294
Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding in children can range from small 
amounts of blood in the stool, associated with milk protein allergy 
or anal fissure, to life-­threatening hemorrhage, associated with portal 
hypertension or peptic ulcer disease. Severe bleeding is a true medical 
emergency and necessitates prompt diagnostic attention and appropri­
ate management since overall mortality of children hospitalized in the 
United States with GI bleeding is approximately 2%. Hemodynamic sta­
bilization of the patient with severe bleeding should always precede diag­
nostic studies. An accurate history and thorough physical examination 
usually allow the physician to categorize the problem as mild or severe 
and to direct evaluation at the appropriate pace.
DEFINITIONS
Children with GI bleeding generally present with hematemesis, hema­
tochezia, or melena, although the clinical manifestation can be as sub­
tle as evidence of occult blood loss. An upper GI bleed is bleeding 
from the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum. Upper sources account 
for the majority of GI bleeds in children. If the site of bleeding is dis­
tal to the ligament of Treitz, it is a lower GI bleed. Blood passed per 
rectum can originate from either an upper or lower GI source. Occult 
bleeding may occur from disorders at numerous sites.
Hematemesis
Vomited blood can be either red or the color of coffee grounds. 
Hematemesis is most commonly associated with an upper GI bleed, 
although swallowed blood produces the same clinical picture. Bright 
red hematemesis suggests active bleeding that has not had prolonged 
contact with gastric secretions. When gastric secretions interact with 
the blood, the blood will darken in color as the iron oxidizes and leads 
to dark red or “coffee ground” emesis.
Hematochezia and Melena
The presence of hematochezia (bright red blood) is generally associ­
ated with colonic bleeding, although it may result from a brisk upper 
bleed. Maroon stools from the rectum are generally associated with 
a lower GI bleed. The presence of melena—passage of black, tarry 
stools—generally results from significant blood loss proximal to the 
ileocecal valve, with up to 90% originating proximal to the ligament of 
Treitz. The color results from bacterial breakdown of the hemoglobin. 
Up to 10–15% of upper GI bleeds present with melena in the absence of 
hematemesis. These patients are more likely to have a clinically signif­
icant bleed.
Occult Gastrointestinal Bleeding
In contrast to overt GI bleeding as in hematemesis, hematochezia, or 
melena, occult GI bleeding is a positive fecal blood test when there is 
no visible blood loss.
Mimics of Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Hemoptysis may occasionally be mistaken for hematemesis. Melena 
may be confused with menstrual bleeding. In addition, certain med­
ications, supplements (such as iron), foods, and dyes may turn stool 
or emesis red or maroon color, mimicking blood. A thorough history 
including respiratory symptoms, menstrual history, medications, and 
diet history is important.
APPROACH TO GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
The first step is to determine whether the problem is actually GI bleed­
ing. Many substances and non-­GI sources may simulate GI bleeding 
(Table 16.1). Occult blood testing consists of guaiac-­based tests from 
the stool or emesis (gastric occult blood), which measure heme, and 
fecal immunochemical tests (FITs), which measure the globin portion 
of human hemoglobin. Recommendations for guaiac-­based testing 
from manufacturers are to avoid red meat, citrus fruits and juices, 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Julia Fritz, Amornluck Krasaelap, and Bernadette Vitola
16
TABLE 16.1  Mimics of Gastrointestinal 
Bleeding
Foodstuffs:
 • Beets
 • Blueberries
 • Food coloring
 • Gelatin
 • Licorice
 • Punch
 • Red candy
 • Spinach
 • Tomato skins
 • Watermelon
Medications:
 • Phenytoin
 • Bismuth
 • Iron supplementation
 • Rifampin
 • Diazepam
 • Cefdinir
 • Phenolphthalein
Bleeding from other locations:
 • Epistaxis
 • Hemoptysis
 • Menses
 • Recent dental work or tonsillectomy
Swallowed maternal blood in breast-­fed or newborn infant
Munchausen (factitious disorder) syndrome by proxy
Factitious disorder
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
295
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
supplemental vitamin C in excess of 250 mg/day for 3 days prior to 
testing, and antacids for at least 60 minutes prior to testing. Nonste­
roidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided for 1 week 
prior to testing and aspirin exposure should be minimized; however, 
it is uncertain whether these products affect the reliability of the test. 
In addition, although iron preparations may blacken stools, they do 
not lead to false-­positive results. Female patients should be told not 
to collect test samples for 3 days after or during a menstrual period. 
To avoid potential false-­positive or false-­negative results, stool should 
be collected from diapers or from disposable collection devices rather 
than directly from toilet water. Finally, an alkali denaturation test, also 
known as the Apt-­Downey or Apt test, should be performed when a 
breast-­fed infant vomits bright red blood or passes red bloody stools to 
distinguish whether it is maternal or fetal hemoglobin.
Once GI bleeding is confirmed, the evaluation, differential diagno­
sis, and therapeutic interventions will depend on the age of the patient, 
severity of bleeding, and whether the bleed is coming from the upper 
or the lower GI tract (Tables 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, and 16.5). A nasogastric 
(NG) tube may be placed in the appropriate patient when the source of 
bleeding is not clear. Bloody aspirate from the stomach is confirmation 
of upper GI bleeding. The tube may then be used to lavage the stomach 
with warm saline. If aspirated saline clears after repeated lavage, the 
bleeding has likely stopped or is from a different source.
HEMATEMESIS AND MELENA: UPPER 
GASTROINTESTINAL BLEED
History
Neonates who did not receive prophylactic vitamin K are at risk for 
hemorrhagic disease of the newborn (see Chapter 51) and additional 
perinatal factors may place them at risk for sepsis or other stress 
that could lead to gastritis. Infants who require intensive care may 
have trauma from an NG tube, and infants with neonatal umbilical 
vein catheterization or neonatal omphalitis are at risk for portal vein 
TABLE 16.2  Differential Diagnosis for 
Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Infants
Ill-­appearing
Stress ulcer
Hemorrhagic gastritis
Sepsis with DIC
Vitamin K deficiency
Infection—CMV, herpes, parasites, fungal
Trauma
Well-­appearing
Milk protein sensitivity
Mallory-­Weiss tear
Prolapse gastropathy
Reflux esophagitis
Reactive gastritis
Anatomic anomalies (duplication)*
Vascular anomalies (hemangioma/vascular 
malformation)*
Children
Ill-­appearing
Esophageal varices
Stress ulcer
Sepsis with DIC
Hemobilia
Well-­appearing
Esophagitis including pill ulceration (alen­
dronate, tetracycline, quinidine, potassium 
chloride, aspirin, NSAIDs)
Reflux esophagitis
Gastritis
 • NSAIDs
 • Helicobacter pylori
Ulcer from foreign body
Mallory-­Weiss tear
Prolapse gastropathy
Vascular malformation*
 • Dieulafoy lesion (artery that protrudes 
through mucosa)
Anatomic anomalies (duplication)*
Infection—CMV, herpes, parasites, fungal
CMV, cytomegalovirus; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; 
NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
*Patient is usually well-­appearing but may deteriorate due to high rate 
of bleeding.
TABLE 16.3  Differential Diagnosis for 
Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Infants
Ill-­appearing
Infectious—Salmonella, ­Shigella, 
­Escherichia coli O157:H7, ­Campylobacter 
species, Yersinia ­species, Entamoeba 
histolytica, CMV
Ischemia—volvulus or necrotizing 
­enterocolitis
Sepsis with DIC
Vitamin K deficiency
Hirschsprung enterocolitis
Intussusception
Trauma
Well-­appearing
Anal fissure
Milk protein sensitivity/eosinophilic 
proctocolitis
Lymphonodular hyperplasia
Vascular anomalies (hemangioma/vascular 
malformation)*
Anatomic anomalies
Children
Ill-­appearing
Infectious—above plus Clostridium difficile
Intussusception
Meckel diverticulum
Inflammatory bowel disease
Ischemia
Typhlitis
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Trauma
Well-­appearing
Anal fissure
Milk and other protein sensitivity
Juvenile polyp
Medication
 • NSAIDs
 • Mycophenolate
Lymphonodular hyperplasia
Hemorrhoid (in chronic liver disease)
Vascular anomalies (hemangioma/vascular 
malformation)*
Anatomic anomalies
CMV, cytomegalovirus; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; 
NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
*Patient is usually well-­appearing but may deteriorate due to high rate 
of bleeding.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
296
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
thrombosis and resultant later onset of esophageal varices. In older 
children, a recent history of vomiting, regurgitation, or abdominal pain 
suggests a mucosal lesion. Forceful, repeated vomiting may result in a 
Mallory-­Weiss tear or prolapse gastropathy. Reactive gastritis can be 
due to medications such as NSAIDs as well as alcohol or ingestion of 
caustic substances. Providers must ask about recent bleeding such as 
epistaxis or dental procedures, which could lead to hematemesis with­
out a GI source of bleeding.
Information regarding chronic pulmonary disease, renal disease, 
bleeding disorders such as hemophilia, platelet dysfunction or von Will­
ebrand disease, and liver disease, including a history of jaundice, should 
be obtained in all children. Patients with cystic fibrosis are at risk not only 
for the development of esophageal varices caused by biliary cirrhosis but 
also for coagulopathies from vitamin K deficiency. They may also have 
hemoptysis, which can be misinterpreted as hematemesis. In patients with 
renal disease, uremia will cause platelet dysfunction, which may manifest 
as a GI bleed. The family history should address the presence of bleed­
ing disorders, peptic ulcer disease, and possible Helicobacter pylori expo­
sure. Other genetic disorders may be elicited in the family history such as 
VMCM (venous malformations, multiple cutaneous and mucosal, OMIM 
600195), hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome, 
and blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome that cause variable GI bleeding.
Physical Examination
Immediate attention must be given to signs of hypovolemia, anemia, 
or shock. An orthostatic change, such as a pulse rate increase of 20 
beats/min or a drop in systolic blood pressure of more than 10 mm Hg 
when the patient changes from supine to standing, is a sensitive index 
of significant volume depletion. Blood pressure may remain normal 
up to the point of circulatory collapse in children and a normal blood 
pressure should not be reassuring in the setting of other signs of hypo­
volemia such as tachycardia or delayed capillary refill.
In addition to close attention to changes in vital signs, a physical 
exam with emphasis on potential sources of bleeding is essential (Table 
16.6). The oropharynx and nasal canals should be examined for lesions 
TABLE 16.4  Causes of Occult 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Inflammatory Causes
Peptic esophagitis
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Mild enterocolitis
Celiac disease
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Meckel diverticulum
Solitary rectal ulcer
Vascular Causes
Angiodysplasia and vascular ectasias
Gastroesophageal varices
Congestive gastropathy
Hemangiomas
Drugs
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Extragastrointestinal Causes
Hemoptysis
Epistaxis
Oropharyngeal bleeding
Infectious Causes
Hookworm
Strongyloidiasis
Ascariasis
Tuberculosis enterocolitis
Amebiasis
Tumors and Neoplastic Causes
Polyps
Lymphoma
Leiomyoma
Lipoma
Carcinoma
Artificial Causes
Hematuria
Menstrual bleeding
Nonspecific test positivity
Miscellaneous Causes
Long-­distance running
Coagulopathies
Factitious
Modified from Ahlquist DA. Approach to the patient with occult gas­
trointestinal bleeding. In: Yamada T, ed. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 
Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1991:620.
TABLE 16.5  Rare/Atypical Causes of 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Children
Hematemesis/Melena
 • Hemobilia—nontraumatic
 • Spontaneous intramural hematoma
 • Burkitt lymphoma
 • Collagenous gastritis/duodenitis
 • Superior mesenteric artery aneurysm
 • Ectopic pancreas
 • Hemosuccus pancreaticus
 • Gastric volvulus
 • Ectopic varices
 • Aortoesophageal fistula
 • Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
Hematochezia
 • Eosinophilic colitis
 • Cytomegalovirus colitis (non–inflammatory bowel disease)
 • Granulomatous colitis (non–Crohn disease)
 • Sarcoidosis
 • Abdominal tuberculosis
 • Chronic granulomatous disease
 • Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
 • Ileal GIST
 • Intestinal Behçet disease
 • Langerhans cell histiocytosis
 • IPEX (immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy)
 • Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
 • Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis
 • Spontaneous intramural hematoma
 • Ectopic varices
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and 
Liver Disease. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:153, Box 13-­11.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
297
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
as the cause of bleeding. Palpation to evaluate organomegaly should 
begin at the iliac crests so as not to miss a hugely enlarged liver or 
spleen. A prominent venous pattern on the abdomen (Fig. 16.1), sple­
nomegaly, and ascites may suggest portal hypertension. Tenderness 
and guarding indicate a significant inflammatory process.
In addition to assessing for pallor, cutaneous lesions may help deter­
mine the underlying cause of bleeding. Petechiae can indicate dissem­
inated intravascular coagulation, hypersplenism, or another bleeding 
abnormality. Hyperpigmented lesions of the oral or anal mucosa may 
indicate Peutz-­Jeghers disease (Fig. 16.2). Cutaneous telangiectasia and 
hemangiomas may indicate such diseases as Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syn­
drome (a.k.a. hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) (Fig. 16.3) and 
ataxia-­telangiectasia, or they may simply suggest a predisposition for 
vascular malformations. However, only about 2% of individuals with 
cutaneous vascular lesions will also have GI involvement. Blue cutane­
ous nodules suggest blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (Fig. 16.4). Pal­
mar erythema, spider angioma, or jaundice suggests underlying liver 
TABLE 16.6  Pertinent Physical Findings in 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Exam Finding
Associated Disorder
Splenomegaly
Caput medusae
Portal hypertension and esophageal varices
Palmar erythema
Spider angioma
Jaundice
Ascites
Liver disease
Hemangioma
Hemangioma in gastrointestinal tract
Port-­wine stain
Vascular malformation in gastrointestinal tract
Palpable purpura
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura or other vasculitis
Hyperpigmented lesions of 
the oral or anal mucosa
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (gastrointestinal 
polyps)
Lip, oral mucosal 
­telangiectasias
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Oral ulcers
Perianal fistula
Perianal skin tag
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Inflammatory bowel disease
Fig. 16.1  Prominent venous pattern on the abdomen.
Fig. 16.2  Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome. This smiling, 12-­year-­old girl devel­
oped progressive lentigines on her face, particularly her lips, in early 
childhood. She also has involvement of the extremities, trunk, and 
mucous membranes. (From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:152, Fig. 6.6.)
Fig. 16.3  Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Telangiectasias are 
found on the lips, oral mucosa, nasal mucosa, skin, and conjunctiva. 
Epistaxis is the most common manifestation of the disease. Blood 
transfusions may be required. (From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Der­
matology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:925, Fig. 23.42.)
Fig. 16.4  Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome. A 16-­year-­old girl was eval­
uated for multiple 3 mm–1 cm blue nodules on the skin. She had a 
history of similar lesions in the gastrointestinal tract, which were discov­
ered during surgery for small bowel obstruction from intussusception. 
(From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saun­
ders; 2013:51, Fig. 2.70.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
298
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
disease. Scleral icterus may be subtle but can be the first sign of liver 
disease and may be more easily appreciated than jaundice in darker-­
skinned individuals.
Differential Diagnosis
In infants, esophagitis, gastritis, and ulcers are the most common causes 
of upper GI bleeding. Esophagitis may be associated with dysphagia, irri­
tability, and arching with feeds (see Chapter 15). Milk protein sensitivity 
should be considered as well, although it more often presents with blood 
in stool. Trauma or infection (such as cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, 
parasites, or fungal) can cause mucosal irritation presenting as hemate­
mesis. Anatomic abnormalities including duplication cysts or vascular 
abnormalities may also lead to hematemesis or melena in infants.
In older children, mucosal lesions remain common causes of bleed­
ing. Mallory-­Weiss tears are associated with repeated forceful vom­
iting from a variety of causes (e.g., acute gastroenteritis) (Fig. 16.5). 
The forcefulness of the vomiting causes a tear in the distal esophagus 
at the level of the lower esophageal sphincter. The history is generally 
one of frequent nonbloody vomiting that then becomes hematemesis. 
Prolapse gastropathy, caused by prolapse of gastric mucosa into the 
distal esophagus, can similarly occur after forceful vomiting and lead 
to hematemesis (Fig. 16.6). Reactive gastritis secondary to medication 
(NSAIDs) or infection (H. pylori) is also a common cause of upper GI 
bleeding. Children with known or unknown liver disease can develop 
esophageal varices that may lead to large-­volume hematemesis and 
melena (or hematochezia if bleeding is brisk). Ulcers, although rare, 
can also lead to significant blood loss and may be related to H. pylori 
infection, stress such as surgery or burns, and foreign body ingestion, 
specifically button batteries, which can lead to significant bleeding.
HEMATOCHEZIA: LOWER GASTROINTESTINAL 
BLEED
History
Chronicity of bleeding is essential to ascertain because infectious coli­
tis may cause acute bloody diarrhea, while inflammatory bowel disease 
generally presents with a more prolonged history (see Chapter 14). 
Presence or absence of pain can also help distinguish between causes of 
bleeding. Severe, acute abdominal pain is often present in patients with 
vascular compromise, such as in intussusception, midgut volvulus, and 
bowel ischemia (e.g., Henoch-­Schönlein purpura), while painless rec­
tal bleeding suggests a Meckel diverticulum, polyp, or angiodysplasia. 
Growth failure is suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease, specifically 
Crohn disease; constipation points to the possibility of an anal fissure 
(see Chapter 19) or Hirschsprung disease with enterocolitis. Informa­
tion regarding travel (either by the patient or by visitors), sick con­
tacts, daycare exposure, camping, and antibiotic exposure may reveal 
potential infectious causes. Family history of polyps or colon cancer 
is important given the inherited polyposis syndromes, as is a family 
history of inflammatory bowel disease.
Physical Examination
Physical exam in any patient with GI bleeding must begin with assess­
ment of hemodynamic status. In addition to a general exam, for 
patients with hematochezia, a rectal exam is important to evaluate for 
fissures as well as skin tags and fistulas, which may be seen in Crohn 
disease (Fig. 16.7). Local intense tenderness, fever, and erythema of the 
perianal area may suggest group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus infec­
tion. Infants and toddlers may have a palpable right lower quadrant 
abdominal mass, which suggests intussusception. Skin examination 
may show purpura, which, although not always present initially, is seen 
in Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; it may also be seen in hemolytic uremic 
syndrome. Erythema nodosum or pyoderma gangrenosum is present 
in approximately 3% of children with inflammatory bowel disease and 
may correlate with disease severity.
Differential Diagnosis
Anal fissures are probably the most frequent cause of streaks of bright 
red blood mixed with stool. The bleeding may be associated with hard 
bowel movements but may occur from straining with normal bowel 
movements. There is also an association with group A streptococcal 
perianal cellulitis and bleeding. Anal fissure may be a manifestation of 
milk protein allergy with resultant perianal inflammation and subse­
quent constipation to avoid painful defecation. More often, a milk pro­
tein allergy will present with specks of blood within the stool. There may 
be a history of increasing frequency and amount of blood and mucus 
in the stool. The infant may exhibit cramping with bowel movements 
Fig. 16.5  Endoscopic appearance of a Mallory-­Weiss tear with mild 
oozing. Note that the tear starts at the gastroesophageal junction (long 
arrow) and extends distally into the hiatal hernia (short arrow). (From 
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s 
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2021, Fig. 20-­14.)
Fig. 16.6  Endoscopic view of fundus showing area of prolapse 
­gastropathy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
299
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
and vomiting may be part of the presentation. Often there is a family 
history of food allergies. Milk protein allergy can be seen in infants 
fed cow’s milk– or soy protein–based formulas, as well as in breast-­fed 
infants. Ischemic bowel disease, including necrotizing enterocolitis and 
volvulus, may lead to rectal bleeding and an acutely ill, sick-­appearing 
neonate or infant. Risk factors for necrotizing enterocolitis include 
prematurity, cardiac surgery, polycythemia, chronic diarrhea, and GI 
malformations.
Infectious colitis is common in both infants and children and 
causes frequent, often watery, bloody bowel movements (see Chapter 
14). There may be cramping pain before and during the bowel move­
ment as a result of the colitis. Common pathogens include Salmonella 
and Shigella organisms, especially with dysentery type stools, but 
Escherichia coli O157:H7, Campylobacter species, Yersinia species, and 
Entamoeba histolytica should also be considered. Clostridium difficile is 
a common cause of hematochezia in older children but is also found in 
healthy infants without causing disease due to lack of toxin receptors 
in the immature colon.
For young children, intussusception and Meckel diverticulum are 
common causes of hematochezia. The hallmark of intussusception is 
the presence of “currant jelly” stools associated with colicky abdominal 
pain, lethargy, or irritability. Meckel diverticulum occurs in 1–3% of 
the population and manifests by the age of 2 years in about 50% of 
patients. Bleeding results from mucosal ulceration secondary to secre­
tion of gastric acid or pepsin from ectopic gastric or pancreatic tissue, 
respectively, in the tip of the diverticulum. It is usually brisk and pain­
less with blood ranging from dark red to bright red.
Juvenile polyps also present with painless rectal bleeding but 
are uncommon in children under 1 year of age with peak incidence 
between ages 5 and 7 years. They are more common in males and non-­
Caucasian people. Most juvenile polyps occur in the distal colon and 
may cause bleeding from autoamputation as they outgrow their blood 
supply. Juvenile polyps can be classified to juvenile polyposis syndrome 
(JPS) based on the number (five or more), distribution, and family 
history. Polyps are generally benign but some may suggest an inher­
ited disorder, such as Peutz-­Jeghers disease or adenomatous polyps in 
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Affected individuals with FAP 
are at significant risk for the development of colonic carcinoma and 
require repeated colonoscopies and, eventually, prophylactic colec­
tomy and ileoanal pouch procedures.
In older children, inflammatory bowel disease becomes a more 
common cause of hematochezia. The rectal bleeding varies from occult 
to frank blood in the bowel movements. Blood is present in 100% of 
cases of ulcerative colitis but in only 30–50% of cases of Crohn disease. 
Inflammatory bowel disease is generally accompanied by fever, weight 
loss, and rectal bleeding (see Chapter 14).
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura is an IgA vasculitic syndrome that can 
cause bloody stools. It is often accompanied by cramping abdominal 
pain, purpuric rash (palpable purpura), joint swelling, scalp edema 
(infants and toddlers), and, occasionally, nephritis (see Chapter 22).
OCCULT GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding (OGIB) is defined as bleeding that is 
unknown to the patient. This condition most often presents as iron-­
deficiency anemia or positive occult blood during evaluation for 
abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, or weight loss. Normal fecal blood 
loss ranges from 0.5 to 1.5 mL/day. In occult bleeding, a patient can 
lose up to 100 mL/day and the stool can still appear grossly normal.
History
While the history of iron-­deficiency anemia might be the only clinical 
clue to diagnose OGIB, it should always be in the differential diagnosis 
of chronic iron-­deficiency anemia. Due to a very low degree of bleed­
ing, symptoms are minimal and typically related to iron-­deficiency 
anemia including irritability, anorexia, and lethargy.
Physical Examination
In contrast to overt GI bleeding, changes in hemodynamic status or 
vital signs are unlikely. Pallor is usually seen at palmar creases, nail 
beds, and conjunctivae. Other physical examinations to determine the 
underlying cause of bleeding are similar to those for upper and lower 
GI bleeding.
Differential Diagnosis
OGIB in children can be caused by any lesion in the GI tract, particu­
larly in the upper GI tract and small intestine. The causes of OGIB are 
similar to those of overt bleeding discussed previously.
Angiodysplasia/Angioectasia
These abnormal vascular lesions are dilated, tortuous mucosal small 
blood vessels of unknown etiology that can produce occult (occasion­
ally acute) upper or lower intestinal blood loss (∼50% are in the small 
bowel) (Fig. 16.8). They are more common in older adults but may 
produce recurrent and chronic intestinal bleeding in children, particu­
larly those with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, von Willebrand 
disease, aortic stenosis, and end-­stage renal disease, although they are 
often independent of an underlying disorder. They may be isolated or 
multiple. Other vascular etiologies of intestinal blood loss are noted in 
Table 16.7.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATIONS
Laboratory Evaluation
Initial laboratory evaluation should include a CBC with differential 
and platelet count, coagulation profile, and a comprehensive metabolic 
profile with total and direct bilirubin (Table 16.8). Patients with clinical 
signs of significant blood loss should have a blood typing with cross 
match sent. Occult blood testing can be performed on stool or emesis 
to confirm presence of blood. In patients with lower GI bleeding, stool 
Fig. 16.7  Skin tags and fistulas as in Crohn disease.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
300
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
should be sent for analysis of infectious causes. UA may be useful in 
patients with hematochezia with suspicion for hemolytic uremic syn­
drome. Iron studies should also be tested to evaluate for iron deficiency 
secondary to bleeding.
Imaging
Radiographs
Abdominal radiographs should be obtained in all infants with acute 
hematochezia to look for pneumoperitoneum, pneumatosis intesti­
nalis, or hepatic portal vein gas suggesting necrotizing enterocolitis. 
Flat plate films may also identify intussusception, volvulus, abdominal 
masses, or foreign bodies (Fig. 16.9). Upper GI contrast studies can dis­
cern anatomic lesions, such as strictures, stenosis, atresias, malrotation, 
large ulcerations, and masses. Small bowel follow-­through examina­
tion allows evaluation of the small bowel from the ligament of Treitz 
to the ileocecal valve. Areas of ulceration, mucosal thickening, and 
narrowing may be appreciated. An air or water-­soluble enema should 
be performed in infants and children in whom there is a concern of 
distal intestinal obstruction, such as intussusception (see Chapter 13). 
In cases of intussusception, the enema not only aids in diagnosis but 
also may be therapeutic. Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis may be 
suggested by results of this test, but endoscopy is necessary for histo­
logic confirmation of these diagnoses.
Abdominal Ultrasound
An ultrasound may be useful in patients with suspected liver disease to 
evaluate for portal hypertension. It may also be used in potential cases of 
intussusception or suspected large vascular malformations (Fig. 16.10).
Computed Tomography
CT scans may be useful in evaluating possible anatomic anomalies and 
may reveal signs of inflammation related to infectious or inflammatory 
colitis. CT enterography can localize an active lower GI bleed. Given 
the radiation exposure, the value of a CT over other diagnostic modal­
ities must be considered.
Magnetic Resonance Enterography
Magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) can be useful in cases of 
occult bleeding or in suspected and known inflammatory bowel disease 
to evaluate for areas of inflammation in the small bowel that may be 
causing blood loss. Patients must be awake and able to stay still through 
the prolonged study, which limits its utility in younger patients.
Angiography
Angiography may help identify the source of bleeding but is only 
sensitive for an active bleed at a rate of at least 0.5 mL/min. The 
diagnostic efficacy can be improved with provocative measures by 
using anticoagulants, vasodilators, and fibrinolytic agents to pro­
long, augment, or reactivate the bleeding. The safety of provoking 
bleeding in the patient must be considered. The classic angio­
graphic finding that confirms active bleeding is extravasation of 
contrast material such as in a Meckel diverticulum or the presence 
of vascular malformations of the bowel, which may be acquired or 
congenital. Therapeutic angiography can also be used to control GI 
bleeding.
Fig. 16.8  Endoscopic image of an angioectasia (AE) in the ascending 
colon. This AE has a typical coral reef–like pattern of small vessels dis­
torting the mucosa and submucosa. A tortuous submucosal vein, which 
is the earliest stage in the development of AE, is probably present 
among the linear vessels intersecting the ectasia but cannot be distin­
guished. (From Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger 
and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2021, Fig. 38-­1.)
TABLE 16.7  Vascular Lesions of the GI Tract
Primary Vascular Lesions
Aneurysms of the aorta and its branches
Angioectasia (angiodysplasia, vascular ectasia)
Arteriovenous malformation
Blue rubber bleb nevus
Capillary phlebectasia
Dieulafoy lesion
Glomus tumor
Hemangioma
Hemangiomatosis
Hemangioendothelioma
Hemangiopericytoma
Hemangiosarcoma
Hemorrhoids
Kaposi sarcoma
Diseases and Syndromes with Vascular Lesions
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease)
Klippel-­Trenaunay or Parkes Weber syndrome
Kohlmeier-­Degos syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
PSS (scleroderma, CREST)
Scurvy
Turner syndrome
von Willebrand disease
Systemic Disorders Associated with Vascular Lesions
Portal hypertension
Congestive gastropathy and colopathy
GAVE (watermelon stomach)
Spider telangiectasias
Varices
Renal failure
GI telangiectasias
Vasculitis (e.g., polyarteritis nodosa)
Iatrogenic lesions
Radiation telangiectasia
CREST, calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, 
sclerodactyly, telangiectasia; GAVE, gastric antral vascular ectasia; GI, 
gastrointestinal; PSS, progressive systemic sclerosis.
From Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and 
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2021:618, Box 37-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
301
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Nuclear Imaging
Nuclear medicine may determine the site of bleeding with minimal 
complications; it is associated with minimal radiation exposure and 
requires minimal sedation. Technetium 99m (99mTc) pertechnetate 
is rapidly taken up by gastric mucosa, and it is useful in identifying 
sites of bleeding secondary to ectopic gastric mucosa. Gastric mucosa 
is found in 90% of bleeding Meckel diverticula, and in these patients 
the Meckel scan has a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 97% in 
the pediatric population (Fig. 16.11). False-­negative results have been 
reported frequently because of insufficient gastric tissue mass, down­
stream washout of isotope, impaired blood supply, or suboptimal tech­
niques. Positive identification may be improved by the administration 
of ranitidine to prevent excretion of pertechnetate from gastric tissue.
Bleeding scans are performed by intravenously injecting technetium 
sulfur colloid. The agent is distributed quickly and is rapidly taken up 
by the reticuloendothelial system. It can detect a rate of bleeding of 0.1 
mL/min. However, because the technetium is taken up by the reticulo­
endothelial system, this may hinder the search for bleeding sites behind 
the liver or spleen. Finally, the clearance is very rapid, with a half-­life of 
2 minutes, which means that bleeding has to be occurring at the time of 
the scan.
The 99mTc pertechnetate–labeled red blood cell scan is a sensi­
tive and accurate test for the localization of active bleeding. In cases 
of intermittent bleeding, a single injection of labeled cells allows 
repeated scans for up to 24 hours. It can detect as little blood as 0.5 
mL/min.
Procedural Evaluations
Upper Endoscopy or Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the procedure of choice in 
identifying the site of upper GI bleeding. EGD can also allow direct 
intervention at the bleeding site, as in the case of esophageal varices 
or a visible vessel in an ulcer crater. Endoscopic visualization of the 
stomach and duodenum should be performed even if the bleeding 
is thought to originate from esophageal varices. Of patients with 
proven esophageal varices, 50% may manifest bleeding from gas­
tritis or peptic ulcer disease rather than the varices. Endoscopy, 
however, should not be performed until the patient is as hemody­
namically stable as possible. Gastric lavage may be useful prior to 
upper endoscopy to remove any blood present in the stomach to 
allow for better views as well as to determine whether there is still 
active bleeding. Erythromycin can be given prior to endoscopy to 
accelerate gastric emptying and removal of blood from the stomach.
Lower Endoscopy
Lower GI tract bleeding can also be evaluated endoscopically. Pro­
cedures frequently used in children include proctosigmoidoscopy 
and flexible colonoscopy. With the patient under appropriate seda­
tion, lower GI endoscopy allows for full exploration of the colon; 
identifies the presence of multiple lesions; allows for therapeutic 
intervention to bleeding lesions through electrocoagulation, laser 
therapy, or thermocoagulation; and allows for removal of bleed­
ing lesions, such as polyps. Colonoscopy is indicated when there 
is melena or severe bleeding with no evidence of upper GI lesions, 
when stools are guaiac positive over a long time, and when exam­
ination of the terminal ileum is indicated to determine whether 
inflammatory bowel disease is present. One disadvantage is that 
large amounts of luminal blood obscure visualization of a lesion. 
Before lower GI colonoscopy, intestinal lavage with oral adminis­
tration of polyethylene glycol should be used to remove as much of 
the luminal blood and stool as possible.
Small Bowel Enteroscopy
Small bowel enteroscopy refers to endoscopic examination of the small 
intestine, extending into the jejunum and/or ileum. Enteroscopy can be 
useful in the evaluation of occult bleeding. While its diagnostic yield 
TABLE 16.8  Laboratory Findings 
Suggestive of a Diagnosis
Lab Finding
Significance
Hgb/HCT
Normal hemoglobin or hematocrit does not rule 
out significant bleed as it may take time to 
equilibrate
Low MCV
Chronic blood loss
Low platelets
HUS, hypersplenism (secondary to portal 
hypertension), ITP, DIC
High platelets
Chronic blood loss, inflammation, IBD
Elevated prothrombin time
Liver disease, coagulation disorder, DIC
Elevated BUN/normal Cr
UGI bleed more likely
Elevated BUN/elevated Cr
HUS or HSP
Decreased albumin
IBD or liver disease
Elevated ESR/CRP
IBD
Elevated AST/ALT
Liver disease
Elevated bilirubin
Liver disease
Fecal calprotectin
IBD, infectious enteritis
Eosinophilia
Parasitic infestation
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; Cr, 
creatinine; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; Hgb/HCT, 
hemoglobin/hematocrit; HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; HUS, hemo­
lytic uremic syndrome; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; ITP, immune 
thrombocytopenic purpura; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; UGI, 
upper gastrointestinal.
Fig. 16.9  Flat plate film demonstrating intussusception (arrows).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
302
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
A
B
M
Fig. 16.10  Abdominal ultrasound illustrating intussusception. A, Transverse plane shows target-­like appear­
ance of bowel. B, Longitudinal plane shows inner bowel loops (white arrows) telescoping through outer 
bowel loops (black arrows). Edema of affected bowel causes hyperechoic mucosa (M).
varies by study, it allows for direct intervention if the source of bleed­
ing is found. In addition, it has been employed intraoperatively to help 
identify lesions and guide surgical intervention.
Capsule Endoscopy
Wireless camera capsule endoscopy may be useful in patients with 
occult or apparent bleeding when other work-­up, including an 
upper and lower endoscopy, has been negative. The patient swal­
lows or has the capsule placed endoscopically and images are taken 
as the capsule passes through the small and large intestines, which 
can identify vascular malformations and other sources of bleeding 
(Fig. 16.12). The main risk is capsule retention and so children 
must be of a certain size and be evaluated for possible stricture 
prior to the study.
Treatment
Resuscitation
The severity of bleeding determines the general guidelines for treat­
ment. For severe bleeding, initial management re-­establishes and 
maintains the intravascular volume. Subsequently, the site of blood loss 
must be determined and attempts made to stop the hemorrhage. Severe 
anemia also necessitates packed red blood cell transfusions after the 
intravascular volume deficit is corrected (Table 16.9).
Although parents tend to overestimate the amount of blood 
lost by their child, a major error in the management of GI bleed­
ing is underestimating blood loss. The hematocrit may remain 
unchanged initially, despite significant blood loss, and therefore is 
not a good indicator of significant bleeding. If orthostatic blood 
Fig. 16.11  Positive Meckel scan. Arrow indicates abnormal area of 
increased uptake in lower abdomen above bladder, consistent with gas­
tric mucosa containing Meckel diverticulum.
Fig. 16.12  Capsule endoscopy image revealing jejunal bleeding (arrows) 
from a vascular malformation in a patient who presented with anemia 
refractory to iron supplementation.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
303
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
pressure changes or tachycardia is present, the initial goal of treat­
ment should be to hemodynamically stabilize the patient, maintain 
the intravascular volume, and provide adequate oxygen delivery 
to the tissues. A second potential error is the failure to establish 
adequate intravenous (IV) access. The largest possible IV catheter 
must be rapidly placed in a child with active bleeding. Blood loss 
should be replaced immediately with a crystalloid solution, such 
as normal saline or lactated Ringer solution. Initially, a fluid push 
of 20 mL/kg should be given, although resuscitation should be per­
formed cautiously in patients who may have portal hypertension as 
overly aggressive resuscitation raises the venous pressure and could 
worsen bleeding from varices. In these patients, small, repeated 
fluid boluses with close monitoring are preferred to large-­volume 
boluses. If blood loss continues and the patient appears to be at 
risk for hypovolemic shock, infusion of normal saline or colloid 
solutions (5% albumin) can be continued until blood is available. 
Plasma is indicated if coagulation factors are depleted. Once bleed­
ing has stopped, transfusions of packed red blood cells should con­
tinue, to slowly raise the hematocrit to 30% (10 g/dL hemoglobin) 
(for patients with variceal bleeding the goal is instead hemoglobin 
of 8–9 g/dL). If continued blood loss necessitates multiple transfu­
sions, fresh frozen plasma and calcium should be given to replace 
coagulation factors and correct the hypocalcemia caused by the 
citrate in blood products. The platelet count in such patients must 
be monitored because thrombocytopenia may develop.
If an NG tube is inserted, the tube size is determined by the child’s 
age and size. A 12 French tube is used in infants and preschool chil­
dren; a 14 or 16 French tube is appropriate for children of elementary 
school age or older. Gastric lavage should be undertaken with room 
temperature normal saline. The color of the gastric lavage fluid gives 
the physician an indication of the rate of bleeding. Lavage returns 
that are bright red indicate significant ongoing bleeding; pink-­tinged 
or brown flecks in the solution indicate less significant or minimal 
bleeding.
Maintaining a gastric pH of more than 4 is considered standard 
therapy for upper GI mucosal bleeding. This can be accomplished with 
either H2-­receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors.
Vasoactive Agents
In patients with suspected variceal bleeding, a continuous infusion of 
octreotide may be started. This agent reduces splanchnic blood flow 
with minimal disturbance to other organs. It is safer than vasopressin 
but has not been shown to have benefit in nonvariceal bleeding. Cus­
tomarily, a bolus of octreotide (1–2 μg/kg) is given over 5–10 minutes, 
and this is followed by a continuous infusion of 1 μg/kg/hr, although 
higher doses may be required. The infusion may help control the bleed­
ing until definitive therapy (banding or sclerotherapy) is performed. 
After endoscopic intervention, octreotide infusions may be weaned 
slowly (every 12 hours) with close monitoring of the patient to ensure 
varices do not rebleed. See Table 16.10 for additional pharmacotherapy.
Endoscopic Modalities
Most patients with GI bleeding will undergo upper and/or lower 
endoscopy for definitive diagnosis and treatment. The aim of thera­
peutic endoscopy is to stop bleeding and prevent rebleeding. Endos­
copy should be performed when the patient has been stabilized, and 
preferably within 24 hours of bleeding presentation. For patients 
with mucosal lesions, such as ulcers or bleeding polyps, there are 
multiple therapeutic interventions available. Injection therapy 
with diluted epinephrine and sclerosants, ablative therapy (contact 
methods such as thermocoagulation heater probe and electrocoag­
ulation; noncontact methods such as argon plasma coagulation), 
mechanical therapy (such as with hemoclips and band ligation), 
and hemostatic powder spray can be used to stop active bleeding. 
Vascular lesions may also be treated endoscopically. For patients 
with colitis, colonoscopy is used primarily to confirm diagnosis and 
extent of disease.
Variceal banding is the preferred method for treating bleeding 
esophageal varices (Fig. 16.13A and B). Ideally, the banding takes 
place after good control of acute bleeding, affording the endoscopist 
an unobstructed view of the varices. Side effects of this therapy are 
minimal, and the procedure is repeated weekly to monthly until the 
varices are obliterated. Sclerotherapy is also effective in controlling the 
acute bleeding from esophageal varices and may be performed weekly 
to monthly until the varices resolve. In young children whose upper 
esophageal sphincter is too small for the endoscopic banding device 
to pass, sclerotherapy may be the only option. Complications include 
esophageal ulceration and esophageal stricture. A number of scleros­
ing agents (e.g., ethanolamine, sodium morrhuate, ethanol, tetradecyl 
sulfate) are efficacious in treating varices. Empiric broad-­spectrum 
antibiotics are also typically administered in patients with liver disease 
causing variceal bleeding due to a high association of infection with 
bleeding.
Interventional Radiology
Selective embolization during angiography can be used to treat vas­
cular malformations and to control bleeding from ulcers. The rate of 
complications from angiography is 2%, whether the procedure is diag­
nostic or therapeutic. In patients with intrahepatic portal hypertension 
with bleeding from GI sites inaccessible to sclerotherapy or banding, 
coiling of varices or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting 
may be beneficial.
Surgical Intervention
Surgical intervention is a definitive treatment for many of the anatomic 
anomalies causing GI bleeding and may be performed in conjunction 
with endoscopy to identify the lesion. Despite effective nonoperative 
therapeutic interventions, traditional operations such as suture ligation, 
lesion or organ excision, vagotomy, portosystemic anastomosis, and 
devascularization procedures continue to be helpful in many instances.
TABLE 16.9  Initial Management of 
Patients with Hypovolemia Secondary to 
Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage
	1.	Establish adequate intravenous (IV) access by placing two IV catheters.
 • Recommended catheter size:
 
• Infant: 20 gauge
 
• Child: 18 gauge
 
• Adolescent: 16 gauge
	2.	Rapidly infuse saline or lactated Ringer solution; use smaller boluses and 
frequent monitoring in patients with suspected varices to avoid rapid 
increase in venous pressure and worsening of variceal bleed.
	3.	Carefully monitor pulse, blood pressure, and central venous pressure to 
avoid fluid overload.
	4.	Monitor urine output, skin perfusion, and orthostatic changes in pulse and 
blood pressure for early recognition of shock.
	5.	Transfuse with packed red blood cells to return oxygen-­carrying capacity 
to normal.
	6.	Carefully record all fluids transfused, and estimate and record all recog­
nized fluids lost.
Modified from Olson AD, Hillemeier AC. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage. 
In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disease. Phila­
delphia: WB Saunders; 1993:253.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
304
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 16.10  Pharmacotherapy in Pediatric Gastrointestinal Bleeding*
*Dosages listed are from Pediatric Lexi-­Comp online formulary and do not apply to infants aged <3 mo. Evidence-­based dosing of these medications 
is not well established.
†Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) should not be administered in infants aged <1 yr without endoscopic evidence of acid-­induced disease.
‡Ranitidine has been withdrawn from the US market.
§Use in conjunction with PPI may limit efficacy.
Medication
Dosage
Proton Pump Inhibitor†—Acid Reducer
Pantoprazole†
IV:
≥2 yr: 0.8 or 1.6 mg/kg once daily (max 
dose: 80 mg/dose)
Oral:
≤5 yr: 1.2 mg/kg/day once daily
>5 yr: 20 (<40 kg) or 40 mg once daily 
(>40 kg)
Esomeprazole†
IV:
<1 yr: 0.5 mg/kg once daily
>1 yr: <55 kg: 10 mg once daily
>55 kg: 20 mg once daily
Oral:
3–5 kg: 2.5 mg once daily
5–7.5 kg: 5 mg once daily
7.5–20 kg: 10 mg once daily
≥20 kg: 10–20 mg once daily
Omeprazole†
Oral:
5 kg to <10 kg: 5 mg once daily
10–20 kg: 10 mg once daily
≥20 kg: 20 mg once daily (max 40 mg/day)
Lansoprazole†
Oral:
Infants 1–2 mg/kg/day
≤30 kg: 15 mg once daily
>30 kg: 30 mg once daily
H2-­Receptor Antagonist—Acid Reducer (Alternative If IV 
PPI is Not Available)
Ranitidine‡
IV:
≤16 yr: 2–4 mg/kg/day divided every 
6–8 hr (max dose: 
50 mg/dose)
>16 yr: 50 mg every 6–8 hr
Medication
Dosage
Oral:
≤16 yr: 4–8 mg/kg/day divided twice 
daily (max dose: 
300 mg/day)
>16 yr: 150 mg twice daily
Famotidine
IV
0.25 mg/kg/dose every 12 hr (max 
dose: 20 mg/dose)
Oral:
≤16 yr: 0.5 mg/kg/day nightly or 
divided twice daily (max dose: 40 
mg/day)
>16 yr: 40 mg/day nightly or divided 
twice daily (max dose: 40 mg/day)
Vasoactive Agent—Somatostatin Analog, Selectively 
Decreases Splanchnic Blood Flow
Octreotide
IV:
1–2 μg/kg initial bolus followed by 1–2 
μg/kg/hr continuous infusion (doses 
up to 4 μg/kg/hr have been used)
Following endoscopic intervention may 
taper dose by 50% every 12 hr and 
discontinue when dose is 25% of initial 
dose
Mucosal Coating Agent—Coats Mucosal Injury, Binds Bile 
Acids to Prevent Further Injury, Inhibits Pepsin in the 
Presence of Acid
Sucralfate§
Oral:
40–80 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hr (max 
dose: 1,000 mg/dose)
A
B
Fig. 16.13  Variceal banding is the preferred method for treating esophageal varices. A, Grade 3 esophageal 
varices in patient with cirrhosis. B, View of varices after band application.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
305
CHAPTER 16  Gastrointestinal Bleeding
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
GI bleeding may occur anywhere along the GI tract and can range 
from occult blood loss to massive hemorrhage. Approach to GI 
bleeding begins with ensuring hemodynamic stability of the patient 
while obtaining a thorough history and physical exam to help deter­
mine upper versus lower sources of bleeding. Iron-­deficiency anemia 
in a male or premenstrual female should raise the suspicion of occult 
blood loss. Red flags include hemodynamic instability that necessi­
tates immediate attention. Laboratory, radiologic, endoscopic, and 
surgical evaluation are used for confirmation of diagnosis and poten­
tial treatment.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
305.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ASGE Technology Committee, Chauhan SS, Manfredi MA, et al. Enteroscopy. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2015;82(6):975–990.
Attard TM, Miller M, Pant C, et al. Mortality associated with gastrointestinal 
bleeding in children: a retrospective cohort study. World J Gastroenterol. 
2017;23(9):1608–1617. https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v23.i9.1608.
Bonnet S, Douard R, Malamut G, et al. Intraoperative enteroscopy in 
the management of obscure gastrointestinal bleeding. Dig Liver Dis. 
2013;45(4):277–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dld.2012.07.003.
Brumbaugh DE, Colson SB, Sandoval JA, et al. Management of button 
battery-­induced hemorrhage in children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2011;52:585–589.
Cappell MS, Friedel D. Initial management of acute upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding: from initial evaluation up to gastrointestinal endoscopy. Med Clin 
North Am. 2008;92(3):491–509, xi.
Cohen S, Hyer W, Mas E, et al. Management of juvenile polyposis syndrome in 
children and adolescents: a position paper from the ESPGHAN polyposis 
working group. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2019;68(3):453–462.
Davis JS, Ryan ML, Fields JM, et al. Use of CT enterography for the diagnosis 
of lower gastrointestinal bleeding in pediatric patients. J Pediatr Surg. 
2013;48:681–684.
de la Torre L, Carrasco D, Mora MA, et al. Vascular malformations of the 
colon in children. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:1754–1757.
Dotson JL, Hyams JS, Markowitz J, et al. Extraintestinal manifestations of 
pediatric inflammatory bowel disease and their relation to disease type and 
severity. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2010;51:140–145.
Freedman SB, Stewart C, Rumantir M, et al. Predictors of clinically significant 
upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage among children with hematemesis. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;54:737–743.
Friedlander JA, Liu QY, Sahn B, Endoscopy Committee, et al. NASPGHAN 
capsule endoscopy clinical report. JPGN. 2017;64:485–494.
Garcia-­Compeán D, Del Cueto-­Aguilera AN, Jiménez-­Rodriguez AR, et al. Diag­
nostic and therapeutic challenges of gastrointestinal angiodysplasias: a critical 
review and view points. World J Gastroenterol. 2019;25(21):2549–2564.
Gralnek IM, Dumonceau JM, Kuipers EJ, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage: European Society of Gas­
trointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline. Endoscopy. 2015;47(10):a1–a46. 
https://doi.org/10.1055/s-­0034-­1393172.
Hood B, Bigler S, Bishop P, et al. Juvenile polyps and juvenile polyp syndromes 
in children: a clinical and endoscopic survey. Clin Pediatr. 2011;50:910–915.
Hwang JH, Fisher DA, Ben-­Menachem T, et al. Standards of Practice Com­
mittee of the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. The role 
of endoscopy in the management of acute non-­variceal upper GI bleeding. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;75:6.
Kim CY. Provocative mesenteric angiography for diagnosis and treatment of occult 
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Gastrointestinal Intervention. 2018;7(3):150–154.
Konrad G, Katz A. Are medication restrictions before FOBT necessary? 
Practical advice based on a systematic review of the literature. Can Fam 
Physician. 2012;58:939–948.
Lirio R. Management of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in children:variceal 
and non-­variceal. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2016;26(1):63–73.
Lowers J, Jaffe A, Zenel JA, et al. Visual diagnosis: four infants who have red, 
“bloody” stools. Pediatr Rev. 2009;30(4):146–149.
Melmed GY, Lo SK. Capsule endoscopy: practical applications. Clin Gastroen­
terol Hepatol. 2005;3:411–422.
Oliva S, Pennazio M, Cohen SA, et al. Capsule endoscopy followed by single 
balloon enteroscopy in children with obscure gastrointestinal bleeding: 
a combined approach. Dig Liver Dis. 2015;47(2):125–130. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dld.2014.09.001.
Pant C, Sankararaman S, Deshpande A, et al. Gastrointestinal bleed­
ing in hospitalized children in the United States. Curr Med Res Opin. 
2014;30(6):1065–1069.
Racadio JM. Arterial interventions: gastrointestinal. In: Temple M, Marshal­
leck FE, eds. Pediatric Interventional Radiology: Handbook of Vascular and 
Non-­vascular Interventions. 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2014:95–104.
Rockey DC. Occult and obscure gastrointestinal bleeding: causes and clinical 
management. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;7(5):265–279.
Sinha CK, Pallewatte A, Easty M, et al. Meckel’s scan in children: a review of 
183 cases referred to two paediatric surgery specialist centres over 18 years. 
Pediatr Surg Int. 2013;29:511–517.
Thakkar K, Fishman DS, Gilger MA. Colorectal polyps in childhood. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:632–637.
Xanthakos SA, Schwimmer JB, Melin-­Aldana H, et al. Prevalence and outcome 
of allergic colitis in healthy infants with rectal bleeding: a prospective 
cohort study. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2005;41:16–22.
Yaqob KS. Occult blood in iron deficiency anemia: the key diagnostic approach 
to treatment in chronic cases. EC Paediatrics. 2017;5:132–138.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
