9
Most causes of sore throat are nonbacterial and neither require nor are 
alleviated by antibacterial therapy (Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3). Accurate 
diagnosis is essential. Acute streptococcal pharyngitis warrants proper 
diagnosis and prompt therapy to prevent serious suppurative and non­
suppurative sequelae. Life-­threatening complications of oropharyngeal 
infections, whether caused by streptococci or other pathogens, may 
manifest initially with poorly differentiated symptoms of mouth pain 
and pharyngitis and then extend into the parapharyngeal space, cause 
jugular venous thrombophlebitis, or result in critical airway obstruc­
tion (Tables 2.4 and 2.5). Noninfectious causes of sore throat, such 
as solid tumors, hematologic malignancy, or Kawasaki disease, if not 
appropriately diagnosed, may similarly carry a high risk of morbid­
ity and even mortality. In most cases, history and physical examina­
tion identify the etiology of a sore throat or sufficiently narrow the 
differential diagnosis so as to direct an evaluation strategy or empiric 
treatment. It is important to note that in many of these diseases sore 
throat is not the defining symptom but part of a systemic illness 
(e.g., measles, COVID-­19, Kawasaki disease).
VIRAL PHARYNGITIS
Most episodes of pharyngitis are caused by viruses (see Tables 2.2 
and 2.3). It is difficult to precisely distinguish between viral and bac­
terial pharyngitis on clinical grounds, though certain clues may help. 
Accompanying findings of rhinitis, conjunctivitis, cough, croup, lar­
yngitis, or discrete oropharyngeal ulcerations are common with viral 
infection but are rare in bacterial pharyngitis (Table 2.6).
Many viruses can produce pharyngitis (see Tables 2.2 and 2.3). 
Some cause distinct clinical syndromes that are readily diagnosed 
without laboratory testing (Table 2.7; see also Tables 2.1 and 2.4). In 
pharyngitis caused by parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, rhino­
viruses, coronaviruses, and respiratory syncytial viruses, symptoms 
of coryza and cough often overshadow sore throat, which is generally 
mild. Parainfluenza viruses are associated with croup and bronchiol­
itis; minor sore throat and signs of pharyngitis are common at the out­
set but rapidly resolve. Influenza infection is often associated with high 
fever, cough, headache, malaise, myalgia, and cervical adenopathy in 
addition to pharyngitis. In young children, croup or bronchiolitis may 
develop. When influenza is suspected on clinical and epidemiologic 
grounds or confirmed by testing (polymerase chain reaction [PCR] is 
most accurate), specific antiviral therapy is available for treatment of 
patients and prophylaxis of family members and other close contacts. 
In young children, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is asso­
ciated with bronchiolitis and, to a lesser degree, pneumonia and croup. 
In older children, RSV infection is usually indistinguishable from a 
simple upper respiratory tract infection. Pharyngitis is not a promi­
nent finding of RSV infection in any age group. Infections caused by 
parainfluenza, influenza, and RSV are often seen in seasonal (winter) 
epidemics. Many viral pathogens can be identified using multiplex or 
targeted PCR testing, but there is rarely reason to test patients in the out­
patient setting and infrequent benefit to testing in the inpatient setting, 
except to confirm and treat influenza.
Adenoviruses can cause upper and lower respiratory tract disease, 
ranging from ordinary colds to severe pneumonia and multisystem 
disease, including hepatitis, myocarditis, and myositis. The incubation 
period of adenovirus infection is 2–4 days. Upper respiratory tract 
infection typically produces fever, erythema of the pharynx, and fol­
licular hyperplasia of the tonsils, together with exudate. Enlargement 
of the cervical lymph nodes occurs frequently. When conjunctivitis 
occurs in association with adenoviral pharyngitis, the resulting syn­
drome is called pharyngoconjunctival fever. Pharyngitis may last as 
long as 7 days and does not respond to antibacterials. There are many 
adenovirus serotypes; adenovirus infections may therefore develop in 
children more than once. Outbreaks have been associated with swim­
ming pools and contamination in health care workers. If obtained, lab­
oratory studies may reveal a leukocytosis and an elevated ESR.
The enteroviruses can cause sore throat. High fever is common, 
and the throat is mildly erythematous; tonsillar exudate and cervical 
adenopathy are unusual. Symptoms usually resolve within a few days. 
Enteroviruses historically were classified as nonpolio enteroviruses, 
coxsackie A viruses, coxsackie B viruses, and echoviruses, though with 
increasing recognition of the multitude of enterovirus serotypes they 
are now numbered consecutively as novel serotypes are identified. 
Enteroviruses can also cause meningitis, acute flaccid myelitis, myo­
carditis, rash, and two specific syndromes that involve the oropharynx: 
herpangina and hand-­foot-­mouth disease. Herpangina is character­
ized by distinctive discrete, painful, gray-­white papulovesicular lesions 
distributed over the posterior oropharynx (see Table 2.7). The vesicles 
are 1–2 mm in diameter and are initially surrounded by a halo of ery­
thema before they ulcerate (Fig. 2.1). Fevers are typically present at 
illness onset, last several days before abating, and may reach 39.5°C 
or higher. The illness is typically caused by coxsackie A viruses and 
Sore Throat
Sarah C. Yale
2
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
10
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
generally lasts <7 days, but severe pain may impair fluid intake and 
occasionally necessitates medical support. Hand-­foot-­mouth disease 
is also caused by enteroviruses, most commonly coxsackievirus A16. 
Painful vesicles that ulcerate can occur throughout the oropharynx, as 
opposed to the lesions of herpangina, which tend to be restricted to 
the posterior oropharynx. Vesicles also develop on the palms and soles 
and, less often, on the trunk, extremities, or diaper region (Fig. 2.2). 
Fever is present in most cases, but many children do not appear seri­
ously ill. Illness typically lasts <7 days.
Primary infection caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV) (Fig. 2.3) 
usually produces high fever with acute gingivostomatitis, involving 
TABLE 2.1  Etiology of Sore Throat
Infection
Bacterial (see Tables 2.2 and 2.3)
Viral (see Tables 2.2 and 2.3)
Fungal (see Table 2.3)
Neutropenic mucositis (invasive anaerobic mouth flora)
Tonsillitis
Epiglottitis
Uvulitis
Tracheitis
Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
Retropharyngeal abscess (prevertebral space)
Ludwig angina (submandibular space)
Lateral pharyngeal space cellulitis or ­abscess
Buccal space cellulitis
Suppurative thyroiditis
Lemierre syndrome (septic jugular thrombophlebitis)
Vincent angina (mixed anaerobic bacteria–gingivitis–pharyngitis)
Irritation
Cigarette or electronic cigarette/vaping use
Inhaled irritants; occupational, environmental
Reflux esophagitis
Allergic rhinitis
Chemical toxins (caustic agents including household cleaners, laundry 
detergent pods)
Medications
Paraquat ingestion
Smog, air pollutants
Dry, hot air
Hot foods, liquids
Shouting
Other
Tumor, including Kaposi sarcoma, leukemia
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis)
Sarcoidosis
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
Foreign body
Stylohyoid syndrome
Behçet disease
Kawasaki disease
Posterior pharyngeal trauma—pseudodiverticulum
Pneumomediastinum with air dissection
Hematoma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Bullous pemphigoid
Syndrome of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical 
adenitis (PFAPA)
TABLE 2.2  Infectious Etiology 
of Pharyngitis
Definite Causes
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococci)
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Epstein-­Barr virus
HIV (primary infection)
Parainfluenza viruses (types 1–4)
Influenza viruses
Rhinoviruses
Enteroviruses
Coronavirus, including SARS-­CoV-­2
Adenovirus (types 3, 4, 7, 14, 21, others)
Respiratory syncytial virus
Herpes simplex virus (types 1, 2)
Probable or Occasional Causes
Group C streptococci
Group G streptococci
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia trachomatis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Toxoplasma gondii
SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-­coronavirus 2.
TABLE 2.3  Additional Potential Pathogens 
Associated with Sore Throat
Bacteria
Fusobacterium necrophorum (Lemierre syndrome)
Neisseria meningitidis
Yersinia enterocolitica
Tularemia (oropharyngeal)
Yersinia pestis
Bacillus anthracis
Chlamydia psittaci
Secondary syphilis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Lyme disease
Corynebacterium ulcerans
Leptospira species
Mycoplasma hominis
Coxiella burnetii
Virus
Cytomegalovirus
Viral hemorrhagic fevers
HIV (primary infection)
Human herpesvirus 6
Measles
Varicella
Rubella
Fungus
Candida species
Histoplasmosis
Cryptococcosis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
11
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
TABLE 2.4  Distinguishing Features of Parapharyngeal–Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
Peritonsillar 
Abscess
Retropharyn­
geal Abscess 
(Cellulitis)
Submandibular 
Space (Ludwig 
Angina)*
Lateral 
Pharyngeal 
Space
Masticator 
Space*
Epiglottitis
Laryngotracheo­
bronchitis 
(Croup)
Bacterial 
Tracheitis
Postanginal 
Sepsis 
(Lemierre 
Syndrome)
Etiology
Group A 
streptococci, oral 
anaerobes†
Staphylococcus 
aureus, oral 
anaerobes,† 
group A 
streptococci, 
“suppurative 
adenitis”
Oral anaerobes†
Oral anaerobes†
Oral anaerobes†
Haemophilus 
influenzae type 
b (rarely), group 
A streptococci, 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, 
Staphylococcus 
aureus, and 
non–type b 
H. influenzae
Parainfluenza 
virus; influenza, 
adenovirus, 
and respiratory 
syncytial virus less 
common
Moraxella 
catarrhalis, 
S. aureus, 
H. influenzae 
type b or 
nontypeable
Fusobacterium 
necrophorum
Age
Teens
Infancy, preteens, 
occasionally 
teens
Teens
Teens
Teens
2–5 yr
3 mo–3 yr
3–10 yr
Teens
Manifestations
Initial episode 
of pharyngitis, 
followed by 
sudden worsening 
of unilateral 
odynophagia, 
trismus, hot 
potato (muffled) 
voice, drooling, 
displacement of 
uvula
Fever, dyspnea, 
stridor, dysphagia, 
drooling, 
stiff neck, 
pain, cervical 
adenopathy, 
swelling of 
posterior 
pharyngeal space
Descending 
mediastinitis (rare)
Lateral neck 
radiograph 
reveals swollen 
retropharyngeal 
prevertebral 
space: infants, 
>1× width of 
adjacent vertebral 
body (>2–7 mm); 
teens, >1/3× 
width of vertebral 
body (>1–7 mm)
CT distinguishes 
cellulitis from 
abscess
Fever, dysphagia, 
odynophagia, 
stiff neck, 
dyspnea; airway 
obstruction, 
swollen tongue 
and floor of 
mouth (tender)
Muffled voice
Severe pain, 
fever, trismus, 
dysphagia, 
edematous 
appearing, painful 
lateral facial (jaw) 
or neck swelling 
(induration)
May lead to 
Lemierre 
syndrome
Pain, prominent 
trismus, fever
Swelling not 
always evident
Sudden-­onset high 
fever, “toxic” 
appearance; 
muffled voice; 
anxiety; pain, 
retractions; 
dysphagia; 
drooling; stridor; 
sitting-­up, 
leaning-­forward 
tripod position; 
cherry-­red 
swollen epiglottis
Usually not hoarse 
or coughing
Lateral neck 
radiograph shows 
“thumb sign” of 
swollen epiglottis
Low-­grade fever, 
barking cough, 
hoarseness, 
aphonia, stridor; 
mild retractions; 
radiograph shows 
“steeple sign” 
of subglottic 
narrowing on 
anteroposterior 
neck view
Prior history of 
croup with 
sudden onset 
of respiratory 
distress, high 
fever, “toxic” 
appearance, 
hoarseness, 
stridor, barking 
cough, tripod 
sitting position; 
radiograph as 
per croup plus 
ragged tracheal 
air column
Prior pharyngitis 
with sudden-­
onset fever, 
chills, 
odynophagia, 
neck pain, septic 
thrombophlebitis 
of internal 
jugular vein 
with septic 
emboli (e.g., 
lungs, joints), 
bacteremia
*Often odontogenic; check for tooth abscess, caries, tender teeth.
†Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
12
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
vesicles throughout the anterior portion of the mouth, including the 
lips; vesicles eventually ulcerate. There is sparing of the posterior phar­
ynx in herpes gingivostomatitis; the infection usually occurs in young 
children. High fever is common, pain is intense, and intake of oral 
fluids is often impaired, which may lead to dehydration and need for 
medical support. In adolescents, HSV may manifest as poorly differ­
entiated pharyngitis. Approximately 35% of new-­onset HSV-­positive 
adolescent patients have herpetic lesions; most teenage patients with 
HSV pharyngitis cannot be distinguished from patients with other 
causes of pharyngitis. The classic syndrome of herpetic gingivostoma­
titis in infants and toddlers lasts up to 2 weeks; data on the course of 
more benign HSV pharyngitis infections in older children and adoles­
cents are lacking. The differential diagnosis of vesicular-­ulcerating oral 
lesions is noted in Tables 2.7 and 2.8.
Infants and toddlers with measles often have prominent oral find­
ings early in the course of the disease. In addition to high fever, cough, 
coryza, and conjunctivitis, the pharynx may be intensely and diffusely 
erythematous, without tonsillar enlargement or exudate. Koplik spots, 
the pathognomonic white or blue-­white enanthem of measles, appear 
on the buccal mucosa near the mandibular molars, generally before 
the typical measles rash develops. Complications of measles include 
ear infections, pneumonia, and encephalitis. In the United States, 
widespread measles vaccination virtually eliminated transmission of 
natural measles infection except among unvaccinated subpopulations 
(e.g., children younger than 12 months old, families who have refused 
immunization). Most recent cases are related to unimmunized visitors 
from countries with endemic measles, although there has been a rise in 
cases within the United States due to increasing rates of unvaccinated 
children.
The lesions of herpangina, hand-­foot-­mouth disease, herpes gingi­
vostomatitis, and measles should be distinguished from noninfectious 
aphthous ulcers, colloquially referred to as canker sores. Aphthous 
ulcers are typically discrete, 3–5 mm in diameter, round or ovoid, with 
a peripheral erythematous halo and a white to yellow-­white covering 
exudate. Lesions tend to be painful, though some may be noted only 
incidentally. An isolated episode of individual or clustered lesions may 
be related to physical or chemical irritation, a reaction to an allergic 
or infectious exposure, nutritional deficiency, or immune-­mediated 
inflammation. Individuals with recurrent aphthous stomatitis may 
lack associated features during or between episodes and experience 
one to several outbreaks per year, a condition known as simple aphtho­
sis. The outbreaks of simple aphthosis tend to start in late childhood 
or adolescence, last up to 2 weeks, and abate by adulthood. Patients 
with complex aphthosis tend to have more frequent outbreaks, have 
more numerous and painful lesions, and occasionally have lesions on 
the genital mucosa as well. In such circumstances, complex aphtho­
sis must be distinguished from Behçet disease, the latter of which is a 
systemic inflammatory disorder that may include arthritis, neurologic 
manifestations, and cutaneous lesions, in addition to orogenital muco­
sal aphthae (see Table 2.6).
An autoinflammatory periodic fever syndrome known as PFAPA 
(periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical 
adenitis) occurs predictably every 2–8 weeks. The onset of PFAPA 
is usually before the age of 5 years. In addition to aphthous stomati­
tis and pharyngitis, PFAPA is characterized by high fever lasting 4–6 
days. The diagnosis is clinical and is typically made in patients with 
a phenotype consistent with PFAPA after excluding cyclic neutrope­
nia, other periodic fever syndromes, infections, malignancy, and the 
persistence of elevated acute-­phase reactants between episodes. Indi­
vidual episodes resolve spontaneously but may respond to oral predni­
sone. Cimetidine in PFAPA syndrome is ineffective. As corticosteroids 
do not prevent future fever cycles, long-­term intervention may also 
TABLE 2.5  Red Flags Associated with Sore 
Throat
Toxic appearance
Shock
Fever >2 wk
Duration of sore throat >2 wk
Dysphagia
Trismus
Stridor
Drooling
Dysphonia
Cyanosis
Hemorrhage
Asymmetric tonsillar swelling or asymmetric cervical adenopathy
Respiratory distress (airway obstruction or pneumonia)
Suspicion of parapharyngeal space infection
Suspicion of diphtheria (bull neck, uvula paralysis, thick membrane)
Apnea
Severe, unremitting pain
Tripod sitting position
“Hot potato” or muffled voice
Chest or neck pain
Weight loss
Systemic lymphadenopathy
Pharyngeal pseudomembrane
Marked neck swelling (bull neck)
Uvula paralysis
Travel or exposure to individuals from diphtheria endemic region
HIV behavioral risk
TABLE 2.6  Findings Suggestive of Group 
A Streptococcus and Viral Pharyngitis
Suggestive of Group A Streptococcus
Sudden onset
Sore throat
Fever >100.4°F
Headache
Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain
Erythema of pharynx and tonsils
Patchy discrete exudates
Tender, enlarged anterior cervical nodes
Patient aged 3–15 yr
Presentation in winter or early spring
History of exposure
Scarlet fever
Suggestive of Viral Etiology
Conjunctivitis
Coryza
Cough
Hoarseness
Diarrhea
Discrete ulcerative lesions
Myalgia
Typical viral rash (measles, etc.)
Posterior cervical or generalized lymphadenopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly
EBV-­ampicillin rash
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 2.7  Vesicular-­Ulcerating Eruptions of the Mouth and Pharynx
Gingivostomatitis Herpangina
Hand-­Foot-­
Mouth Disease
Chickenpox
Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus 
(SLE)
Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease 
(IBD)
Aphthous 
Stomatitis
Behçet Disease
Vincent 
Stomatitis
Recurrent 
Scarifying 
Ulcerative 
Stomatitis 
(Sutton 
Disease)
Etiology
Herpes simplex virus 
(HSV I)
Coxsackievirus A, 
B; echovirus or 
HSV (rarely)
Coxsackievirus A, 
coxsackievirus B 
(rarely)
Varicella-­zoster 
virus
Autoimmune
Autoimmune
Unknown
Unknown; vasculitis Unknown; or 
anaerobic 
bacteria
Unknown
Location
Ulcerative vesicles of 
pharynx, tongue, and 
palate plus lesions 
of mucocutaneous 
(perioral) margin
Anterior fauces 
(tonsils), soft 
palate (uvula), 
less often 
pharynx
Tongue, buccal 
mucosa, palate, 
palms, soles, 
anterior oral 
cavity
Tongue, gingiva, 
buccal mucosa, 
marked 
cutaneous 
lesions; trunk > 
face
Oral, nasal mucosa; 
palate, pharynx, 
buccal mucosa
Lips, tongue, 
buccal mucosa, 
oropharynx
As in IBD
Oral (similar to 
IBD); genital 
ulcers
Gingiva; ulceration 
at base of teeth
Tongue; buccal 
mucosa
Age
<5 yr
3–10 yr
1 yr–teens
Any age
Any age
Any age
Teens and 
adulthood
Teens, adulthood, 
occasionally 
<10 yr
Teens; if younger, 
consider 
immunodeficiency 
and blood 
dyscrasia
Teens
Manifestations Fever, mouth 
pain, toxic, fetid 
breath, drooling, 
anorexia, cervical 
lymphadenopathy; 
cracked, swollen 
hemorrhagic 
gums; secondary 
inoculation possible 
(fingers, eye, skin); 
reactivation with 
long latency (any 
age)
Fever, sore throat, 
odynophagia; 
summer 
outbreaks; 6–12 
lesions (2–4 mm 
papule) → vesicle 
→ ulceration; 
headache, 
myalgia
Painful bilateral 
vesicles, fever
Fever, pruritic 
cutaneous 
vesicles, painful 
oral lesions
Renal, central 
nervous system, 
arthritis, 
cutaneous, 
hematologic, 
other organ 
involvement; 
ulcers minimally 
to moderately 
painful; may be 
painless
Multiple 
recurrences; 
painful 
ulcerations 
1–2 mm, but may 
be 5–15 mm; 
abdominal 
pain, diarrhea, 
hematochezia, 
weight loss
Similar to IBD
Painful ulcerations 
(heal without 
scarring); uveitis, 
arthralgia, 
arthritis, lower 
gastrointestinal 
ulceration 
(similar to IBD); 
recurrences; 
spontaneous 
remissions
Fever, bleeding 
gums; gray 
membrane
Deep, large, painful 
ulcerations; 
relapsing; 
scarring with 
distortion of 
mucosa
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
14
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
Fig. 2.1  Herpangina with shallow ulcers in the posterior oropharynx. 
(From Cohen J, Powderly WG. Infectious Diseases. 2nd ed. St Louis: 
Mosby; 2004.)
A
B
C
Fig. 2.2  A, Hand-­foot-­mouth disease. Aphthae-­like erosions may appear anywhere in the oral cavity. B, 
Hand-­foot-­mouth disease. Cloudy vesicles with a red halo are highly characteristic of this disease. C, Hand-­
foot-­mouth disease. The pale, white, oval vesicles with a red areola are a distinguishing feature of this 
disease. (From Dinulos JGH. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Figs. 14.4, 
14.6, and 14.7.)
C
A
B
Fig. 2.3  Herpes simplex infections. A, Herpetic gingivostomatitis is characterized by discrete mucosal ulcer­
ations and diffuse gingival erythema, edema, and friability in association with fever, dysphagia, and cervical 
adenopathy. B, Numerous yellow ulcerations with thin red halos are seen on the patient’s tongue as well. 
C, Thick-­walled vesicles on an erythematous base were noted in this child, who showed early findings of 
intraoral involvement. (From Michaels MG, Williams JV. Infectious diseases. In Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk 
AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Fig. 13.3.)
include tonsillectomy with or without adenoidectomy, although risks 
of surgical intervention such as anesthetic and postoperative complica­
tions must be considered. In most patients PFAPA completely resolves 
without sequelae before puberty; a few persist into adulthood. Some 
patients initially diagnosed as having PFAPA actually had a monoge­
netic recurrent fever syndrome (see Chapter 54).
INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS
Pathogenesis
Acute exudative pharyngitis commonly occurs with infectious mono­
nucleosis caused by primary infection with the Epstein-­Barr virus 
(EBV). Mononucleosis is a febrile, systemic, self-­limited lymphopro­
liferative disorder that is usually associated with hepatosplenomegaly 
and generalized lymphadenopathy. Acute pharyngitis may be mild or 
severe, with erythema, impressive tonsillar exudates, and significant 
tonsillar hypertrophy that can result in airway obstruction. Regional 
lymph nodes may be particularly enlarged and slightly tender. Infec­
tious mononucleosis usually occurs in adolescents and young adults; 
EBV infection is generally milder or subclinical in preadolescent chil­
dren. In U.S. high school and college students, attack rates are 200–800 
per 100,000 per year. EBV is transmitted primarily by saliva.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
15
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
Clinical Features
After a 2–4-­week incubation period, patients with infectious mononu­
cleosis usually experience an abrupt onset of malaise, fatigue, fever, and 
headache, followed closely by pharyngitis. The tonsils are enlarged with 
exudates and cervical (often posterior) adenopathy. More generalized 
adenopathy with hepatosplenomegaly often follows. Fever and pharyn­
gitis typically last 1–3 weeks, and lymphadenopathy and hepatospleno­
megaly resolve over 3–6 weeks. Malaise and lethargy can persist for 
several months and can affect school or work performance.
Diagnosis
The findings of acute exudative pharyngitis together with hepatomeg­
aly, splenomegaly, and generalized lymphadenopathy suggest infec­
tious mononucleosis. Early in the disease and in cases without liver 
or spleen enlargement, differentiation from other causes of pharyn­
gitis, including streptococcal pharyngitis, is difficult. Indeed, a small 
number of patients with infectious mononucleosis have a throat 
culture positive for group A streptococci, though these patients are 
likely streptococcal carriers. Patients with infectious mononucleo­
sis treated for presumed streptococcal pharyngitis with antibacteri­
als, particularly with ampicillin or amoxicillin, frequently develop a 
diffuse, erythematous, papular exanthem during the course of ther­
apy that retrospectively suggests infectious mononucleosis due to 
EBV. An indistinguishable mononucleosis syndrome can occur with 
cytomegalovirus, but differentiation is rarely of clinical importance. 
Acute toxoplasmosis may also present similarly. Serologic evidence of 
mononucleosis should be sought when splenomegaly or other features 
are present or if symptoms persist longer than expected. Laboratory 
studies of diagnostic value include atypical lymphocytosis; these lym­
phocytes are primarily EBV-­specific, cytotoxic T lymphocytes that rep­
resent a reactive response to EBV-­infected B lymphocytes. A modest 
elevation of serum aminotransferase levels, reflecting EBV hepatitis, is 
common. Tests useful for diagnosis include detection of heterophile 
antibodies that react with bovine erythrocytes (most often detected 
by the monospot test) and a specific antibody against EBV viral cap­
sid antigen (VCA), early antigen (EA), and nuclear antigen (EBNA). 
Acute infectious mononucleosis is usually associated with a positive 
heterophile antibody test result and the presence of antibodies to VCA 
and EA in a specific pattern; subacute and remote infections produce 
distinct antibody profiles (Fig. 2.4). In young children, the monospot 
may be negative.
Primary infection with HIV may produce a mononucleosis-­like 
illness with sore throat, fever, lymphadenopathy, rash, myalgia, and 
hepatosplenomegaly. Early infection may be detected by viral RNA or 
DNA load because immunoglobulin M (IgM) or immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) titers may have not yet developed.
TABLE 2.8  Broad Differential Diagnosis of Oral Ulceration
Condition
Comment
Common
Aphthous ulcers (canker sores)
Painful circumscribed lesions; recurrences
Traumatic ulcers
Accidents, chronic cheek biter, after dental local anesthesia
Hand-­foot-­mouth disease
Painful; lesions on tongue, anterior oral cavity, hands, and feet
Herpangina
Painful; lesions confined to soft palate and oropharynx
Herpetic gingivostomatitis
Vesicles on mucocutaneous borders; painful, febrile
Recurrent herpes labialis
Vesicles on lips; painful
Other viruses
HIV, varicella, EBV
Chemical burns
Alkali, acid, aspirin; painful
Heat burns
Hot food, electrical
Drugs
NSAIDs, chemotherapy, sulfa drugs, phenytoin, ACE inhibitors, others
Uncommon
Neutrophil defects
Agranulocytosis, leukemia, cyclic neutropenia; painful
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Recurrent; may be painless or bullous
Behçet syndrome
Resembles aphthous lesions; associated with genital ulcers, uveitis
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivostomatitis
Vincent stomatitis; painful
Syphilis
Chancre or gumma; painless
Oral Crohn disease
Aphthous-­like; painful
Histoplasmosis
Lingual
Pneumococcal sepsis or pneumonia
Gingival cystic ulcerations
Pemphigus
May be isolated to the oral cavity
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
May be isolated to or appear initially in the oral cavity
Mycoplasma (MIRM)
Rash may be absent
RIME
Non-­mycoplasma infections; lesions similar to MIRM; may be reactive
PFAPA
Unknown etiology recurrent autoinflammatory fever syndrome
Celiac disease
Primary or nutritional deficiencies
Nutritional deficiencies
Vitamin B12, iron, folate
ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; MIRM, mycoplasma-­induced rash and mucositis; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflamma­
tory drugs; PFAPA, periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis syndrome; RIME, reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
16
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
BACTERIAL PHARYNGITIS
Group A Streptococcal Infection
In evaluating a patient with sore throat, the primary concern is usu­
ally accurate diagnosis and treatment of pharyngitis caused by group 
A streptococci (GAS), also known as Streptococcus pyogenes, which 
accounts for up to 30% of all episodes of pharyngitis in children in the 
United States. The sequelae of GAS pharyngitis, especially acute rheu­
matic fever (ARF) and poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (PSGN), 
at one time resulted in considerable morbidity and mortality in the 
United States and continue to do so in other parts of the world. Preven­
tion of ARF in particular depends on timely diagnosis of streptococcal 
pharyngitis and prompt antibacterial treatment. Group A streptococci 
are characterized by the presence of group A carbohydrate in the cell 
wall, and they are further distinguished by several cell wall protein 
antigens (M, R, T). These protein antigens, especially the M protein, a 
virulence factor, are useful for studies of epidemiology and pathogene­
sis but are not used in clinical care.
Epidemiology
Group A streptococcal pharyngitis is endemic in the United States; 
epidemics occur sporadically. Episodes peak in the late winter and 
early spring. Rates of GAS pharyngitis are highest among children 
aged 5–11 years old. Spread of GAS in classrooms and among fam­
ily members is common, especially in the presence of crowded living 
conditions. Transmission occurs primarily by the inhalation of organ­
isms in large droplets or by direct contact with respiratory secretions. 
Pets do not appear to be a frequent reservoir. Untreated streptococcal 
pharyngitis is particularly contagious early in the acute illness and for 
the first 2 weeks after the organism has been acquired. Antibacterial 
therapy effectively prevents disease transmission: Within 24 hours of 
institution of therapy with penicillin, it is difficult to isolate GAS from 
patients with acute streptococcal pharyngitis, and infected children 
can return to school.
Molecular epidemiology studies of streptococcal pharyngitis have 
shown that the prevalent M protein types vary among communities 
and over time. Numerous distinct strains of GAS can circulate simul­
taneously in a community during the peak season. Molecular genetic 
studies can establish the specific M protein gene (i.e., emm gene); M 
protein identification is not available or useful for clinical care. Chil­
dren with streptococcal pharyngitis can serve as a local reservoir for 
strains that cause invasive disease (e.g., sepsis, streptococcal toxic 
shock syndrome, cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis) in the same geographic 
area and season.
Clinical Features
Acute streptococcal pharyngitis classically presents with the sud­
den onset of fever and sore throat (see Table 2.6). Headache, malaise, 
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting occur frequently. Cough, rhi­
norrhea, conjunctivitis, stridor, diarrhea, discrete ulcerated lesions, 
and hoarseness are distinctly unusual and suggest a viral etiology (see 
Table 2.6).
Physical examination reveals marked pharyngeal erythema. Pete­
chiae may be noted on the palate but can also occur in viral pharyn­
gitis, especially mononucleosis. Tonsils are enlarged, symmetric, and 
bright red, with patchy exudates on their surfaces. Anterior cervical 
lymph nodes are often tender and enlarged.
Combinations of these signs can be used to assist in diagnosis; in 
particular, tonsillar exudates in association with fever, palatal pete­
chiae, and tender anterior cervical lymphadenopathy strongly suggest 
infection with GAS. However, other diseases can produce this con­
stellation of findings, including infectious mononucleosis. Some or all 
Heterophile antibody
Infectious mononucleosis
Antibody titer
1:320
1:160
1:80
1:40
1:20
1:10
0
0
2
4
2
4
Weeks
IgM-VCA
(4 years)
IgM-VCA
(4 years)
IgG-VCA
Early antigen
Nuclear antigen
Months
Time after Clinical Onset
6
1
Years
3
Fig. 2.4  Schematic representation of the evolution of antibodies to various Epstein-­Barr virus antigens in 
patients with infectious mononucleosis. The titers are geometric mean values expressed as reciprocals of the 
serum dilution. The minimal titer tested for viral capsid antigen (VCA) and early antigen antibodies was 1:10; 
for Epstein-­Barr nuclear antigen, it was 1:2.5. The immunoglobulin M (IgM) response to capsid antigen was 
divided because of the significant differences noted according to age. IgG, immunoglobulin G. (From Jenson 
HB, Ench Y, Sumaya CV. Epstein-­Barr virus. In: Rose NR, de Macario EC, Folds JD, et al., eds. Manual of 
Clinical Laboratory Immunology. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology; 1997:634–643.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
17
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
of these classic characteristics may be absent in patients with strep­
tococcal pharyngitis. Symptoms usually resolve within 5 days even in 
the absence of antibacterial therapy. Younger children can have a syn­
drome called streptococcosis—coryza with crusting below the nares, 
more generalized adenopathy, and a more chronic course. When rash 
accompanies the illness, accurate clinical diagnosis is easier. Scarlet 
fever, so-­called because of the characteristic fine, diffuse red rash, is 
essentially pathognomonic for infection with group A streptococci. 
Scarlet fever is rarely seen in children younger than 3 years old or in 
adults.
Scarlet Fever
The rash of scarlet fever is caused by infection with a strain of GAS 
that contains a bacteriophage encoding for production of an eryth­
rogenic (redness-­producing) toxin, usually erythrogenic (also called 
pyrogenic) exotoxin A (designated SPE A). Scarlet fever is simply GAS 
pharyngitis with a rash and should be explained as such to patients 
and their families. Although patients with streptococcal toxic shock 
syndrome are also infected with GAS that produces SPE A, most GAS 
pharyngeal infections are not associated with development of severe 
invasive or systemic disease.
The rash of scarlet fever has a texture like sandpaper and blanches 
with pressure (Figs. 2.5 and 2.6). It usually begins on the face, but after 
24 hours, it becomes generalized. The face is red, especially over the 
cheeks, and the area around the mouth often appears pale in compar­
ison, giving the appearance of circumoral pallor. Accentuation of ery­
thema occurs in flexor skin creases, especially in the antecubital fossae, 
a finding termed Pastia lines. The papillae of the tongue may be red 
and swollen, hence the designation “strawberry tongue.” The erythema 
begins to fade within a few days. Desquamation begins within a week 
of onset on the face and progresses downward, often resembling that 
seen after mild sunburn. On occasion, sheetlike desquamation occurs 
around the free margins of the fingernails; this is usually coarser than 
the desquamation seen with Kawasaki disease. The differential diagno­
sis of scarlet fever includes Kawasaki disease, measles, and staphylo­
coccal toxic shock syndrome (Table 2.9).
Diagnosis
Although signs and symptoms may strongly suggest acute streptococ­
cal pharyngitis, laboratory diagnosis is strongly recommended, even 
for patients with scarlet fever (Fig. 2.5). Scoring systems for diagnos­
ing acute GAS pharyngitis on clinical grounds, such as the McIsaac or 
Centor criteria, have not proved very satisfactory. Using clinical cri­
teria alone, physicians overestimate the likelihood that patients have 
streptococcal infection. Historically, the throat culture on blood agar 
plate was used to diagnose streptococcal pharyngitis, but results were 
typically not available for 24–48 hours. Rapid antigen detection tests 
(RADTs) that take <15 minutes can detect the presence of the cell 
wall group A carbohydrate antigen after acid extraction of organisms 
obtained by throat swab. These RADTs are highly specific (generally 
>95%) when compared to throat culture. One recommendation is 
that two throat swabs be obtained simultaneously from patients with 
suspected GAS pharyngitis. One swab is used for a rapid test. When 
the RADT result is positive, it is highly likely that the patient has GAS 
pharyngitis, and the extra swab can be discarded. When the RADT is 
negative, GAS may nonetheless be present; thus, the extra swab should 
be processed for culture. One of the best validated scoring systems 
for determining pretest probability in children is the McIsaac criteria 
(fever, cervical adenopathy, tonsillar exudates, no cough, 3–15 years 
old), but the positive predictive value of the highest McIsaac score is 
C
A
B
Fig. 2.5  A, Scarlet fever. Early eruptive stage on the trunk showing numerous pinpoint red papules. B, Fully 
evolved eruption. Numerous papules giving a sandpaper-­like texture to the skin. C, Portions of the white coat 
remain in the center, but the remainder of the tongue is red with engorged papillae (“strawberry tongue”). (From 
Dinulos JGH. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Figs. 14.9, 14.10, and 14.11.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
18
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
only about 60%. In contrast, a score ≤2 is associated with a negative 
predictive value of about 80%. The presence of viral symptoms such as 
cough, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, laryngitis, stridor, croup, or diarrhea 
decreases the likelihood that the illness is due to GAS. Patients with a 
negative RADT result should not be treated before culture verification 
unless there is a particularly high suspicion of GAS infection (e.g., scar­
let fever, peritonsillar abscess, or tonsillar exudates in addition to ten­
der cervical adenopathy, palatal petechiae, fever, and recent exposure 
to a person with GAS pharyngitis).
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) for GAS are available for 
use in hospital and reference laboratories and are supplanting RADTs 
in many settings. These simplified molecular tests use methods that 
amplify the DNA of a specific GAS gene. They take <1 hour to perform 
and are reported to have both sensitivity and specificity ≥99% when 
compared to standard throat culture and PCR. They can be used as a 
“stand-­alone” test for GAS or as a confirmatory test when the RADT 
is negative. There are three concerns with these molecular tests: (1) 
they are so sensitive it is likely they may identify more patients who 
are carriers than would ordinarily be identified by RADT and/or cul­
ture; (2) unless rigorous technique is followed, they may be prone to 
contamination with exogenous GAS DNA from other swabs, a partic­
ular concern in physician offices when performed by staff who are not 
trained laboratory technologists; and (3) depending on the institution, 
they can be more expensive than throat culture, and their costs may not 
be covered by all insurance plans. As NAAT testing becomes more cost 
efficient the use will likely continue to rise as these assays can provide 
sensitive and actionable results quicker than a traditional culture.
Testing patients for serologic evidence of an antibody response to 
extracellular products of GAS is not useful for diagnosing acute phar­
yngitis. Because it generally takes several weeks for antibody levels to 
rise, streptococcal antibody tests are valid only for determining past 
infection. Specific antibodies that are often measured in the appropriate 
0
1
2
3
1
2
4
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
4
103° F
White tongue
Red tongue
Temperature
Incubation
days
Pharyngitis (sudden onset)
Nausea + Vomit + Headache + Abdominal pain
Exanthem
Desquamation
Fig. 2.6  Scarlet fever. Evolution of signs and symptoms. (From Dinulos JGH. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 
7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Fig. 14.8.)
TABLE 2.9  Differential Diagnosis of Scarlet Fever
Scarlet Fever
Kawasaki Disease
Measles
Staphylococcal 
Toxic Shock 
Syndrome
Staphylococcal 
Scalded Skin 
Syndrome
Agent
Group A streptococci
Unknown
Measles virus
Staphylococcus aureus
S. aureus
Age range
All (peak, 5–15 yr)
Usually <5 yr
<2 yr, 10–20 yr
All (especially >10 yr)
Usually <5 yr
Prodrome
No
No
Fever, coryza, cough, 
conjunctivitis
Usually no
No
Enanthem
No
Occasionally
Koplik spots
No
Limited
Mouth
Strawberry tongue, 
exudative pharyngitis, 
palatal petechiae
Erythema; red, cracked lips; 
strawberry tongue
Diffusely red, no cracked 
lips
Usually normal
Erythema
Rash
Fine, red, “sandpaper,” 
membranous 
desquamation, 
circumoral pallor, Pastia 
lines
Variable polymorphic; 
erythematous face, trunk, and 
diaper area; tips of fingers and 
toes desquamate
10–28 days after onset
Maculopapular; 
progressing from 
forehead to feet; may 
desquamate
Diffuse erythroderma; 
desquamates
Erythema, painful 
bullous lesions; 
positive Nikolsky sign; 
desquamates
Other
Cervical adenitis, 
gallbladder hydrops, 
fever
Coronary artery disease; fever >5 
days; conjunctival (nonpurulent) 
injection; tender, swollen hands 
and feet; cervical adenopathy 
(size >1.5 cm); thrombocytosis;
pyuria (sterile); gallbladder 
hydrops
“Toxic” appearance; 
dehydration; 
encephalitis, 
pneumonia;
Shock (hypotension, 
including orthostatic); 
encephalopathy; 
diarrhea; headache
Fever, cracked lips; 
conjunctivitis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
19
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
clinical setting include antistreptolysin O (ASO), anti–DNase B, and 
antihyaluronidase (AHT). When antibody testing is desired to evaluate 
a possible poststreptococcal illness, more than one of these tests should 
be performed to improve sensitivity.
Treatment
Treatment begun within 9 days of the onset of GAS pharyngitis is effec­
tive in preventing ARF. Therapy does not affect the risk of acute post­
streptococcal glomerulonephritis. Antibacterial therapy also reduces the 
incidence of suppurative sequelae of GAS pharyngitis, such as peritonsil­
lar abscess and cervical adenitis. In addition, treatment produces a more 
rapid resolution of signs and symptoms and terminates contagiousness 
within 24 hours. For these reasons, antibacterials should be instituted as 
soon as the diagnosis is supported by laboratory studies.
There are numerous antibiotics available for treating streptococcal 
pharyngitis (Table 2.10). The drugs of choice are penicillin and amox­
icillin. Despite the widespread use of penicillin to treat streptococcal 
and other infections for many decades, resistance of GAS to penicillin 
or any other β-­lactam antibiotic has not developed. Amoxicillin has 
been demonstrated to be effective in eradicating GAS when given by 
mouth once daily for 10 days.
Patients who are allergic to penicillin can receive a cephalosporin 
if they have not had an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. Eryth­
romycin or another non-­β-­lactam antibiotic, such as clarithromycin, 
azithromycin, or clindamycin, can be used. Resistance of GAS to mac­
rolides has increased dramatically in many areas of the world where 
erythromycin has been widely used. Macrolide resistance also affects 
azithromycin and can affect clindamycin.
Suppurative Complications
Antibacterial therapy has greatly reduced the likelihood of developing 
suppurative complications caused by spread of GAS from the pharynx 
to adjacent parapharyngeal structures. Peritonsillar abscess (“quinsy”) 
manifests with fever, severe throat pain, dysphagia, “hot potato voice,” 
pain referred to the ear, and bulging of the peritonsillar area with asym­
metry of the tonsils and sometimes displacement of the uvula to the 
opposite side (Fig. 2.8; see also Table 2.4). There can be peritonsillar 
cellulitis without a well-­defined abscess cavity. Trismus may be present. 
When an abscess is found clinically or by an imaging study such as a 
CT scan, needle aspiration or surgical drainage is indicated. Peritonsil­
lar abscess occurs most commonly in older children and adolescents. 
Group A streptococcus is recovered from the abscess in ∼50%; other 
organisms include other streptococci and oral anaerobic bacteria.
Retropharyngeal abscess represents extension of an infection from 
the pharynx or peritonsillar region into the retropharyngeal (prever­
tebral) space, which is rich in lymphoid structures (Figs. 2.9 and 2.10; 
see also Table 2.4). Penetrating trauma from a foreign object (e.g., fish 
bone) may rarely cause this. Children younger than 4 years old are 
most often affected. Fever, dysphagia, drooling, stridor, extension and 
limited motion of the neck, and a mass in the posterior pharyngeal 
wall may be noted. Retropharyngeal abscesses may rarely extend into 
the posterior mediastinum. The organisms are often polymicrobial and 
include streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, and anaerobic bacteria. 
Surgical drainage is often required if frank suppuration has occurred.
Spread of GAS via pharyngeal lymphatic vessels to regional nodes 
can cause cervical lymphadenitis. The markedly swollen and tender 
anterior cervical nodes that result can suppurate. Otitis media, mas­
toiditis, and sinusitis also may occur as complications of GAS pharyngi­
tis. Additional parapharyngeal suppurative infections that may mimic 
streptococcal disease are noted in Table 2.4. Furthermore, any pharyn­
geal infectious process may produce torticollis if there is inflammation 
that extends to the paraspinal muscles and ligaments, producing pain, 
spasm, and, on occasion, rotatory subluxation of the cervical spine, a 
condition termed Grisel syndrome. Oropharyngeal torticollis lasts <2 
weeks and is not associated with abnormal neurologic signs or pain 
over the spinous process. Invasive sterile site or bacteremic infections 
with GAS are unusual sequelae of pharyngitis.
Nonsuppurative Sequelae
Nonsuppurative complications include ARF, PSGN, and possibly reac­
tive arthritis or synovitis. In addition, an association between strepto­
coccal infection and neuropsychiatric disorders such as tic disorder, 
obsessive-­compulsive disorder, and Tourette syndrome has been postu­
lated. This possible association has been called PANDAS (pediatric auto­
immune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococci). The 
terminology has been modified to “pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiat­
ric syndrome” (PANS) or “childhood acute neuropsychiatric syndrome” 
(CANS), in recognition that the etiologic role of GAS and benefit from 
antibacterial treatment have been difficult to establish, and it is likely 
Signs and Symptoms Compatible with GAS
Scarlet fever?
Positive
Yes
No
Confirm with rapid test,
throat culture, or
molecular test; treat 
with antibiotics
Viral pharyngitis
Symptomatic therapy
(No antibiotics)
Treat with
antibiotics
Sore throat persists
≥7 days?
Positive
1) Repeat testing for GAS
2) Mono test
Throat culture
or
Molecular test
Negative
Viral
  pharyngitis
Symptomatic
  therapy
(No antibiotics)
Yes
GAS pharyngitis
No
Rapid
test
Negative
Not GAS
pharyngitis
GAS
pharyngitis
GAS
pharyngitis
Positive
No
Negative
Negative
Viral pharyngitis
Viral pharyngitis
Symptomatic therapy
(No antibiotics)
No antibiotics
Mononucleosis
Positive
Yes
Fig. 2.7  Management of patients with sore throat. GAS, group A strep­
tococci.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
20
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
that infections other than GAS infection are associated with the develop­
ment, recurrence, or exacerbation of neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Therapy with an appropriate antibacterial within 9 days of onset of 
symptoms is highly effective in preventing ARF. Except in certain geo­
graphic areas (e.g., Salt Lake City) and populations (e.g., Hasidic Jew­
ish communities), ARF is quite rare in North America. The impressive 
reduction in ARF prevalence in the United States since the mid-­1960s 
may be related to reductions in the prevalence of so-­called “rheumato­
genic” GAS M types. The reason for the near disappearance of rheu­
matogenic types in the United States is unknown. Areas of the world 
with persistently high rates of ARF have different M types than the 
United States had in the past and has currently. PSGN is not prevented 
by treatment of the antecedent streptococcal infection. Pharyngitis 
caused by one of the “nephritogenic” strains of GAS precedes glomeru­
lonephritis by about 10 days. Unlike ARF, which occurs only after GAS 
pharyngitis, PSGN also can follow GAS skin infection.
Treatment Failure and Chronic Carriage
Treatment with penicillin cures GAS pharyngitis but does not eradi­
cate GAS from the pharynx in as many as 25% of patients (Fig. 2.11), 
causing considerable consternation among affected patients and their 
families. Resistance to penicillin is not the cause of treatment fail­
ure. A few such patients are symptomatic and are characterized as 
having clinical treatment failure. Reinfection with the same strain 
or a different strain is possible, as is intercurrent viral pharyngitis. 
Some of these patients may be chronic pharyngeal carriers of GAS 
who are suffering from a new superimposed viral infection; others 
may have been nonadherent to therapy. Many patients who continue 
to have positive tests for GAS despite antimicrobial treatment are 
asymptomatic and are identified only when follow-­up throat swabs 
are obtained, a practice that is usually unnecessary in North America. 
Patients who adhered to therapy are at minimal risk for ARF. One 
explanation for asymptomatic persistence of GAS after treatment is 
that these patients are chronically colonized with GAS, were initially 
TABLE 2.10  Recommended Treatment Regimens for Acute Streptococcal Pharyngitis*
Dose/Route
Duration
Frequency
Standard Treatment
Amoxicillin
50 mg/kg up to 1,000 mg/oral
10 days
Once daily
Penicillin V
250 mg (weight <27 kg)/oral
500 mg (weight >27 kg) for adolescents and 
adults/oral
10 days
b.i.d.
Benzathine penicillin G
600,000 U (weight <27 kg)/IM
1.2 million U (weight ≥27 kg)/IM
N/A
N/A
Once
Oral Dose
Duration
Frequency
Treatment for Penicillin-­Allergic Patients
Clarithromycin
15 mg/kg/day up to 500 mg/day
10 days
b.i.d.
Azithromycin†
12 mg/kg on day 1 then 6 mg/kg/day on days 2–5
5 days
Once daily
Clindamycin
21 mg/kg/day up to 900 mg/day
10 days
t.i.d.
Cephalosporins‡
Cephalexin
40 mg/kg/day up to 1,000 mg/day
10 days
b.i.d.
Cefadroxil
30 mg/kg/day up to 1,000 mg/day
10 days
Once daily
*Based on Infectious Diseases Society of America 2012 and AAP Red Book recommendations.
†Maximum dose for children is 500 mg/day. Adult dosage: 500 mg the first day, 250 mg the subsequent 4 days.
‡First-­generation cephalosporins (e.g., cephalexin and cefadroxil) are preferred but all cephalosporins are effective. Dosage and frequency vary 
among agents. Avoid use in patients with history of immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity to penicillin or other β-­lactam antibiotics.
b.i.d., two times a day; IM, intramuscular; t.i.d., three times a day.
Fig. 2.8  Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy, sore throat). The left tonsil is 
asymmetrically inflamed and swollen; there is displacement of the uvula 
to the opposite side. The supratonsillar space (arrow) is also swollen; 
this is the usual site of the surgical incision for drainage. Prominent 
unilateral cervical adenopathy typically coexists. (From Reilly BM. Sore 
throat. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadel­
phia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
21
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
2
*
A
B
Fig. 2.9  Retropharyngeal abscess in a 3-­year-­old female with sore throat and fever. A, Lateral soft tissue neck 
radiograph reveals extensive soft tissue swelling displacing the airway anteriorly from the skull base to C6 
(arrow). B, Sagittal reconstructed contrast-­enhanced CT confirms thickened, enhancing retropharyngeal soft 
tissues indicating cellulitis. Region of hypoattenuating fluid is concerning for retropharyngeal abscess (aster­
isk). (From Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and inflammation. In: Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:138, Fig. 15.4.)
Tongue
Epiglottis
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Retropharyngeal
space
Retrotracheal
space
Fig. 2.10  In an adolescent, the retropharyngeal space normally does not 
exceed 7 mm when measured from the anterior aspect of the C2 verte­
bral body to the posterior pharynx. In infants the retropharyngeal space 
is usually less than one width of the adjacent vertebral body. However, 
during crying, this distance may be three widths of the vertebral body. In 
addition, under normal circumstances, the retrotracheal space does not 
exceed 22 mm in adolescents when measured from the anterior aspect 
of C6 to the trachea. Dotted lines depict the “thumbprint” sign, noted 
on a lateral neck radiograph, made by a swollen epiglottis. (From Reilly 
BM. Sore throat. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Signs and Symptoms of bona fide
Acute GAS Pharyngitis
No
Yes
Throat culture
or
Molecular test
Positive
Negative
Probable GAS carrier
GAS carrier
Antibiotic treatment (optional)
1. Oral clindamycin or
2. IM benzathine penicillin plus
    oral rifampin
Recurrent pharyngitis
No
Yes
Special situation?
Family or physician
overly concerned?
Evaluate and treat
each symptomatic
episode individually
Fig. 2.11  Management of patients with repeated or frequent positive 
rapid tests or throat cultures. GAS, group A streptococci; IM, intramus­
cular.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
22
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
symptomatic because of a viral pharyngitis, and did not truly have 
acute streptococcal pharyngitis.
Patients who are chronically colonized with GAS are called chronic 
carriers. Carriers do not appear to be at risk for ARF or for development 
of suppurative complications, and are rarely sources of spread of GAS in 
the community. There is no reason to exclude carriers from school. There 
is no easy way to identify chronic carriers prospectively among patients 
with symptoms of acute pharyngitis. The pathophysiology of chronic car­
riage is unknown. As resistance to penicillin is not a factor, many other 
causes have been hypothesized including nonadherence to antibacterial 
treatment, tolerance to antibacterials (suppression but lack of killing by 
antimicrobials), internalization of GAS by epithelial cells, and presence 
of β-­lactamase-­producing “co-­pathogens,” but none has been proven. The 
clinician should consider the possibility of chronic GAS carriage when a 
patient or a family member has multiple test-­positive episodes of pharyn­
gitis, especially when symptoms are mild or atypical. A culture or other test 
is usually positive for GAS when the suspected carrier is symptom-­free or 
is receiving antibacterial treatment (intramuscular benzathine penicillin is 
recommended to eliminate concerns about compliance).
Carriers often receive multiple unsuccessful courses of antibacte­
rial therapy in attempts to eliminate GAS. Physician and patient/family 
anxiety is common and can develop into “streptophobia.” Unproven 
and ineffective therapies include tonsillectomy, prolonged adminis­
tration of antibacterials, use of β-­lactamase-­inhibiting antibacterials, 
and culture or treatment of pets. Available options for approaching the 
patient with chronic streptococcal carriage include the following:
	1.	 Evaluate for GAS pharyngitis by throat swab each time the patient has 
pharyngitis with features that suggest streptococcal pharyngitis. Treat 
as acute GAS pharyngitis with amoxicillin or penicillin (or an alterna­
tive agent) each time a test is positive; this will prevent ARF if the GAS 
identified has been newly acquired. Avoid testing patients who do not 
have signs and symptoms suggestive of acute GAS pharyngitis.
	2.	 Treat with one of the regimens effective for terminating chronic car­
riage.
The first option is simple, as safe as amoxicillin and penicillin, and 
appropriate for most patients. The second option should be reserved 
for particularly anxious patients/families; those with a history of ARF 
or living with someone who had it; or those living or working in nurs­
ing homes, chronic care facilities, and hospitals. Two antibacterial 
treatment regimens have been demonstrated in randomized trials to 
be effective for eradication of the carrier state:
 • Intramuscular benzathine penicillin plus oral rifampin (10 mg/kg/
dose up to 300 mg, given twice daily for 4 days beginning on the day 
of the penicillin injection)
 • Oral clindamycin, given for 10 days (20 mg/kg/day up to 450 mg, 
divided into three equal doses)
Clindamycin is easier to use than intramuscular penicillin plus oral 
rifampin and may be somewhat more effective. Amoxicillin-­clavulanate 
(40 mg amoxicillin/kg/day up to 2,000 mg amoxicillin/day divided t.i.d. 
for 10 days) has also been used. Successful eradication of the carrier state 
makes evaluation of subsequent episodes of pharyngitis much easier, 
although chronic carriage can recur upon re-­exposure to GAS.
Recurrent Acute Pharyngitis
Some patients seem remarkably susceptible to developing GAS phar­
yngitis. The reasons for frequent bona fide acute GAS pharyngitis are 
obscure. In contrast to chronic carriers, appropriate antibacterial treat­
ment of each episode results in eradication of the organism.
The role of tonsillectomy in the management of patients with multi­
ple episodes of streptococcal pharyngitis is controversial. The presence 
of tonsils is not necessary for GAS to infect the throat. Fewer episodes 
of sore throat were reported among patients treated with tonsillectomy 
(in contrast to patients treated without surgery) during the first 2 years 
after operation. Patients had experienced numerous episodes of pharyn­
gitis over several years, and it appears that not all episodes were caused 
by GAS. By 2 years after tonsillectomy there was no difference between 
the groups in the frequency of pharyngitis. The postoperative complica­
tion rate among tonsillectomy patients was 14%. Tonsillectomy cannot 
be recommended for treatment of recurrent pharyngitis except in unusual 
circumstances. It is preferable to treat most patients with penicillin or 
amoxicillin whenever symptomatic GAS pharyngitis occurs. Obtaining 
follow-­up throat specimens for lab testing can help distinguish recurrent 
pharyngitis from chronic carriage but is unnecessary in most instances.
INFECTION WITH STREPTOCOCCI THAT ARE NOT 
GROUP A (NON-­A STREPTOCOCCI)
Certain β-­hemolytic streptococci of serogroups other than group A 
cause acute pharyngitis. Well-­documented epidemics of food-­borne 
group C and group G streptococcal pharyngitis have been reported in 
young adults. In these situations, a high percentage of individuals who 
had ingested the contaminated food promptly developed acute phar­
yngitis, and throat cultures yielded virtually pure growth of the epi­
demiologically linked organism. There have been outbreaks of group 
G streptococcal pharyngitis among children. However, the role of 
non-­A streptococcal organisms as etiologic agents of acute pharyngitis 
in endemic circumstances has been difficult to establish. Group C and 
group G streptococci may be responsible for acute pharyngitis, partic­
ularly in adolescents. However, the exact role of these agents, most of 
which are carried asymptomatically in the pharynx of some children 
and young adults, remains to be fully characterized. When they are 
implicated as agents of acute pharyngitis, group C and G organisms 
do not appear to necessitate treatment, inasmuch as they cause self-­
limited infections. ARF is not a sequela to these non-­A streptococci 
infections, but acute glomerulonephritis has been documented in rare 
cases after epidemic group C and group G streptococcal pharyngitis.
Fusobacterium necrophorum
Fusobacterium necrophorum, an anaerobic gram-­negative organism, is 
increasingly recognized as a cause of pharyngitis in older adolescents 
and adults aged up to approximately 30 years. Prevalence in studies in 
Europe is reported to be about 10% in patients with pharyngitis not 
caused by GAS, but large surveillance studies have not been performed. 
In a U.S. study of students at a university health clinic, F. necrophorum 
was detected by PCR in 20.5% of patients with pharyngitis and 9.4% of 
an asymptomatic convenience sample; some had more than one bacte­
rium detected by PCR of throat swabs. Many of the pharyngitis patients 
with F. necrophorum had signs and symptoms indistinguishable from 
patients with increased likelihood for GAS pharyngitis: About one third 
had fever, one third had tonsillar exudates, two thirds had anterior cervi­
cal adenopathy, and most did not have cough. The symptomatic overlap 
of F. necrophorum and GAS and the presence of asymptomatic carriage 
could complicate the clinical assessment of sore throat in adolescents, 
but F. necrophorum is difficult to culture from the throat and neither a 
rapid test nor PCR is available for use in clinical care.
F. necrophorum pharyngitis can be associated with develop­
ment of septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein, known 
as Lemierre syndrome (Fig. 2.12). Approximately 80% of cases of 
Lemierre syndrome are due to this gram-­negative rod, but the propor­
tion of patients infected or colonized with F. necrophorum who develop 
pharyngitis and Lemierre syndrome is unknown. Patients present ini­
tially with fever, sore throat, exudative pharyngitis, and/or peritonsillar 
abscess. The symptoms persist, severe neck pain and swelling develop, 
and the patient appears toxic. Septic shock may ensue along with met­
astatic complications, especially septic pulmonary emboli. Diagnosis 
is confirmed by CT or MRI of the neck and isolation of the organism 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
23
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
on anaerobic blood culture. F. necrophorum is usually sensitive to met­
ronidazole, clindamycin, a carbapenem, and β-­lactam in combination 
with a β-­lactamase inhibitor (such as ampicillin-­sulbactam). The sep­
tic thrombophlebitis of Lemierre syndrome can also be polymicrobial 
(Bacteroides, Prevotella); combination antibacterial therapy may be 
beneficial. Some patients require surgical debridement and/or incision 
and drainage. The case-­fatality rate may be as high as 9%.
Arcanobacterium Infection
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum is a gram-­positive rod that has been 
reported to cause acute pharyngitis and scarlet fever–like rash, particu­
larly in teenagers and young adults. Detecting this agent requires special 
methods for culture, and it has not routinely been sought in patients with 
scarlet fever or pharyngitis. The clinical features of A. haemolyticum are 
indistinguishable from GAS pharyngitis; pharyngeal erythema is present 
in almost all patients, patchy white to gray exudates in about 70%, cervi­
cal adenitis in about 50%, and moderate fever in 40%. Palatal petechiae 
and strawberry tongue may also occur. The scarlatiniform rash usually 
spares the face, palms, and soles. The rash is erythematous and blanches; 
it may be pruritic and demonstrate minimal desquamation. Erythromy­
cin appears to be the treatment of choice.
Epiglottitis and Bacterial Tracheitis
Epiglottitis (or supraglottitis) is a life-­threatening infection of the 
airway proximal to the vocal cords (Fig. 2.13; see also Fig. 2.10). His­
torically, it was an infection in 1-­ to 4-­year-­old children caused by 
Haemophilus influenzae type b. Epiglottitis presents with acute onset of 
fever and severe sore throat. This disease progresses rapidly to airway 
compromise. Patients are often drooling and leaning forward with the 
neck extended. Some patients may have stridor, but a muffled voice is 
more common. Management depends on establishing a secure airway 
by intubation and treating with antibacterials. When epiglottitis is sus­
pected, the oropharynx should not be visualized or manipulated except 
in a controlled environment (e.g., intensive care unit or operating 
room) by someone with expertise in management of the airway who 
is prepared to immediately intubate the patient. Vaccination against H. 
influenzae type b has nearly eliminated this disease in childhood; how­
ever, epiglottitis caused by GAS, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. aureus, 
and non–type b H. influenzae occurs occasionally.
Bacterial tracheitis (bacterial croup, bacterial laryngotracheitis) is 
a rare complication of viral croup. S. aureus is the most common super­
infecting bacterium identified. Patients have a history of prolonged 
croup symptoms that become dramatically worse with fever and signs 
of airway obstruction. While sore throat may have been present at the 
onset of croup, it is not a prominent complaint once bacterial infection 
*
A
B
C
Fig. 2.12  Lemierre syndrome (Fusobacterium necrophorum infection) complicated by stroke in a 6-­year-­old 
female presenting with fever, difficulty swallowing, and nuchal rigidity. A, Axial contrast-­enhanced CT image 
shows low-­attenuation retropharyngeal fluid (asterisk). B, MRI 2 days later, performed because of acute 
left arm weakness, confirms lack of left internal jugular vein patency on magnetic resonance venogram. 
C, Diffusion-­weighted image of the brain reveals multiple small foci of bright signal infarction secondary to 
emboli from thrombophlebitis, vasospasm, or both. (From Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and inflammation. In: 
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:137, Fig. 15.2.)
Fig. 2.13  Epiglottis in a 5-­year-­old boy with respiratory distress and 
drooling. A lateral soft tissue neck radiograph shows a markedly thick­
ened epiglottis (white arrow), which is referred to as the “thumb” sign. 
The aryepiglottic folds (black arrow) also are thickened. (From Laya BF, 
Lee EY. Upper airway disease. In: Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 
12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:529, Fig. 51.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
24
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
of the airway occurs. The clinical appearance of patients with bacterial 
tracheitis may mimic that of patients with epiglottitis.
DIPHTHERIA
Diphtheria is a very serious disease that is caused by pharyngeal infec­
tion by toxigenic strains of Corynebacterium diphtheriae. It has become 
very rare in the United States and other developed countries because of 
immunization but is endemic in Asia, the Middle East, Eastern Europe, 
Haiti, and the Dominican Republic. The few diphtheria cases recog­
nized annually in the United States usually occur in unimmunized 
individuals; the fatality rate is about 5%.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of diphtheria involves nasopharyngeal mucosal 
colonization by C. diphtheriae and toxin elaboration after an incuba­
tion period of 1–5 days. Toxin leads to local tissue inflammation and 
necrosis, producing an adherent grayish membrane made up of fibrin, 
blood, inflammatory cells, and epithelial cells; toxin is absorbed into 
the bloodstream. Fragment B of the polypeptide toxin binds particu­
larly well to cardiac, neural, and renal cells, and the smaller fragment 
A enters cells and interferes with protein synthesis. Toxin fixation by 
tissues may lead to fatal myocarditis with arrhythmias within 10–14 
days and to peripheral neuritis within 3–7 weeks.
Clinical Features
Acute tonsillar and pharyngeal diphtheria is characterized by sore 
throat, anorexia, malaise, and low-­grade fever. The grayish membrane 
forms within 1–2 days over the tonsils and pharyngeal walls and occa­
sionally extends into the larynx and trachea. Cervical adenopathy var­
ies but may be severe and associated with development of a “bull neck.” 
In mild cases, the membrane sloughs after 7–10 days and the patient 
recovers. In severe cases, an increasingly toxic appearance can lead 
to prostration, stupor, coma, and death within 6–10 days. Distinctive 
features include palatal and uvula paralysis, laryngeal paralysis, ocular 
palsies, diaphragmatic palsy, and myocarditis. Airway obstruction from 
membrane formation may complicate the toxigenic manifestations.
Diagnosis
Accurate diagnosis requires isolation of C. diphtheriae on culture of 
material from beneath the membrane, with confirmation of toxin pro­
duction by the organism isolated. Laboratories must be forewarned 
that diphtheria is suspected. Other tests are of little value.
GONOCOCCAL PHARYNGITIS
Acute symptomatic pharyngitis caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae occurs 
occasionally in sexually active individuals from oral-­genital contact. In 
cases involving young children, sexual abuse must be suspected. The 
infection usually manifests as an ulcerative, exudative tonsillopharyn­
gitis but may be asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously. Gonococcal 
pharyngitis is more readily transmitted via fellatio than via cunnilin­
gus. Gonorrhea rarely is transmitted from the pharynx to a sexual part­
ner, but pharyngitis can serve as a source for gonococcemia. Diagnosis 
requires culture on appropriate selective media (e.g., Thayer-­Martin 
medium). NAAT may also detect the organism from pharyngeal and 
other sites. Examination and testing for other sexually transmitted 
infections and pregnancy are recommended.
CHLAMYDIAL AND MYCOPLASMAL INFECTIONS
Chlamydia species and Mycoplasma pneumoniae may cause pharyn­
gitis, although the frequency of these infections is unclear. Chlamydia 
trachomatis has been implicated serologically as a cause of pharyngi­
tis in as many as 20% of adults with pharyngitis, but isolation of the 
organism from the pharynx has proved more difficult. Chlamydia 
pneumoniae has also been identified as a cause of pharyngitis. Because 
antibodies to this organism show some cross reaction with C. tracho­
matis, it is possible that infections formerly attributed to C. tracho­
matis were really caused by C. pneumoniae. Diagnosis of chlamydial 
pharyngitis is difficult, whether by culture or serologically, and neither 
method is readily available to the clinician.
M. pneumoniae most likely causes pharyngitis. Serologic (positive 
mycoplasma IgM) or, less often, culture methods can be used to iden­
tify this infectious agent, which was found in 33% of college students 
with pharyngitis in one study. PCR is diagnostic but there is no need 
to seek evidence of these organisms routinely in pharyngitis patients in 
the absence of ongoing research studies of nonstreptococcal pharyngitis. 
The efficacy of antibacterial treatment for M. pneumoniae and chlamyd­
ial pharyngitis is not known, but these illnesses appear to be self-­limited.
ORAL-­PHARYNGEAL FACIAL SPACE PAIN
Facial space infections are usually polymicrobial, are odontogenic in 
origin, and develop after a periapical tooth abscess spreads through the 
maxillary or mandibular bone (Figs. 2.14, 2.15, and 2.16 and Table 2.11). 
In many of these infections there is localized swelling often out of pro­
portion to facial tenderness, erythema, and specific tooth tenderness.
Lateral (buccal side) extension of an infected molar produces 
marked lateral facial swelling (buccal space), while involvement of 
canines (canine space) produces anterior mid-­facial edema, which 
may extend to the periorbital space. Extension to the angle of the jaw 
(parotid space) may be confused with parotitis.
Abscess spread toward the medial-­lingual location may irritate 
muscles of mastication producing trismus, while further extension 
may produce lateral pharyngeal space infection with the risk of 
involvement of the internal jugular vein and carotid artery as well as 
producing airway compromise. Other complications may include cav­
ernous sinus thrombosis and brain abscess.
Submandibular and sublingual spread produces Ludwig angina, a 
potentially life-­threatening rapidly spreading indurated cellulitis mani­
fest by brawny nonpitting edema, an elevated swollen tongue, pain, tris­
mus, fever, drooling, and a risk for airway compromise (Fig. 2.17).
Dominant 
bacteria 
include 
a 
combination 
of 
anaerobic 
gram-­negative rods and gram-­positive cocci plus facultative and 
Abscess
A
B
Abscess
Fig. 2.14  When the infection process is allowed to progress, it erodes 
through the nearest cortical plate. A, Tooth apex is near thin labial bone, 
so infection erodes onto labial side. B, Apex is near palatal side and erodes 
through that side. (Modified from Christian JM. Odontogenic infections. 
In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngol­
ogy Head & Neck Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010, Fig. 12.1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
25
CHAPTER 2  Sore Throat
Mylohyoid
muscle
Platysma
muscle
Buccinator
muscle
2
5
4
1
1
6
3
6
2
Fig. 2.15  As the infection erodes through the bone, it can express itself 
in a variety of places, depending on thickness of overlying bone and 
relationship of muscle attachments to the site of perforation. This illus­
tration notes six possible locations: 1, vestibule; 2, buccal space; 3, pal­
ate; 4, sublingual space; 5, submandibular space; and 6, maxillary sinus. 
(From Christian JM. Odontogenic infections. In Flint PW, Haughey BH, 
Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery. 
5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010, Fig. 12.2.)
Canine space
lnfratemporal space
Maxillary periapical abscess
Mandibular periapical abscess
Submandibular and
sublingual spaces
Masticator spaces
Lateral pharyngeal space
Carotid sheath
Cranium
Mediastinum
Retropharyngeal space
Buccal
space
Parotid
space
Masseteric
Pterygoid
Temporal
Orbit
Fig. 2.16  Potential pathways of extension in deep fascial space infec­
tions. (From Chow AW. Infections of the oral cavity, neck, and head. In: 
Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MF, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s 
Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020, Fig. 64.6.)
TABLE 2.11  Clinical Presentation of 
Odontogenic Infections by Location
Type of Infection
Clinical Presentation
Dentoalveolar infection
Swelling of the alveolar ridge with periodontal, 
periapical, and subperiosteal abscess.
Submental space 
infection
Firm midline swelling beneath the chin. Caused by 
infection from the mandibular incisors.
Submandibular space 
infection
Swelling of the submandibular triangle of the 
neck around the angle of the mandible. Infection 
is caused by mandibular molar infections. 
Trismus is typical.
Sublingual space 
infection
Swelling of the floor of the mouth with possible 
elevation of the tongue and dysphagia.
Retropharyngeal space 
infection
Stiff neck, sore throat, dysphagia, raspy voice. 
These infections are caused by infections of the 
molars. The retropharyngeal space infection has 
a high potential to spread to the mediastinum.
Buccal space infection
Swelling of the cheek. Caused by infection of 
premolar or molar tooth.
Masticator space 
infection
Swelling on either side of the mandibular ramus. 
Caused by infection of the mandibular third 
molar. Trismus is present.
Canine space infection
Swelling of the anterior cheek with loss of the 
nasolabial fold and possible extension to the 
infraorbital region.
From Ogle OE. Odontogenic infections. Dent Clin North Am. 
2017;61(2):235–252 (Table 1, p. 236).
Fig. 2.17  Early appearance of a patient with Ludwig angina with a 
brawny, boardlike swelling in the submandibular spaces. (From Megran 
DW, Scheifele DW, Chow AW. Odontogenic infections. Pediatr Infect 
Dis. 1984;3:262; with permission.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
26
SECTION 2  Respiratory Disorders
microaerophilic streptococci. Panoramic x-­rays and CT imaging help 
confirm the diagnosis and characterize facial space involvement. Treat­
ment includes involved tooth abscess drainage, root canal or tooth 
extraction, and surgical debridement of the other infected tissue. 
Antibiotic therapy includes clindamycin or ampicillin-­sulbactam 
plus metronidazole. Concerning features include swelling involving 
the submandibular and submental spaces, swelling in the floor of the 
mouth, drooling, sitting-­up “sniffing” posture, and fever >38.9°C.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Sore throat is a common pediatric complaint. Most children with acute 
sore throat have a viral illness. Accurate diagnosis of acute streptococ­
cal pharyngitis is essential because appropriate therapy ensures pre­
vention of serious suppurative and nonsuppurative complications. 
Life-­threatening infectious complications of oropharyngeal infections 
may manifest with mouth pain, pharyngitis, parapharyngeal space 
infectious extension, and/or airway obstruction. Other red flags are pro­
longed fever, prolonged sore throat, drooling, muffled voice, trismus, 
and severe, unremitting pain (see Table 2.5). Considering noninfectious 
mimics of pharyngitis with or without oral lesions, such as solid tumors, 
hematologic malignancy, Kawasaki disease, and other noninfectious 
inflammatory conditions, is essential prior to instituting therapy.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
26.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Group A Streptococci
Anderson NW, Buchan BW, Mayne D, et al. Multicenter clinical evaluation 
of the illumigene group A streptococcus DNA amplification assay for 
detection of group A streptococcus from pharyngeal swabs. J Clin 
Microbiol. 2013;51:1474–1477.
Attia MW, Zaoutis T, Klein JD, et al. Performance of a predictive model 
for streptococcal pharyngitis in children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2001;155:687–691.
Bisno AL. Acute pharyngitis. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:205–211.
Carapetis JR, Steer AC, Mulholland EK, et al. The global burden of group A 
streptococcal diseases. Lancet Infect Dis. 2005;5:685–694.
Gerber MA, Shulman ST. Rapid diagnosis of pharyngitis caused by group A 
streptococci. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2004;17:571–580.
Henson AM, Carter D, Todd K, et al. Detection of Streptococcus pyogenes 
using the illumigene group A Streptococcus assay. J Clin Microbiol. 
2013;51:4207–4209.
Leckman JF, King RA, Gilbert DL, et al. Streptococcal upper respiratory tract 
infections and exacerbations of tic and obsessive-­compulsive symptoms: 
a prospective longitudinal study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2011;50:108–118.
McIsaac WJ, Kellmer JD, Aufricht P, et al. Empirical validation of guidelines 
for the management of pharyngitis in children and adults. J Am Med Assoc. 
2004;291:1587–1595.
Podbielski A, Kreikemeyer B. Persistence of group A streptococci in eukaryotic 
cells—a safe place? Lancet. 2001;358:3.
Pritt B, Patel R, Kirn T. Point-­counterpoint: a nucleic acid amplification 
test for Streptococcus pyogenes should replace antigen detection 
and culture for detection of bacterial pharyngitis. J Clin Microbiol. 
2016;54:2413–2419.
Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the 
diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 
2012;55:e86–e102.
Shulman ST, Stollerman G, Beall B, et al. Temporal changes in streptococcal M 
protein types and the near-­disappearance of acute rheumatic fever in the 
U.S. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;42:441–447.
Singer HS, Gilbert DL, Wolf DS, et al. Moving from PANDAS to CANS. J 
Pediatr. 2012;160:725–731.
Tanz RR, Gerber MA, Kabat W, et al. Performance of a rapid antigen detection 
test and throat culture in community pediatric offices: implications for 
management of pharyngitis. Pediatrics. 2009;123:437–444.
Torres-­Martinez C, Mehta D, Butt A, et al. Streptococcus associated toxic 
shock. Arch Dis Child. 1992;67:126–130.
Willis BH, Coomar D, Baragilly M. Comparison of Centor and McIsaac scores 
in primary care: a meta-­analysis over multiple thresholds. Br J Gen Pract. 
2020;70(693):e245–e254.
Other Causes
Canavan TN, Mathes EF, Frieden I, et al. Mycoplasma pneumoniae-­induced 
rash and mucositis as a syndrome distinct from Stevens-­Johnson syndrome 
and erythema multiforme: a systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2015;72:239–245.
Centor RM, Arkinson TP, Ratliff AE, et al. The clinical presentation of 
Fusobacterium-­positive pharyngitis at a university health clinic: a cross-­
sectional study. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:241–247.
Feder Jr HM. Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis: clinical 
review of a new syndrome. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2000;12:253–256.
Gotlieb M, Long B, Koyfman A. Clinical mimics: an emergency medicine-­
focused review of streptococcal pharyngitis mimics. J Emerg Med. 
2018;54(5):619–629.
Peridis S, Pilgrim G, Koudoumnakis E, et al. PFAPA syndrome in children: 
a meta-­analysis on surgical versus medical treatment. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2010;74:1203–1208.
Pillay R, Fernando SL. The importance of distinguishing Mycoplasma pneumoniae-­
induced rash and mucositis (MIRM) and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome in a 
clinical setting. Hematol Med Oncol. 5. https://doi.org/10.15761/HMO.1000209.
Preeti L, Magesh K, Rajkumar K, et al. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis. J Oral 
Maxillofac Pathol. 2011;15(3):252–256. https://doi.org/10.4103/0973-­
029X.86669.
Renner B, Mueller CA, Shephard A. Environmental and non-­infectious factors in 
the aetiology of pharyngitis (sore throat). Inflamm Res. 2012;61:1041–1052.
Truelove SA, Keegan LT, Moss WJ, et al. Clinical and epidemiological aspects 
of diphtheria: a systematic review and pooled analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 
202;71(1):89–97.
Waagner DC. Arcanobacterium haemolyticum: biology of the organism and 
diseases in man. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1991;10:933–939.
Wurster VM, Carlucci JG, Feder Jr HM, et al. Long-­term follow-­up of children 
with periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis 
syndrome. J Pediatr. 2011;159:958–964.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
