672
Paroxysmal disorders can be broadly classified into epileptiform 
and nonepileptic events. The nonepileptic episodes are often 
referred to by the generic term spells. They may mimic epileptic sei­
zures but are not associated with the typical rhythmic EEG patterns 
characteristic of seizures (Table 39.1; see Chapters 7 and 40). These 
spells can be a manifestation of myriad etiologies leading to tran­
sient loss of consciousness and can be neurologic, cardiovascular, 
endocrine, psychologic, or gastrointestinal in origin. Most paroxys­
mal neurologic symptoms can be effectively evaluated, diagnosed, 
and managed by following a systematic approach. A detailed history 
will often be sufficient to make the diagnosis or to significantly nar­
row the diagnostic differential. A few well-­selected tests will then 
allow the correct diagnosis to be made and subsequently enable the 
appropriate treatment of the child. The principal aim in the assess­
ment is to establish signs of serious or emergent neurologic disease, 
and second, to form a differential diagnosis to guide further inves­
tigations and treatment (Fig. 39.1).
HISTORY
A careful description of the event or events from beginning to end, 
including re-­enactments or videos by the parents of any unclear phys­
ical symptoms, is critical.
Pertinent questions include:
 • Was this the first such event, or have there been multiple events?
 • Is there a single or multiple episodes within the event?
 • What was the child doing at the time of each spell—were they 
awake, asleep, playing, or sitting quietly?
 • If they were asleep, how long had they been asleep, or what time of 
day or night did the spell occur?
 • If abnormal tone or movements were involved, was the child rigid 
or limp, and which limbs were involved? Were the movements 
rhythmic and synchronous, or were they alternating, migratory, or 
stop-­start?
 • If the child was unresponsive or had alteration of awareness, what 
did the parents do to ascertain their level of responsiveness? Did the 
parents try touching them to regain their attention, or merely call 
their name?
 • How long did the event last, and how did the child behave afterward?
 • Did the child describe any symptoms prior to the onset of the actual 
event, or was there any abnormal behavior that the parents wit­
nessed prior to the event?
 • Were there any signs or symptoms of illness associated with the 
spell? Were any fevers documented?
 • Has there been any behavioral, developmental, or academic regres­
sion since the start of the events?
 • Is the child developmentally normal? If not, has the child’s develop­
ment always been abnormal, or was there a regression at some point?
 • Were there any problems during pregnancy or the delivery?
 • Has the child ever had a significant head injury or central nervous 
system (CNS) infection?
 • Is there any family history of similar events, or any other neurologic 
disorders?
Parents frequently record videos of these spells on their mobile 
devices, which are ideal for reviewing the episode firsthand.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The physician should compare vital signs, including blood pressure and 
head circumference, to previous measurements if possible. Elevated 
blood pressure can be indicative of pain, anxiety, increased intracranial 
pressure, or hypertensive encephalopathy. Hypotension may suggest 
syncopal events or sepsis. Dramatic increases in head circumference in 
infants may indicate intracranial pathology.
A general physical examination, including the cardiopulmonary 
and abdominal examinations, should be performed; abnormalities may 
indicate a non-­neurologic cause for spells. Dysmorphic features or 
cutaneous findings can provide clues toward an underlying syndromic 
diagnosis.
An ophthalmologic examination can be as simple as obtaining a 
red reflex and observation of eye movements in young children. Eye 
movements may be observed by having the patient track a moving 
object or toy; abnormalities such as deviation, nystagmus, or new-­
onset limitations in range of motion may indicate a structural cause 
for the spells such as hydrocephalus or a mass lesion. In cooperative 
older children, the physician should attempt a funduscopic examina­
tion. Papilledema is a clue to increased intracranial pressure but is 
only readily appreciable after 2–3 weeks of increased intracranial pres­
sure; it will not be present with acute disturbances leading to increased 
intracranial pressure.
The child will provide important information about their mental 
status and developmental status through simple conversation. Con­
versations about toys, school, or family members in the room can pro­
vide information about orientation, aphasia, dysarthria, and fund of 
knowledge for age. If there are any questions about whether any facial 
asymmetry is new-­onset, parents may be able to provide old photo­
graphs; most people have some degree of facial asymmetry at baseline 
that may only be noticed after a frightening event causes the parents to 
observe the child more closely.
Muscle strength can be ascertained by manual testing in a coop­
erative older child or observing natural play or strength of resistance 
to examination in a younger child. If a child can easily perform age-­
appropriate actions such as crawling, walking, running, climbing, or 
grabbing for objects, and strongly resists examination, they are likely 
to have grossly normal strength in their major muscle groups. Tone 
can be checked by passively moving the patient’s limbs or suspending 
Paroxysmal Disorders
Donald Basel
39
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
673
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
an infant in your hands to check if they start to slide through your grip. 
Low tone (hypotonia) can also be detected by observing gait or observ­
ing how the child sits; “W”-­sitting (sitting with knees together and 
heels outside of their hips) may be another clue. Low strength (weak­
ness) should be distinguished from hypotonia or ataxia; an example 
of normal strength but low tone might be an infant with motor delays 
and head lag who vigorously opposes examination; a child with normal 
strength but ataxia might vigorously oppose examination but cannot 
accurately reach to push away the examiner.
A normal physical examination (including vital signs and mental 
status) does not rule out the presence of a neurologic disorder but gen­
erally indicates a disorder that does not require immediate interven­
tion and that more time can be spent carefully evaluating all diagnostic 
possibilities. In children with baseline neurologic abnormalities, such 
as children with cerebral palsy, knowledge of their baseline physical 
examination, abilities, and behavior is critical in deciding how urgently 
they need to be evaluated further. Parents can be very helpful in deter­
mining a child’s baseline behavior in this case.
RED FLAGS
After obtaining a history of the events, the presence of “red flags” in the 
history or examination should strongly prompt referral to the emer­
gency room:
Increased Intracranial Pressure or 
Large Intracranial Mass
 • Hypertension and bradycardia
 • Third or sixth nerve palsy; anisocoria, ptosis, diplopia
 • Forced-­seeming and persistent downward deviation of both eyes 
(tonic downward gaze deviation)
 • Papilledema
 • Severe vomiting that is exquisitely positional (i.e., strongly pro­
voked by the transition from lying to sitting)
 • Engorged scalp veins
 • Bulging fontanel or split cranial sutures in an infant
 • Presence of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VP shunt) with any of 
the aforementioned symptoms should prompt concern about shunt 
malfunction
Ongoing Status Epilepticus
 • Waxing and waning responsiveness after a convulsive seizure 
has ended, particularly with periods of complete unresponsive­
ness
 • Persistent eye deviation after a convulsive seizure has ended
 • Persistent tachycardia after a convulsive seizure has ended
 • Persistent confusion or delirium, even if the child is able to speak 
and walk
TABLE 39.1  Comparison of Generalized Seizures and Some Disorders That Can Mimic Them
Condition
Precipitants (May Not 
Apply to All Patients)
Prodrome
Ictal Symptoms
Postictal Symptoms
Generalized seizures
Sleep deprivation, television, 
video games, visual 
patterns, and photic 
stimulation
Rarely irritability or 
nonspecific behavioral 
changes
Usually 2–3 min
Consciousness might be preserved if atonic 
or, in some, tonic seizures
Synchronous bilateral movements
Tongue biting
Delayed recovery with postictal 
depression, incontinence 
(may be ictal also)
Syncope: vasovagal
Fatigue, emotional stress, 
dehydration, vomiting, 
choking, swallowing
Blurring of vision, 
tinnitus, dizziness, 
nausea, sweating, 
crying in breath-­
holding spells
Loss of consciousness for seconds, pallor, 
and rarely reflex anoxic seizures
Rapid recovery with no 
postictal depression
Syncope with reflex 
anoxic seizures
Minor bump to head, 
upsetting surprises
Syncope: trigeminal vagal
Cold water on face
Syncope: orthostatic
Standing up, bathing, 
awakening
Hyperekplexia
Auditory and tactile stimuli
None
Tonic stiffening, cyanosis if severe, 
nonfatigable nose-­tap–induced startles
Depending on severity, may 
have postictal depression
Cardiac
Exercise
None
Loss of consciousness, often only for a few 
seconds, pallor
Rarely
Psychogenic
Suggestion, stress
None
Eyes closed, with active opposition to 
attempts to open them
Asynchronous flailing limb movements that 
vary between attacks
Motor activity stops and starts during a spell
Weeping and crying
No injury
May respond to suggestion during “loss of 
consciousness”
Usually longer than 2–3 min
No postictal depression
Adapted from Obeid M, Mikati MA. Expanding spectrum of paroxysmal events in children: potential mimickers of epilepsy. Pediatr Neurol. 
2007;37(5):309–316.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
674
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Stroke or Complicated Migraine
 • Focal weakness or numbness, particularly if accompanied by slurred 
speech or confusion (if the spell is remote and the patient has returned 
to a normal baseline, suggest expedited referral to a neurologist)
Meningitis
 • Fever
 • Nuchal rigidity
 • Positive Kernig or Brudzinski signs
 • Bulging fontanel
The following red flags should prompt an urgent or even emergent 
referral to a pediatric neurologist, including direct communication 
with a neurologist for proper triaging:
 • Infantile spasms
 • Clusters of abdominal “crunches” or “startles,” particularly when 
the child is falling asleep or waking up from sleep
 • Developmental plateau or regression
 • Loss of visual attentiveness
Any developmental regression in infants or toddlers that has been 
present for more than 1 month (or sooner, for dramatic or progressive 
regressions) is concerning; change in handedness after 4–5 years of age 
is also a red flag (see Chapter 28).
PAROXYSMAL SPELLS OF ALTERED 
BEHAVIOR OR MOVEMENT
Paroxysmal neurologic symptoms can have neurologic, psychiat­
ric, pulmonary, cardiovascular, or gastrointestinal causes (see Table 
39.1). For this reason, during the investigation of a paroxysmal event, 
generic terms such as spells, convulsions, or altered mental status are 
more appropriate to use rather than seizures, which implies a very 
specific etiology and may falsely eliminate diagnostic possibili­
ties. Witnesses may use terms such as grand mal, petit mal, or even 
generalized tonic-­clonic (GTC) to describe events; these descriptors 
should not be taken at face value or thought to only describe epileptic 
seizures.
No
Yes
Did the child have a seizure?
Benign paroxysmal
    vertigo
Breath holding
Cough syncope
Familial choreoathetosis
Hereditary chin trembling
Shuddering attacks
Narcolepsy
Night terror
    pseudoseizures
Rage attack
Benign myoclonus of
    infancy
Tics
Initial Seizure
Fasting blood sugar,
  calcium, metabolic
  studies dictated by
  history and physical:
  EEG, CT scan, MRI,
  CSF examination
Recurrent Seizures
Drug compliance?
Improper dose?
Incorrect drug?
Metabolic disorder?
Underlying structural lesion?
Drug interaction?
CNS degenerative disease?
Intractable seizures?
Studies and Examination
Abnormal
Symptomatic seizures
Treat underlying cause
   (hypoglycemia, urea
   cycle abnormality,
   meningitis. temporal
   lobe tumor, etc.)
Antiepileptic drugs if
   necessary
Normal
Isolated flrst seizure 
    with normal EEG
Negative family history
No continuous drug
    treatment
Close observation
Prescribe rescue
    medications (rectal
    diazepam) for
    seizures longer than
    5 min
Follow-up
Normal (except EEG)
Consider drug therapy
Good Control
Regular follow-up
Antiepileptic drug levels
    monitor toxicity (CBC,
    liver function,
    behavioral, learning)
EEG as indicated
Poor Control
Consider hospitalization
Prolonged EEG
    recording and video
    monitoring for
    possible epilepsy
    surgery candidacy
Readjust medication
Reconsider underlying
    pathology with
    reinvestigation with
    CT or MRI
Frequent follow-up
Fig. 39.1  Approach to the child with a suspected convulsive disorder. CNS, central nervous system; CSF, 
cerebrospinal fluid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
675
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
EPILEPTIC SEIZURES
An epileptic seizure is a paroxysmal alteration in behavior, motor 
function, and/or autonomic function occurring in association with 
excessive synchronous neuronal activity in the CNS. Seizures may be 
considered provoked or unprovoked, referring to whether they were 
precipitated by an acute cause such as illness, concussion, metabolic 
disorder, or toxic ingestion. The term symptomatic refers to whether 
the seizures represent a symptom of a known chronic disorder, such as 
a structural, genetic, or metabolic abnormality. Epilepsy is a disorder 
in which there are recurrent unprovoked epileptic seizures; Figure 39.2 
outlines the contextual framework when evaluating seizure disorders 
and Figure 39.3 provides the classification structure. Table 39.2 pro­
vides a glossary of terms frequently encountered when considering 
seizure disorders.
Epileptic seizures must be clearly distinguished from non-­
neurologic paroxysmal disorders caused by psychiatric, cardiovascu­
lar, pulmonary, or gastrointestinal causes. There are also paroxysmal 
disorders that are neurologic but nonepileptic in nature, such as tics, 
dystonias, stereotypies, or other movement disorders. The correct 
diagnosis is critical to avoid unnecessary testing, interventions, and 
medication trials. However, multiple types of events, both epileptic and 
Etiology
Comorbidities
Seizure types*
Epilepsy types
Epilepsy syndromes
Focal
Generalized
Unknown
Focal
Generalized
Combined
generalized
and focal
Unknown
Structural
Genetic
Infectious
Metabolic
Immune
Unknown
Fig. 39.2  The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) 2017 Classification of the Epilepsies. *Denotes 
onset of seizure. (From Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in 
Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:1625, Fig. 100.6.)
Focal onset
Generalized onset
Motor
  tonic-clonic
  clonic
  tonic
  myoclonic
  myoclonic-tonic-clonic
  myoclonic-atonic
  atonic
  epileptic spasms
Nonmotor (absence)
  typical
  atypical
  myoclonic
  eyelid myoclonia
Motor
  tonic-clonic
  epileptic spasms
Nonmotor
  behavior arrest
Unclassified
Unknown onset
Motor onset
  automatisms
  atonic
  clonic
  epileptic spasms
  hyperkinetic
  myoclonic
  tonic
Nonmotor onset
  autonomic
  behavior arrest
  cognitive
  emotional
  sensory
focal to bilateral tonic-clonic
Aware
Impaired
awareness
Fig. 39.3  The 2017 International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) operational classification of seizure types. 
(Modified from Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Prac­
tice. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:1619, Fig. 100.3.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
676
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.2  Terminology Used in Describing Paroxysmal Episodes
Word
Definition
Absence, typical
A sudden onset, interruption of ongoing activities, a blank stare, possibly a brief upward deviation of the eyes. Usually, the 
patient will be unresponsive when spoken to. Duration is a few seconds to half a minute with very rapid recovery. Although not 
always available, an EEG would show generalized epileptiform discharges during the event. An absence seizure is a seizure of 
generalized onset. The word is not synonymous with a blank stare, which also can be encountered with focal onset seizures
Absence, atypical
An absence seizure with changes in tone that are more pronounced than in typical absence or the onset and/or cessation is not 
abrupt, often associated with slow, irregular, generalized spike-­wave activity
Atonic
Sudden loss or diminution of muscle tone without apparent preceding myoclonic or tonic event lasting ∼1–2 sec, involving head, 
trunk, jaw, or limb musculature
Automatism
A more or less coordinated motor activity usually occurring when cognition is impaired and for which the subject is usually (but 
not always) amnesic afterward. This often resembles a voluntary movement and may consist of an inappropriate continuation of 
preictal motor activity
Autonomic seizure
A distinct alteration of autonomic nervous system function involving cardiovascular, pupillary, gastrointestinal, sudomotor, 
vasomotor, and thermoregulatory functions
Aura
A subjective ictal phenomenon that, in a given patient, may precede an observable seizure
Awareness
Knowledge of self or environment
Behavior arrest
Arrest (pause) of activities, freezing, immobilization, as in behavior arrest seizure
Bilateral
Both left and right sides, although manifestations of bilateral seizures may be symmetric or asymmetric
Clonic
Jerking, either symmetric or asymmetric, that is regularly repetitive and involves the same muscle groups
Cognitive
Pertaining to thinking and higher cortical functions, such as language, spatial perception, memory, and praxis. The previous term 
for similar usage as a seizure type was psychic
Consciousness
A state of mind with both subjective and objective aspects, comprising a sense of self as a unique entity, awareness, 
responsiveness, and memory
Dacrystic
Bursts of crying, which may or may not be associated with sadness
Dystonic
Sustained contractions of both agonist and antagonist muscles producing athetoid or twisting movements, which may produce 
abnormal postures
Emotional seizures
Seizures presenting with an emotion or the appearance of having an emotion as an early prominent feature, such as fear, 
spontaneous joy or euphoria, laughing (gelastic), or crying (dacrystic)
Epileptic spasms
A sudden flexion, extension, or mixed extension-­flexion of predominantly proximal and truncal muscles that is usually more 
sustained than a myoclonic movement but not as sustained as a tonic seizure. Limited forms may occur: grimacing, head 
nodding, or subtle eye movements. Epileptic spasms frequently occur in clusters. Infantile spasms are the best-­known form, but 
spasms can occur at all ages
Epilepsy
A disease of the brain defined by any of the following conditions: (1) at least two unprovoked (or reflex) seizures occurring >24 hr 
apart; (2) one unprovoked (or reflex) seizure and a probability of further seizures similar to the general recurrence risk (at least 
60%) after two unprovoked seizures, occurring over the next 10 yr; (3) diagnosis of an epilepsy syndrome. Epilepsy is considered 
to be resolved for individuals who had an age-­dependent epilepsy syndrome but are now past the applicable age or those who 
have remained seizure free for the last 10 years, with no antiseizure medicines for the last 5 yr
Eyelid myoclonia
Jerking of the eyelids at frequencies of at least 3 per second, commonly with upward eye deviation, usually lasting <10 sec, often 
precipitated by eye closure. There may or may not be associated brief loss of awareness
Fencer’s posture seizure
A focal motor seizure type with extension of one arm and flexion at the contralateral elbow and wrist, giving an imitation of 
swordplay with a foil. This has also been called a supplementary motor area seizure
Figure-­of-­4 seizure
Upper limbs with extension of the arm (usually contralateral to the epileptogenic zone) with elbow flexion of the other arm, 
forming a figure-­of-­4
Focal
Originating within networks limited to one hemisphere. They may be discretely localized or more widely distributed. Focal seizures 
may originate in subcortical structures
Focal onset bilateral tonic-­clonic 
seizure
A seizure type with focal onset, with awareness or impaired awareness, either motor or nonmotor, progressing to bilateral tonic-­
clonic activity. The prior term was seizure with partial onset with secondary generalization
Gelastic
Bursts of laughter or giggling, usually without an appropriate affective tone
Generalized
Originating at some point within, and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distributed networks
Generalized tonic-clonic
Bilateral symmetric or sometimes asymmetric tonic contraction and then bilateral clonic contraction of somatic muscles, usually 
associated with autonomic phenomena and loss of awareness. These seizures engage networks in both hemispheres at the start 
of the seizure
Hallucination
A creation of composite perceptions without corresponding external stimuli involving visual, auditory, somatosensory, olfactory, 
and/or gustatory phenomena. Example: “hearing” and “seeing” people talking
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
677
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
nonepileptic, may occur in the same patient, necessitating that each 
spell be properly characterized.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CAUSES OF 
SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY
If febrile seizures are included, approximately 3.5% of children experi­
ence some kind of seizure by the age of 15 years; most seizures occur 
before the age of 3 years. Most children who present with a seizure do 
not have or will not develop epilepsy. Many children presenting with a 
seizure have febrile convulsions, which are a provoked, age-­dependent 
paroxysmal neurologic condition; 13% of children with seizures have 
acute symptomatic seizures other than febrile convulsions; and 8% 
have single, unprovoked seizures of unknown cause. The incidence of 
acute symptomatic seizures is highest in the first year of life; the most 
common causes of these predominantly neonatal seizures are genetic, 
infection, and metabolic disorders. After age 4 years, head trauma is 
the most common cause of acute symptomatic seizures, and infection 
is the next most common.
The incidence of epilepsy among children younger than 15 years 
is 45–85/100,000 in developed countries. It is highest in younger chil­
dren; in those younger than 1 year, it is ∼100/100,000. The prevalence 
of active epilepsy in patients taking antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) is 
between 4.3 and 9.3/1,000, or about 0.5–1% of the population. Tradi­
tionally, ∼60% of children with epilepsy have no identifiable etiologic 
factors for the disease; next-­generation gene sequencing technology 
has moved the estimated underlying genetic etiology to approximately 
40%. Of those children in whom a cause is identified, population-­based 
studies report the following presumed causes: infection in 5%, head 
trauma in 3%, and miscellaneous causes (tumors, malformations of 
cortical development, vascular malformations, and cerebral infarction) 
in 2%. Epilepsy is found in association with other long-­standing neu­
rodevelopmental abnormalities in 13% of children.
GENETICS
It is estimated that a genetic etiology underlies epilepsy in approximately 
40% of individuals. There are certain patterns and ages of onset that might 
guide specific genetic consideration (Tables 39.3 and 39.4), but given the 
wide genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, it is more practical to do gene 
sequencing broadly as opposed to trying to narrow down the genetic 
sequencing unless there is a very clear diagnostic consideration such as 
Angelman or Rett syndrome. Neonatal-­onset seizures require both a met­
abolic (Table 39.5) and a genomic approach to the diagnostic evaluation 
because there are several epileptic encephalopathic syndromes that could 
be treatable and genetic testing generally has a 2–3-­month turnaround for 
results. If rapid genome sequencing is an option, this would supplant the 
need for metabolic testing as the results of genomic sequencing will be 
available within a short enough period of time to allow for timely imple­
mentation of treatment. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency is a rare exam­
ple that has a lifesaving orphan drug treatment that needs to be initiated as 
early as possible to prevent irreversible cystic encephalopathy. Table 39.6 
outlines several of the recognizable syndromic genetic disorders as defined 
by the underlying pathoetiology.
TABLE 39.2  Terminology Used in Describing Paroxysmal Episodes—cont’d
Word
Definition
Immobility
Activity arrest
Impaired awareness (impairment 
of consciousness)
Impaired or lost awareness is a feature of focal impaired awareness seizures, previously called complex partial seizures
Jacksonian seizure
Traditional term indicating spread of clonic movements through contiguous body parts unilaterally
Motor
Involves musculature in any form. The motor event could consist of an increase (positive) or decrease (negative) in muscle 
contraction to produce a movement
Myoclonic
Sudden, brief (<100 msec) involuntary single or multiple contractions of muscles or muscle groups of variable topography (axial, 
proximal limb, distal). Myoclonus is less regularly repetitive and less sustained than is clonus
Myoclonic-­atonic
A generalized seizure type with a myoclonic jerk leading to an atonic motor component. This type was previously called myoclonic-­
astatic
Myoclonic-­tonic-­clonic
One or a few jerks of limbs bilaterally, followed by a tonic-­clonic seizure. The initial jerks can be considered to be either a brief 
period of clonus or myoclonus. Seizures with this characteristic are common in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
Nonmotor
Focal or generalized seizure types in which motor activity is not prominent
Propagation
Spread of seizure activity from one place in the brain to another, or engaging of additional brain networks
Responsiveness
Ability to appropriately react by movement or speech when presented with a stimulus
Seizure
A transient occurrence of signs and/or symptoms due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain
Sensory seizure
A perceptual experience not caused by appropriate stimuli in the external world
Tonic
A sustained increase in muscle contraction lasting a few seconds to minutes
Tonic-­clonic
A sequence consisting of a tonic followed by a clonic phase
Unclassified
Referring to a seizure type that cannot be described by the ILAE 2017 classification either because of inadequate information or 
unusual clinical features. If the seizure is unclassified because the type of onset is unknown, a limited classification may still 
derive from observed features
Unresponsive
Not able to react appropriately by movement or speech when presented with stimulation
Versive
A sustained, forced conjugate ocular, cephalic, and/or truncal rotation or lateral deviation from the midline
ILAE, International League Against Epilepsy.
Adapted from Fisher FS, Cross JH, D’Souza C, et al. Instruction manual for the ILAE 2017 operational classification of seizure types. Epilepsia. 
2017;58(4):531–542 (Table 2, p. 538).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
678
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.3  Clinical Conditions for Targeted Gene Sequencing
Targeted Gene Sequencing
Clinical Condition
Advantage of Testing
SCN1A
Dravet syndrome. Consider testing for recurrent episodes of febrile 
status epilepticus, intractable tonic-­clonic seizures during the first 
year of life, epileptic encephalopathy attributed to vaccination, 
and adults with a history consistent with Dravet syndrome
Avoidance of sodium channel blockers, aggressive 
seizure management, justification of stiripentol, 
bromides, etc.
PCDH19
Females presenting with multiple clusters of brief febrile seizures 
and developmental delay or regression, particularly if there is a 
family history consistent with paternal transmission
Prognosis and potential forthcoming treatment options
SLC2A1
Onset of absence seizures at younger than 4 yr old, particularly 
if there is a family history of paroxysmal exercise-­induced 
dyskinesia
Initiation of a ketogenic diet
POLG
Prior to starting valproic acid in patients with drug-­resistant seizures 
and developmental delay or regression
Avoidance of potentially fatal liver failure starting as 
early as 2 mo after initiation of valproic acid therapy
HLA-­B*1502
Prior to starting carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, and 
lamotrigine in patients of Asian descent
Avoidance of a potentially fatal reaction (Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis)
Modified from Ream MA, Patel AD. Obtaining genetic testing in pediatric epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2015;56:1505–1514.
TABLE 39.4  Identified Genes for Epilepsy Syndromes*†
Epilepsy Type
Gene
Protein
Infantile Onset
Benign familial neonatal seizures
KCNQ2
Potassium voltage-­gated channel
KCNQ3
Potassium voltage-­gated channel
Benign familial neonatal infantile seizures
SCN2A
Sodium channel protein type 2α
Early familial neonatal infantile seizures
SCN2A
Sodium channel protein type 2α
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE)
CDKL5 (EIEE2)
Cyclin-­dependent kinase-­like 5
ARX (EIEE1)
Aristaless-­related homeobox
TSC1
Hamartin
TSC2
Tuberin
SCN1A (EIEE6)
Sodium channel protein type 1α
PCDH19 (EIEE9)
Protocadherin-­19
KCNQ2 (EIEE7)
Potassium voltage-­gated channel
STXBP1 (EIEE4)
Syntaxin binding protein 1
SLC2A1
Solute carrier family 2, facilitated glucose transporter 
member 1
ALDH7A1
α-­Aminoadipic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (antiquitin)
POLG
DNA polymerase subunit γ1
SCN2A (EIEE11)
Sodium channel protein type 2α
PLCβ1 (EIEE12)
Phospholipase C β1
ATP6AP2
Renin receptor
SPTAN1 (EIEE5)
α2-­Spectrin
SLC25A22 (EIEE3)
Mitochondrial glutamate carrier 1
PNPO
Pyridoxine-­5′-­phosphate oxidase
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (early 
onset)
SCN1A
Sodium channel protein type 1α
SCN1B
Sodium channel protein type 1β
GABRG2
γ-­Aminobutyric acid receptor subunit γ2
SCN2A
Sodium channel protein type 2α
Childhood Onset
Childhood-­onset epileptic encephalopathies
SCN1A
Sodium channel protein type 1α
PCDH19
Protocadherin-­19
SLC2A1
Solute carrier family 2, facilitated GTM1
POLG
DNA polymerase subunit γ1
SCN2A
Sodium channel protein type 2α
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
679
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.4  Identified Genes for Epilepsy Syndromes*†—cont’d
Epilepsy Type
Gene
Protein
Childhood Onset—cont’d
Early-­onset absence seizures, refractory epilepsy of 
multiple types, at times with movement disorder
GLUT-­1 deficiency syndrome, SLC2A1 gene
Solute carrier family 2, facilitated GTM1
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizure plus
SCN1A
Sodium channel protein type 1α
SCN1B
Sodium channel protein type 1β
GABRG2
γ-­Aminobutyric acid receptor subunit γ2
SCN2A
Sodium channel protein type 1α
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (more commonly 
presents in adolescence)
EFHC1
EF-­hand domain-­containing protein 1
CACNB4
Voltage-­dependent L-­type calcium channel
GABRA1
γ-­Aminobutyric acid receptor subunit α1
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy (different forms 
present from infancy through adulthood)
EPM2A
Laforin
NHLRC1
NHL repeat-­containing protein 1 (malin)
CSTB
Cystatin-­B
PRICKLE1
Prickle-­like protein 1
PPT1, TPP1, CLN3, CLN5, CLN6, CLN8, CTSD, 
DNAJC5, MFSD8
Multiple proteins causing neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe 
epilepsies (presents in childhood through 
adulthood)
CHRNA4
Neuronal acetylcholine receptor α4
CHRNB2
Neuronal acetylcholine receptor β2
CHRNA2
Neuronal acetylcholine receptor α2
Adolescent Onset
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME)
See Childhood-­Onset JME
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME)
See Childhood-­Onset PME
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe 
epilepsies (AD-­NFLE)
See Childhood-­Onset AD-­NFLE
Autosomal dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy 
(usually presents in adulthood)
LGI1
Leucine-­rich glioma-­inactivated protein 1
*Note that the same gene (different variants) often appears as causing different epilepsy syndromes.
†Most of these genes can be tested for through commercially available targeted single-­gene sequencing or through commercially available gene 
panels or through exome sequencing (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/GeneTests/review?db=genetests).
In some circumstances, unique clinical phenotypes can guide 
the initial clinical differential diagnosis. Severe metabolic acidosis 
resulting in shock and requiring intubation and ventilation is seen in 
metabolic epileptic encephalopathic syndromes such as nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia, pyridoxine-­5′-­phosphate oxidase deficiency, molyb­
denum cofactor deficiency, pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy, and Leigh 
syndrome. Table 39.7 provides an overview of the clinical associations 
of metabolic disorders associated with epilepsy. The characteristic 
syndactyly of the second and third toes is seen in steroid metabolism 
disorders, Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome in particular, which addition­
ally has associated genitourinary tract abnormalities. Skin exanthems 
are highly suggestive of biotinidase deficiency. Atypical coarse or thin 
hair and wormian bones are seen in copper disorders such as Menkes 
syndrome. Cardiomyopathy is characteristic of mitochondrial disor­
ders including Barth syndrome and fatty acid oxidation disorders and 
is also seen in RASopathies and cobalamin C deficiency. Atypical fat 
distribution and a prominent suprapubic fat pad are seen in congeni­
tal disorders of glycosylation. The circumstances in which genetic test­
ing is offered varies widely between centers. Gene panels are offered 
by several laboratories and do not all include the same genes. It is 
thus important to understand the benefits and limitations of the test 
requested. Exome sequencing should not be considered “end of the 
line” or “last resort,” as the window of opportunity for targeted inter­
vention may pass while more conventional options are investigated. 
This is particularly relevant in new-­onset intractable or refractory sei­
zures. In addition, there are several cases with digenic seizure disorders 
or rare metabolic disorders that will not be easily detected through 
more routine analysis but benefit from early targeted intervention to 
reduce morbidity and improve overall quality of life. The consensus for 
evaluating patients with suspected congenital disorders of glycosyla­
tion, mitochondrial disorders, or otherwise complex atypical disorders 
is to utilize exome sequencing as a first-­line diagnostic test, with yields 
of up to 30% in these circumstances.
SEIZURE CLASSIFICATION AND TERMINOLOGY
Seizures are characterized according to their clinical semiology and 
presumptive etiology (see Figs. 39.2 and 39.3). Seizures can be dif­
ficult to classify and identify without a careful description of their 
onset, unfolding, and aftermath. Multiple seizure types may have the 
same brief general description, such as “twitching” or “staring.” With­
out further details as to duration, additional symptoms, and postictal 
behavior, they may be incorrectly classified as to type, even if they are 
accurately determined to be seizures. This is clinically relevant because 
improper classification can lead to inappropriate treatment; for exam­
ple, some antiepileptic medications for focal seizures will exacerbate 
generalized seizures. Table 39.8 aligns some of the older terminology 
with the newer classification.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
680
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.5  Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEMs) Identified by Each of the Tier 1 Diagnostic Tests
Source
Diagnostic 
Test
Related IEM
BLOOD
Comprehensive 
metabolic panel
Glucose (low in FAODs and HIHA)
Anion gap (elevated in organic acidemias)
Liver transaminases (elevated in CDGs and 
mitochondrial depletion syndromes)
Alkaline phosphatase (low in hypophosphatasia, 
elevated in GPI biosynthesis defects)
Blood gases
Organic acidemias (low pH)
Urea cycle disorders (high pH)
Ammonia
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
HIHA
HHH syndrome
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Creatine kinase
FAODs
Dystroglycanopathy type-­CDG
Uric acid
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (low)
Lactate/pyruvate
PDH deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Biotinidase deficiency
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Lipoic acid synthesis defects
Plasma amino 
acids
Urea cycle defects (elevated Glu)
MSUD (elevated branched-­chain amino acids)
Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies (elevated Phe)
Lactic acidemias (elevated Ala)
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency (elevated Cit, 
Pro, and Lys; low Glu)
PNPO deficiency (high Gly and Thr)
PDE (high Gly and Thr)
Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (elevated Gly)
Hyperprolinemia type 2 (elevated Pro)
Lipoic acid synthesis disorders (elevated Gly)
Serine biosynthesis disorders (low Ser)
Glutamine synthetase deficiency (low Gln)
Asparagine synthetase deficiency (low Asn)
GABA transaminase (elevated GABA, elevated 
β-­Ala)
Mitochondrial glutamate transporter deficiency 
(elevated Pro)
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (low Cys, high Tau)
Source
Diagnostic 
Test
Related IEM
BLOOD—
cont’d
Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (low Cys, 
high Tau)
Plasma 
acylcarnitines
FAODs
Organic acidemias
Ethylmalonic encephalopathy
Copper and 
ceruloplasmin
Menkes disease (low)
Wilson disease (low)
Plasma total 
homocysteine
Cobalamin C disease (high)
MTHFR deficiency (high)
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (low)
Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (low)
URINE
Urinalysis
Organic acidemias (elevated ketones)
MSUD (elevated ketones)
Urine AASA
PDE
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency
Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
Urine purines and 
pyrimidines
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (high 
succinyladenosine)
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (high xanthine 
and hypoxanthine)
Creatine 
metabolites
AGAT deficiency (low GAA and creatine)
GAMT deficiency (high GAA, low creatine)
Creatine transporter deficiency (high creatine)
Urine organic 
acids
PNPO deficiency (vanillactate)
Organic acidurias
OTC deficiency (orotic acid)
Cobalamin C deficiency (MMA)
Biotinidase deficiency and holocarboxylase 
synthetase deficiency (3-­hydroxypropionic 
acid, 3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid, 
3-­methylcrotonylglycine, methylcitrate)
Fumarate hydratase deficiency (fumarate)
SSADH deficiency (4-­hydroxybutyric acid)
Ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EMA)
Mitochondrial short-­chain enoyl-­
CoA hydratase 1 deficiency 
(methacryloylglycine, 3-­hydroxyisobutyric 
acid, S-­2-­carboxypropyl-­cysteine, and S-­2-­
carboxypropylcysteamine)
AASA, α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde; AGAT, arginine:glycine amidinotransferase; CDG, congenital disorders of glycosylation; EMA, ethylmalonic acid; 
FAODs, fatty acid oxidation disorders; GAA, guanidinoacetate; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; GAMT, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase; GPI, gly­
cosylphosphatidylinositol; HHH, hyperornithinemia-­hyperammonemia-­homocitrullinuria; HIHA, hyperinsulinism-­hyperammonemia syndrome; MMA, 
methylmalonic acidemia; MSUD, maple syrup urine disease; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; OTC, ornithine transcarbamylase; PDE, 
pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; PNPO, pyridox(am)ine 5’-­phosphate oxidase; SSADH, succinic semialdehyde dehy­
drogenase.
From van Karnebeek CDM, Sayson B, Lee JJY, et al. Metabolic evaluation of epilepsy: a diagnostic algorithm with focus on treatable conditions. 
Front Neurol. 2018;9:Article 1016 (Table 3). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2018.01016.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
681
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.6  Epilepsy Genes and Phenotypes Catalogued in Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (OMIM) Since 2016
Gene
Phenotype
OMIM
Chromatin Remodeling
ACTL6B
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 76
618470
SMARCC2
Coffin-­Siris syndrome 8
618362
STAG2
Neurodevelopmental disorder, X-­linked, with craniofacial abnormalities
301022
Intracellular Signaling
CSF1R
Brain abnormalities, neurodegeneration, and dysosteosclerosis
618476
YWHAZ
Popov-­Chang syndrome
618428
CHP1
Spastic ataxia 9, autosomal recessive
618438
Ion Channels and Neurotransmitter Receptors
CACNA1E
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 69
618285
GABRG2
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 74
618396
CACNA2D2
Cerebellar atrophy with seizures and variable developmental delay
618501
HCN1
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus, type 10
618482
CACNA1B
Neurodevelopmental disorder with seizures and nonepileptic hyperkinetic movements
618497
KCNK4
Facial dysmorphism, hypertrichosis, epilepsy, intellectual/developmental delay, and gingival overgrowth syndrome
618381
SLC25A42
Metabolic crises, recurrent, with variable encephalomyopathic features and neurologic regression
618416
ATP1A1
Hypomagnesemia, seizures, and intellectual disability
618314
SLC28A1
Uridine-­cytidineuria
618477
SCN8A
Myoclonus, familial, 2
618364
SLC9A7
Intellectual developmental disorder, X-­linked 108
301024
Metabolism
GLS
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 71
618328
PARS2
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 75
618437
RNF13
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 73
618379
FCSK
Congenital disorder of glycosylation with defective fucosylation 2
618324
PPP3CA
Arthrogryposis, cleft palate, craniosynostosis, and impaired intellectual development
618265
PPP2CA
Neurodevelopmental disorder and language delay with or without structural brain abnormalities
618354
MTHFS
Neurodevelopmental disorder with microcephaly, epilepsy, and hypomyelination
618367
P4HTM
Hypotonia, hyperventilation, impaired intellectual development, dysautonomia, epilepsy, and eye abnormalities
618493
DHPS
Neurodevelopmental disorder with seizures and speech and walking impairment
618480
MAST1
Mega-­corpus-­callosum syndrome with cerebellar hypoplasia and cortical malformations
618273
DEGS1
Leukodystrophy, hypomyelinating, 18
618404
MYORG
Basal ganglia calcification, idiopathic, 7, autosomal recessive
618317
ALKBH8
Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal recessive 71
618504
NAXD
Encephalopathy, progressive, early onset, with brain edema and/or leukoencephalopathy, 2
618321
KDM6B
Neurodevelopmental disorder with coarse facies and mild distal skeletal abnormalities
618505
HS6ST2
Paganini-­Miozzo syndrome
301025
TRMT1
Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal recessive 68
618302
COLGALT1
Brain small vessel disease 3
618360
IREB2
Neurodegeneration, early onset, with choreoathetoid movements and microcytic anemia
618451
PIGB
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 80
618580
Mitochondrial Metabolism
MICOS13
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 37
618329
GFM2
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 39
618397
Neuronal Development
NFASC
Neurodevelopmental disorder with central and peripheral motor dysfunction
618356
NHLRC2
Fibrosis, neurodegeneration, and cerebral angiomatosis
618278
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
682
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Clonic movements are rhythmic, nonsuppressible, position-­
independent jerking movements (low frequency, high amplitude) 
caused by involvement of the motor cortex. They can be unilateral 
or bilateral and can start with one body part and spread. If bilat­
eral, they are synchronous and do not alternate from one side to 
the other in a bicycling fashion. This should be distinguished from 
clonus, which is rhythmic twitching of a limb, generally the foot, 
caused by hyperreflexia and lack of descending cortical inhibition 
due to CNS injury such as is seen in cerebral palsy or stroke. This 
is generally provoked by movement, excitement, and positioning 
and can be suppressed or halted by gently repositioning the affected 
limb. There is no alteration of alertness with clonus. In newborns, 
jitteriness (high frequency, low amplitude) may also be mistaken 
for clonic seizure activity; this tends to be stimulus-­provoked and 
suppressible.
The term tonic refers to a change in tone as a manifestation of sei­
zure activity, which clinically presents as stiffening or arching. This can 
occur as the only manifestation of a seizure (tonic seizure) or may be 
TABLE 39.6  Epilepsy Genes and Phenotypes Catalogued in Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (OMIM) Since 2016—cont’d
Gene
Phenotype
OMIM
Nucleoplasmic Transport
NUP133
Galloway-­Mowat syndrome 8
618349
NUP214
Susceptibility to acute infection-­induced encephalopathy 9
618426
Regulation of Cell Morphology and Motility
BICD2
Spinal muscular atrophy, lower extremity predominant, 2b, prenatal onset, autosomal dominant
618291
DOCK3
Neurodevelopmental disorder with impaired intellectual development, hypotonia, and ataxia
618292
PHACTR1
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 70
618298
MACF1
Lissencephaly 9 with complex brainstem malformation
618325
DYNC1I2
Neurodevelopmental disorder with microcephaly and structural brain anomalies
618492
Synaptic Vesicle Cycle
NEUROD2
Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 72
618374
MAPK8IP3
Neurodevelopmental disorder with or without variable brain abnormalities
618443
Transcriptional Regulation
ATN1
Congenital hypotonia, epilepsy, developmental delay, and digital anomalies
618494
RORB
Susceptibility to idiopathic generalized epilepsy 15
618357
ZNF142
Neurodevelopmental disorder with impaired speech and hyperkinetic movements
618425
RSRC1
Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal recessive 70
618402
TCF20
Developmental delay with variable intellectual impairment and behavioral abnormalities
618430
EIF3F
Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal recessive 67
618295
ZBTB11
Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal recessive 69
618383
CNOT1
Holoprosencephaly 12 with or without pancreatic agenesis
618500
NFIB
Macrocephaly, acquired, with impaired intellectual development
618286
SOX4
Coffin-­Siris syndrome 10
618506
TRRAP
Developmental delay with or without dysmorphic facies and autism
618454
Transmembrane Protein
TMEM94
Intellectual developmental disorder with cardiac defects and dysmorphic facies
618316
Structural Protein
COL3A1
Polymicrogyria with or without vascular-­type Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
618343
Nuclear DNA Polymerase
POLE
Intrauterine growth retardation, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, genital anomalies, and 
immunodeficiency
618336
Multiple Functions
WDR4
Microcephaly, growth deficiency, seizures, and brain malformations
618346
Intracellular Trafficking
TRAPPC2L
Encephalopathy, progressive, early onset, with episodic rhabdomyolysis
618331
From Hebbar M, Mefford HC. Recent advances in epilepsy genomics and genetic testing. F1000Res. 2020;9(F1000 Faculty Rev):185; last updated 
Mar 12 2020 (Table 1). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7076331/pdf/f1000research-­9-­23530.pdf.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
683
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.7  Summary of Clinical, Laboratory, EEG, and Neuroimaging Findings of Metabolic 
Epilepsy
IEM
Neurologic
Non-­neurologic
Laboratory
EEG
Brain MRI
Brain MRS
Urea cycle 
disorders
Encephalopathy
Liver disease (sometimes) Hyperammonemia
Respiratory alkalosis
Increased glutamine
Slow background
Cortical and subcortical 
edema
BG T2 hyperintensity with 
thalamic sparing
Scalloped ribbon of DWI 
restriction at insular gray-­
white matter interface
Prominent Glx peak
Organic 
acidemias
Encephalopathy
Choreoathetosis
Cytopenias
Pancreatitis
Cardiomyopathy (PA)
Renal disease (MMA)
Hyperammonemia
High anion gap metabolic 
acidosis
Ketotic hyperglycinemia
Slow background
Burst-­
suppression 
possible
Diffuse swelling neonatally; 
delayed myelination and 
globi pallidi lesions later
Decreased Glx peak 
(PA)
Disorders 
of biotin 
metabolism
Encephalopathy
Erythroderma or 
ichthyosis
Hyperammonemia
High anion gap metabolic 
acidosis
Lactic acidosis
Ketosis
Burst-­
suppression
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Subependymal cysts
Lactate peak
MSUD
Encephalopathy
Opisthotonos
Bicycling/fencing 
movements
Sweet (“maple syrup”) 
smell
Ketosis
Hypernatremia
Increased BCAAs and 
BCKAs
Comblike rhythm
Increased signal and 
cytotoxic edema 
myelinated structures, 
vasogenic edema of 
unmyelinated tracts
BCAA/BCKA peak 
(0.9 ppm)
Fatty acid 
oxidation 
defects
Encephalopathy 
(“Reye 
syndrome”)
Lipid storage myopathy
Liver disease
Renal cysts (GA2)
Hypoketotic hypoglycemia
Slow background
T2 hyperintensities in 
periventricular and 
subcortical WM (GA2)
Lipid peak (0.9 and 
1.3 ppm)
Primary lactic 
acidosis
Encephalopathy
Infantile 
Parkinsonism 
(PC deficiency)
Dysmorphic features 
(PDH deficiency)
Lactic acidosis
Slow background, 
multifocal 
spikes
T2 hyperintensities and 
DWI restriction of dorsal 
brainstem, cerebral 
peduncles, corticospinal 
tracts; subependymal cysts
Lactate peak
Glycine 
encephalopathy
Seizures
None
High CSF glycine and CSF/
plasma glycine ratio
Burst-­
suppression
Dysgenesis of the CC
T2 hyperintensities and DWI 
restriction of myelinated 
tracts
Glycine peak (3.55 
ppm)
Molybdenum 
cofactor/
sulfite oxidase 
deficiency
Seizures
Hyperekplexia
None
Elevated S-­sulfocysteine; 
low cysteine, high 
taurine
Increased AASA and 
pipecolic acid
Burst-­
suppression
Diffuse swelling followed by 
cystic changes
S-­sulfocysteine 
peak (3.61 ppm); 
taurine peak (3.24
and 3.42 ppm)
Disorders 
of GABA 
metabolism
Seizures
Hypersomno­lence
Choreoathetosis
Overgrowth (GABAT)
Elevated urine
4-­hydroxybutyric acid 
(SSADH); elevated 
GABA, β-­alanine, and 
homocarnosine (GABAT)
Slow background, 
multifocal 
spikes, burst-­
suppression
T2 hyperintensities of 
globi pallidi, dentate 
and subthalamic nucleus 
(SSADH)
GABA peak (2.2–2.4 
ppm; GABAT)
PDE
Seizures
None
Increased AASA and 
pipecolic acid
Slow background, 
multifocal 
spikes, burst-­
suppression
Usually normal; can have 
dysgenetic CC
Decreased NAA 
peak (over time)
Serine 
biosynthesis 
disorders
Microcephaly
Seizures
Ichthyosis
Ectropion, eclabion (Neu-­
Laxova)
Low serine in plasma and 
CSF
Multifocal spikes; 
hypsarrhythmia
Hypomyelination
Decreased NAA 
peak; increased 
choline peak
Lysosomal 
storage 
disorders
Neurodegener­
ation
Hydrops fetalis
Dermal melanosis
Ichthyosis (Gaucher 
type 2)
Decrease in specific 
enzyme activity
Vacuolated lymphocytes 
(CLN3 disease)
Fast central 
spikes (Tay-­
Sachs); vertex 
sharp waves 
(sialidosis)
Hypomyelination (GM1 
and GM2 gangliosidosis, 
fucosidosis, Salla disease)
Subdural fluid collections 
(NCLs)
Broad peak 
centered around 
3.7 ppm
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
684
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
followed by clonic jerking, which is the generalized tonic-­clonic seizure 
(GTC or grand mal). Atonic seizures refer to seizures where a sudden, 
brief loss of tone in the neck or entire body causes a head nod or fall to 
the ground. This type of seizure must be distinguished from falls due 
to complete loss of consciousness or those due to tonic stiffening of the 
entire body. With atonic seizures, the loss of tone is sudden but brief, 
and the patient is quickly responsive afterward.
Automatisms are semipurposeful movements that usually occur 
with impairment of consciousness either during or after a seizure and 
can be very useful for identifying a spell as a seizure. They may be a 
perseveration of an activity in progress at ictal onset, such as turning 
pages of a book, or novel semipurposeful movements arising during 
the seizure. These novel movements are most often a mixture of mas­
ticatory, oral, and lingual movements (lip smacking or grimacing) and 
simple fragmentary limb movements, such as fidgeting with a held 
object or pulling at clothing. In infants, orofacial automatisms are 
more likely than complex gestures and must be distinguished from the 
normal behavior of infants. Automatisms can be seen both in focal sei­
zures, specifically those of temporal lobe onset, and in some general­
ized seizures, specifically absence epilepsy, so they are not specific to a 
broad category of seizure.
Impairment of consciousness, defined as an alteration in aware­
ness of external stimuli, may be combined with a complete loss or 
impairment of responsiveness to external stimuli. Assessment of 
consciousness during seizures is often difficult, particularly in young 
children. It is possible to be unresponsive because of an inability to 
speak or articulate clearly (aphasia, apraxia, or paralysis). It is also 
possible to be responsive to external stimuli but to have altered aware­
ness, often demonstrated by complete amnesia for events immediately 
before, during, or after the seizure, which implies that memory was 
not acquired during the seizure because of ongoing neuronal dysfunc­
tion. It is possible to have complex motor behaviors without loss of 
complete awareness or amnesia; frontal lobe seizures commonly have 
this presentation and must be carefully distinguished from nonep­
ileptic events. Both focal and generalized seizures can be associated 
with impairment of consciousness; the term dyscognitive is used to 
describe this symptom (see Table 39.2).
Seizure etiology was previously divided into idiopathic, cryptogenic, 
and symptomatic. There were also separate categories for infantile 
spasms and neonatal seizures. The terms genetic, structural, metabolic, 
and unknown are currently used to characterize presumptive etiologies 
(Table 39.9).
FOCAL SEIZURES
Localization-­Related Seizures, Partial Seizures
Focal seizures are seizures in which the first clinical and EEG changes 
indicate initial activation of a system of neurons limited to part of one 
cerebral hemisphere. The clinical symptoms and signs of focal seizures 
reflect the functional anatomy of the region of the brain undergoing 
the abnormal neuronal discharge.
When consciousness is impaired, this was historically known as a 
complex partial seizure; if there is no apparent loss of consciousness, 
this was known as a simple partial seizure. These terms have been 
replaced by the more descriptive terms focal seizure with impairment 
of consciousness or focal dyscognitive seizure in the case of complex 
partial seizures, and focal seizure without impairment of conscious­
ness for simple partial seizures (see Table 39.8).
TABLE 39.7  Summary of Clinical, Laboratory, EEG, and Neuroimaging Findings of Metabolic 
Epilepsy—cont’d
IEM
Neurologic
Non-neurologic
Laboratory
EEG
Brain MRI
Brain MRS
Peroxisomal 
disorders
Hypotonia
Seizures
Cholestasis; renal 
cysts; epiphyseal 
stippling
Dysmorphic features
Elevated VLCFA, 
phytanic acid, bile 
acid intermediates, 
pipecolic acid, low 
plasmalogens
Multifocal spikes; 
hypsarrhythmia
Perisylvian 
polymicrogyria 
and pachygyria; 
hypomyelination; 
subependymal cysts
Lipid peak (0.9 and 
1.3 ppm)
Congenital 
disorders of 
glycosylation
Hypotonia
Seizures
Inverted nipples 
Abnormal fat pads
Elevated 
transaminases; 
coagulopathy; 
endocrine 
abnormalities
Multifocal epileptic 
discharges
Pontocerebellar 
hypoplasia
Decreased NAA peak
Disorders of copper 
metabolism
Seizures
Pili torti
Cutis laxa
Bladder diverticula
Metaphyseal lesions
Wormian bones
Low serum copper 
and ceruloplasmin; 
high urine copper
Burst-­suppression
Arterial tortuosity
Subdural collections
Decreased NAA peak
GLUT1 deficiency
Seizures
Abnormal eye 
movements
Hemolytic anemia, 
pseudohyperkalemia, 
cataracts (specific 
variants)
Low CSF glucose and 
lactate; low CSF/
serum glucose ratio
Variable depending 
on type of seizure
Normal
Normal
AASA, α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde; BCAAs, branched-­chain amino acids; BCKAs, branched-­chain ketoacids; BG, basal ganglia; CC, corpus callo­
sum; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DWI, diffusion-­weighted imaging; GA2, glutaric aciduria type 2; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; GABAT, GABA transami­
nase; Glx, glutamine/glutamate; IEM, inborn error of metabolism; MMA, methylmalonic acidemia; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; MSUD, 
maple syrup urine disease; NAA, N-­acetylaspartate; NCLs, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis; PA, propionic acidemia; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PDE, 
pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; SSADH, succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency; VLCFA, very long-­chain 
fatty acids; WM, white matter.
From van Karnebeek CDM, Sayson B, Lee JJY, et al. Metabolic evaluation of epilepsy: a diagnostic algorithm with focus on treatable conditions. 
Front Neurol. 2018;9:Article 1016 (Table 2). https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2018.01016.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
685
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.8  Mapping of Old to New Seizure Classifying Terms
Old Term for 
Seizure
New Term for Seizure [Choice] 
(Optional)
Absence
(Generalized) absence
Absence, atypical
(Generalized) absence, atypical
Absence, typical
(Generalized) absence, typical
Akinetic
Focal behavior arrest, generalized absence
Astatic
[Focal/generalized] atonic
Atonic
[Focal/generalized] atonic
Aura
Focal aware
Clonic
[Focal/generalized] clonic
Complex partial
Focal impaired awareness
Convulsion
[Focal/generalized] motor [tonic-­clonic, tonic, clonic], 
focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic
Dacrystic
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] emotional 
(dacrystic)
Dialeptic
Focal impaired awareness
Drop attack
[Focal/generalized] atonic, [focal/generalized] tonic
Fencer’s posture 
(asymmetric tonic)
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] motor tonic
Figure-­of-­4
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] motor tonic
Freeze
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] behavior 
arrest
Frontal lobe*
Focal
Gelastic
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] emotional 
(gelastic)
Grand mal
Generalized tonic-­clonic, focal to bilateral 
tonic-­clonic, unknown-­onset tonic-­clonic
Gustatory
Focal [aware or impaired awareness] sensory 
(gustatory)
Old Term for 
Seizure
New Term for Seizure [Choice] 
(Optional)
Infantile spasms
[Focal/generalized/unknown] onset epileptic 
spasms
Jacksonian
Focal aware motor (Jacksonian)
Limbic
Focal impaired awareness
Major motor
Generalized tonic-­clonic, focal-­onset bilateral tonic-­
clonic
Minor motor
Focal motor, generalized myoclonic
Myoclonic
[Focal/generalized] myoclonic
Neocortical*
Focal aware or focal impaired awareness
Occipital lobe*
Focal
Parietal lobe*
Focal
Partial
Focal
Petit mal
Absence
Psychomotor
Focal impaired awareness
Rolandic
Focal aware motor, focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic
Salaam
[Focal/generalized/unknown onset] epileptic spasms
Secondarily generalized 
tonic-­clonic
Focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic
Simple partial
Focal aware
Supplementary motor
Focal motor tonic
Sylvian
Focal motor
Temporal lobe*
Focal aware/impaired awareness
Tonic
[Focal/generalized] tonic
Tonic-­clonic
[Generalized/unknown] onset tonic-­clonic, 
focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic
Uncinate
Focal [aware impaired awareness] sensory (olfactory)
Note that there is not a one-­to-­one correspondence, reflecting reorganization as well as renaming.
The most important terms are set in bold.
*Anatomic classification may still be useful for some purposes, for example, in evaluation for epilepsy surgery.
From Fisher FS, Cross JH, D’Souza C, et al. Instruction manual for the ILAE 2017 operational classification of seizure types. Epilepsia. 
2017;58(4):531–542 (Table 3, p. 540).
An aura is the portion of a seizure that is experienced before any loss 
of consciousness. Some auras can be difficult for a patient to describe; 
asking them if they know a seizure will happen before it happens, even 
if they cannot articulate precisely what they are experiencing, is one 
way to approach the topic. Examples of auras include an epigastric ris­
ing sensation; nausea; visual, auditory, or olfactory hallucinations; or 
limbic symptoms such as fear or a sensation of déjà vu. An aura may 
be suspected in very young children if there is a change in behavior 
before seizures, such as interrupting an activity to seek out parents or 
complaining of abdominal pain. The presence of an aura is tradition­
ally thought to be indicative of a focal seizure without impairment of 
consciousness, as it implies focal cortical dysfunction, but some studies 
have reported that up to 64% of patients with documented idiopathic 
generalized epilepsy experience some form of aura, possibly due to 
asymmetric propagation of the discharges through the thalamocortical 
networks.
Nonepileptic events such as migraines or syncope may also have a 
prodrome, further highlighting the value of a comprehensive history in 
distinguishing types of events.
The progressive symptoms of some seizures after the initial aura 
reflect the spread of the abnormal electrical discharge beyond the 
region of onset, which is why a detailed history is critical for evaluating 
paroxysmal spells and determining the likelihood that they represent 
seizure activity.
Focal seizures can have motor and/or sensory components, depending 
on which areas of what is termed eloquent cortex become involved in the 
seizure. However, the seizure may originate in a portion of the cortex that 
does not produce obvious physical symptoms (termed the silent or nonel­
oquent cortex), and physical signs of the seizure only develop if the seizure 
discharge spreads to involve eloquent cortex. Seizures with clear electrical 
abnormalities but minimal or absent physical symptoms are commonly 
referred to as electrographic seizures or subclinical seizures. Subclinical elec­
trographic seizures, particularly during sleep, can be associated with dete­
rioration in development, behavior, attention, and learning.
Focal motor seizures produce rhythmic jerking (clonic) movements 
of the limb or limbs contralateral to the primary motor cortex involved. 
Other focal motor seizures include involuntary turning of the head and 
eyes in one direction (version), vocalization, and speech arrest. There may 
be tonic stiffening and extension of the arm ipsilateral to the seizure onset.
Involvement of the sensory cortex produces simple somatosensory 
experiences such as paresthesia or numbness, often with a dysesthetic 
quality, and visual, auditory, olfactory, or gustatory phenomena. Some 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
686
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
of these sensory phenomena can be quite complex, including structured 
visual hallucinations, sensations of depersonalization, and affective symp­
toms such as anxiety or fear. Epileptic phenomena are a rare cause for such 
phenomena, and a broad differential diagnosis should be considered for 
paroxysmal spells where the primary symptoms are sensory or affective.
As the seizure continues to spread, both cerebral hemispheres may 
become engaged, and there is generalized clonic jerking of the body 
that closely resembles a GTC seizure. These secondarily generalized 
seizures may be mistaken for a generalized seizure if the onset is not 
witnessed. Occasionally after a seizure, there is persistent focal weak­
ness or hemiparesis known as Todd palsy, which is strongly suggestive 
of a contralateral focal onset to the seizure.
Generalized Seizures
Generalized seizures are defined as seizures in which the first clini­
cal changes indicate initial involvement of both hemispheres. Motor 
involvement, if present, is bilateral, as are the initial EEG changes. 
Consciousness is impaired in most generalized seizures, but not in all; 
for instance, brief myoclonic seizures and some atonic seizures may not 
be associated with any impairment of consciousness.
Absence (petit mal) seizures begin with sudden interruption of 
activity and staring; they are usually brief and end abruptly without post­
ictal confusion. Simple absence seizures consist of only motionlessness 
and a blank stare lasting for several seconds, with immediate postictal 
reanimation. Lip-­smacking, fumbling or searching hand movements, 
or convulsive swallowing can appear during longer seizures, or preic­
tal activities may be continued in a slow, automatic manner. Paroxysmal 
alterations in autonomic function may also accompany absence seizures, 
including pupillary dilation, pallor, flushing, sweating, salivation, pilo­
erection, or a combination of these. Absence seizures that are more typ­
ically accompanied by eyelid fluttering, facial twitching, or myoclonic 
jerks of the trunk or extremities are referred to as complicated absence 
seizures. Atypical absence seizures are described as absence seizures 
with a less abrupt beginning and end, with more pronounced changes 
TABLE 39.9  Suggested Scheme for an Etiologic Classification of Epilepsy
Main Category
Subcategory
Examples*
Idiopathic epilepsy
Pure epilepsies due to single-­
gene disorders
Benign familial neonatal convulsions; autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy; generalized 
epilepsy with febrile seizures plus; severe myoclonic epilepsy of childhood; benign adult familial 
myoclonic epilepsy
Pure epilepsies with complex 
inheritance
Idiopathic generalized epilepsy (and its subtypes); benign partial epilepsies of childhood
Symptomatic epilepsy
Predominantly genetic 
or developmental 
causation
Childhood epilepsy syndromes
West syndrome; Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome
Progressive myoclonic 
epilepsies
Unverricht-­Lundborg disease; dentato-­rubro-­pallido-­luysian atrophy; Lafora body disease; mitochondrial 
cytopathy; sialidosis; neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis; myoclonus renal failure syndrome
Neurocutaneous syndromes
Tuberous sclerosis; neurofibromatosis; Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Other neurologic single-­gene 
disorders
Angelman syndrome; lysosomal disorders; neuroacanthocytosis; organic acidurias and peroxisomal 
disorders; porphyria; pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy; Rett syndrome; urea cycle disorders; Wilson 
disease; disorders of cobalamin and folate metabolism
Disorders of chromosomes
Down syndrome; fragile X syndrome; 4p− syndrome; isodicentric chromosome 15; ring chromosome 20
Developmental anomalies of 
the cerebral structure
Hemimegalencephaly; focal cortical dysplasia; agyria-­pachygyria-­band spectrum; agenesis of the corpus 
callosum; polymicrogyria; schizencephaly; periventricular nodular heterotopia; microcephaly; arachnoid cyst
Predominantly acquired 
causation
Hippocampal sclerosis
Hippocampal sclerosis
Perinatal and infantile causes
Neonatal seizures; postneonatal seizures; cerebral palsy
Cerebral trauma
Open head injury; closed head injury; neurosurgery; epilepsy after epilepsy surgery; nonaccidental head 
injury in infants
Cerebral tumor
Glioma; ganglioglioma and hamartoma; DNET; hypothalamic hamartoma; meningioma; secondary tumors
Cerebral infection
Viral meningitis and encephalitis; bacterial meningitis and abscess; malaria; neurocysticercosis; 
tuberculosis; HIV
Cerebrovascular disorders
Cerebral hemorrhage; cerebral infarction; degenerative vascular disease; arteriovenous malformation; 
cavernous hemangioma
Cerebral immunologic disorders
Rasmussen encephalitis; SLE and collagen vascular disorders; inflammatory and immunologic disorders
Degenerative and other 
neurologic conditions
Alzheimer disease and other dementing disorders; multiple sclerosis and demyelinating disorders; 
hydrocephalus and porencephaly
Provoked epilepsy
Provoking factors
Fever; menstrual cycle and catamenial epilepsy; sleep-­wake cycle; metabolic and endocrine-­induced 
seizures; drug-­induced seizures; alcohol-­ and toxin-­induced seizures
Reflex epilepsies
Photosensitive epilepsies; startle-­induced epilepsies; reading epilepsy; auditory-­induced epilepsy; eating 
epilepsy; hot water epilepsy
Cryptogenic epilepsies†
*These examples are not comprehensive, and in every category there are other causes.
†By definition, the causes of the cryptogenic epilepsies are “unknown.” However, these are an important category, accounting for at least 40% of 
epilepsies encountered in adult practice and a lesser proportion in pediatric practice.
DNET, dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Shorvon SD. The etiologic classification of epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2011;52:1052–1057.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
687
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
in muscle tone, and of longer duration. Distinctions should be made 
between the clinical features of absence seizures, focal dyscognitive sei­
zures, and episodic daydreaming (Table 39.10). Staring spells that are 
prolonged beyond 15–20 seconds are less likely to represent absence sei­
zures due to incorrect duration. Staring spells in infants and toddlers are 
also unlikely to represent absence seizures due to incorrect age of onset. 
Early-­onset generalized epilepsy is associated with rare genetic syn­
dromes. Children with prolonged staring spells, particularly starting at a 
young age, are at higher risk of partial-­onset seizures or behavioral spells.
Tonic-­clonic seizures are perhaps the most dramatic of the epileptic 
seizures. The tonic phase begins with sudden sustained contraction of 
facial, axial, and limb muscle groups, and there may be an initial involun­
tary stridorous cry or a moan secondary to contraction of the diaphragm 
and chest muscles against a partially closed glottis (the ictal cry). The 
tonic contraction is maintained for seconds to 10s of seconds, during 
which time the child falls if standing, is apneic and may become cya­
notic, may bite the sides of their tongue, and may pass urine. The clonic 
phase of the seizure begins when the tonic contraction is repeatedly 
interrupted by momentary relaxation of the muscular contraction. This 
gives the appearance of generalized jerking as the contraction resumes 
after each relaxation. At the end of the clonic phase, the body relaxes, and 
the patient is unconscious with deep respiration. If roused, the patient is 
confused, may complain of muscle soreness, and usually wishes to sleep.
Myoclonic seizures are sudden, brief, shocklike contractions of 
muscles. They may involve the whole body or a portion of the axial 
musculature such as the face and trunk, or they may be limited to the 
limbs. They can be isolated or repetitive, irregular or rhythmic. Myo­
clonic seizures arise from the cortex and are associated with a distinct 
EEG pattern. Some forms of myoclonus are of brainstem or spinal ori­
gin; those occurring without other seizure types are not regarded as 
epileptic myoclonus but thought of as movement disorders.
Generalized tonic seizures begin in the same way as tonic-­clonic 
seizures; a massive, generalized contraction produces any combination 
of facial grimacing, neck and trunk flexion or extension, abduction or 
elevation of the arms, and flexion of the hips. Subtle tonic seizures may 
produce only facial grimacing and slight neck and trunk flexion. Tonic 
seizures may be accompanied by pronounced autonomic activity with 
diaphoresis, flushing, pallor, and tachycardia, even when the muscular 
contraction is slight.
Atonic seizures are characterized by a sudden decrease or loss of 
postural muscle tone. The extent of muscle involvement may vary; an 
atonic seizure may be limited to a sudden head drop with slack jaw or 
may result in a fall because of loss of axial and limb muscle tone. The 
falls are referred to as drop attacks, and because they are unexpected 
and sudden in onset, they often result in injury.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF A SEIZURE 
DISORDER
Electroencephalographic Studies
The incidence of EEG epileptiform activity in normal children without 
a history of seizures is very low (<2%); such findings are associated 
with a strong family history of genetic epilepsy. The incidence of recur­
rent epileptic seizures in patients with focal EEG spikes is 83%. In a 
child with suspected seizures, the finding of focal or generalized epi­
leptiform activity on the EEG supports a diagnosis of epilepsy, whereas 
multiple negative EEG studies capturing both wakefulness and sleep 
argue against such a diagnosis and should prompt the physician to con­
sider alternative diagnoses and to attempt to record the episodes.
There are two basic types of EEGs: conventional and amplitude-­
integrated. A conventional EEG utilizes 19 or more electrodes distrib­
uted symmetrically over both hemispheres and along the midline. A 
routine outpatient EEG is run for at least 20 minutes, and more often 
40–60 minutes. A prolonged EEG, or long-­term monitoring, is run for 
over 24 hours, and can even be performed for over a week at a time. 
This type of prolonged study can be performed on an ambulatory basis 
at home or as an inpatient in an epilepsy monitoring unit. Amplitude-­
integrated EEG, by contrast, utilizes only two or four EEG electrodes 
and is primarily used in neonatal intensive care units.
An EEG should always attempt to capture sleep, and most will include 
hyperventilation and photic stimulation, all of which potentially activate 
epileptiform discharges, increasing the diagnostic yield. Hyperventila­
tion produces absence seizures in about 80% of children with childhood 
TABLE 39.10  Differential Diagnosis of Episodic Unresponsiveness Without Convulsions
Clinical
Absence Seizures
Focal Dyscognitive Seizures
Staring, Inattention
Frequency
Multiple daily
Rarely more than one to two per day
Daily, situation dependent: e.g., may 
occur only at school
Duration
Often <10 sec, rarely >30 sec
Average duration >60 sec, rarely <10 sec
Seconds to minutes
Aura
Not present
May be present
Not present
Abrupt interruption of child’s activity
Yes: e.g., speech arrest midsentence; 
pause while eating, playing, or fighting
Yes
Activities such as play or eating are not 
abruptly interrupted, no sudden onset
Eyelid flutter
Common, often with upward eye 
movement
Uncommon, but may be present
No
Myoclonic jerks
Common
Uncommon
Not present
Automatisms
Occur in longer absences, usually mild
Frequent and often prominent
No
Responsiveness
Unresponsive
Unresponsive
Responds to touch
Postictal impairment
None
Postictal confusion and malaise is 
typical; drowsiness may also occur
No
EEG
Generalized 3-­Hz spike-­and-­wave 
complexes
Regional epileptic discharges (most 
often frontal or temporal)
Normal
MRI
Normal
Focal structural lesions not uncommon 
(e.g., tumor)
Normal
First-­line medication
Valproate, ethosuximide
Carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate
None
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
688
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
absence epilepsy. Intermittent photic stimulation produces generalized 
epileptic discharges in several of the generalized epileptic syndromes, but 
photosensitivity is overall rare in epilepsy. Recording during wakefulness 
and sleep performed after sleep deprivation may have the highest yield. 
Overnight recording in the hospital provides for prolonged sampling of the 
interictal EEG in wakefulness and spontaneous sleep. For any patient with 
refractory seizures or an uncertain diagnosis, the use of video and EEG 
monitoring is usually helpful in clarifying the diagnosis. Defining the exact 
seizure type may lead to modification of drug treatment or consideration of 
epilepsy surgery, or a nonepileptic paroxysmal disorder may be discovered.
A single normal EEG does not definitively exclude a seizure disor­
der, particularly in people with infrequent seizures or seizures in spe­
cific contexts, such as illness or sleep.
Neuroimaging Studies
MRI is superior to CT for the evaluation of epilepsy. Any patient with a 
history or examination suspicious for focal-­onset epilepsy should have 
MRI of the brain unless the syndrome is clearly that of benign focal 
epilepsy of childhood with centrotemporal spikes. MRI may also reveal 
an abnormality in patients with symptomatic generalized epilepsy. 
Functional neuroimaging is important in the assessment of candidates 
for surgical resection in patients with intractable seizures (Fig. 39.4). 
When available, a 3.0 Tesla MRI of the brain with specific protocols 
dedicated to epilepsy evaluation (e.g., proper alignment of the imaging 
axis with the hippocampi) is preferred. It is important to note that gen­
eralized seizures associated with status epilepticus may also produce 
nonspecific and reversible findings on MRI (Fig. 39.5).
Evaluation of the First Seizure
There is no clinical sign or diagnostic investigation that determines 
with certainty whether a child presenting with a first seizure has epi­
lepsy or has had an isolated seizure. The assessment of patients with a 
first seizure must include a search for etiologic agents and features that 
may indicate the risk of recurrence. Factors to be considered include 
the circumstances of the seizure, the health of the child in the time 
before the seizure, the recent sleep patterns, the possibility of abuse or 
trauma, and the chance of ingestion of prescription or street drugs or 
syndromes such as the neurocutaneous disorders (Table 39.11).
The recurrence risk after a first unprovoked seizure, usually defined 
as a seizure or flurry of seizures within 24 hours in patients older than 
1 month, is ∼40–50%.
The most important predictor of recurrence appears to be the exis­
tence of an underlying neurologic disorder. The existence of intellec­
tual disability or cerebral palsy is a common antecedent to epilepsy, 
as is a history of significant head injury. An EEG with generalized or 
focal epileptiform discharges or with focal or generalized slowing is 
also predictive of recurrence. Focal seizures are more likely to be asso­
ciated with recurrence, although patients with such seizures are also 
more likely to have an existing neurologic deficit or an abnormal EEG. 
The duration of the first seizure or a presentation in status epilepticus is 
not associated with a higher incidence of recurrence. A family history 
of epilepsy is not a predictor of recurrence. Earlier age at onset, partic­
ularly before the age of 12 months, has been associated with a higher 
risk of recurrent seizures.
Most authorities believe that the majority of patients with a first 
seizure should not be treated unless the risk of recurrence is judged to 
be significantly higher than average. An abnormal neurologic exam­
ination, an abnormal MRI of the brain, and abnormal EEG all increase 
the risk of recurrence; the greater the number of risk factors, the more 
likely an AED may be initiated after a first known seizure, although 
some neurologists will still elect to wait for a second confirmed seizure. 
In adults or adolescents, the issues of driving and employment may 
influence the decision to treat a first seizure, but in otherwise healthy 
and developmentally normal children, there is almost no indication for 
chronic AED treatment in response to a single seizure. Activities such 
as bathing, driving, and swimming must be carefully supervised.
The decision to begin AED therapy is usually made after a patient has 
had two or more seizures in a short interval of time (6–12 months). Treat­
ment with AEDs lowers the recurrence rate by about 50% (Fig. 39.6).
STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Status epilepticus is a medical emergency where epileptic seizures are 
prolonged or occur in rapid succession without recovery between the 
seizures. There are two general categories of status epilepticus: convul­
sive and nonconvulsive (“subclinical”) status epilepticus. Convulsive 
status epilepticus may involve repetitive or prolonged GTC, myo­
clonic, or tonic seizures. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus may involve 
repeated or continuous absence seizures or focal dyscognitive seizures 
with an altered state of consciousness lasting hours or even days.
A common duration of a seizure defined as status epilepticus is 30 
minutes or longer, but seizures continuing for more than 5–10 minutes 
warrant immediate attention, as they are statistically likely to progress 
to status epilepticus. The tonic-­clonic phase of generalized seizures 
Fig. 39.4  Fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 ([18F]FDG) PET and ictal [99mTc] ethyl 
cysteinate dimer ([99mTc]ECD) single photon emission computed tomog­
raphy (SPECT) in left frontal lobe epilepsy. This patient’s MRI scan (top 
row) was normal, whereas [18F]FDG PET showed extensive left fron­
tal hypometabolism (second row). Additional ictal and interictal [99mTc]
ECD SPECT scans were performed for accurate localization of seizure 
onset. Result of a SPECT subtraction analysis (ictal-­interictal; blood flow 
increases above a threshold of 15%, maximum 40%) was overlaid onto 
the MRI and [18F]FDG PET scan (third and fourth rows, respectively), 
clearly depicting the zone of seizure onset within the functional deficit 
zone given by [18F]FDG PET. (From Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy 
SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:593, Fig. 42.18.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
689
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
usually lasts <2 minutes; such seizures lasting ≥5 minutes usually 
evolve into status epilepticus. One third of children presenting with 
status epilepticus have no history of epilepsy, another third have a his­
tory of chronic epilepsy, and an acute illness or injury has caused status 
epilepticus in another third. One of the most common precipitants of 
status epilepticus in people with a known history of epilepsy is abrupt 
discontinuation of a daily AED.
Status epilepticus has a significant acute mortality rate, partly 
because of the underlying cause of the seizures; intracranial infections 
(meningitis, encephalitis), poisoning, acute metabolic disorders, and 
head injuries are some of the most common causes.
The goals of the emergency management of status epilepticus are 
as follows:
	1.	 Maintain normal cardiorespiratory function and cerebral oxygenation.
 2. Stop clinical and electrical seizure activity and prevent its recur­
rence.
 3. Identify precipitating factors.
	4.	 Correct any metabolic disturbances (hypoglycemia, hyponatremia) 
and prevent systemic complications such as cardiovascular collapse, 
cardiac arrhythmia, pneumonia, and renal failure.
Table 39.12 sets out a plan of initial assessment and management of 
convulsive status epilepticus. Lorazepam and diazepam are rapidly act­
ing anticonvulsants when given intravenously but must be combined 
with a primary AED, as their duration of action is short. Side effects 
include sedation, depressed respiration, decreased ability to protect the 
airway, and hypotension.
Phenytoin, fosphenytoin, phenobarbital, or valproic acid could be 
used in conjunction with the benzodiazepines in providing longer-­
lasting anticonvulsive action.
Phenytoin is less commonly used. It has a rare but serious com­
plication called purple glove syndrome, which occurs in 1.7–5.9% 
of intravenous administrations; within 2 hours of administration, 
there is pain, bluish discoloration, and swelling of the affected limb. 
Treatment involves discontinuation of the phenytoin and elevation 
and icing of the affected limb; compartment syndrome is a potential 
complication.
Fosphenytoin, a prodrug of phenytoin, can be administered either 
intravascularly or intramuscularly. Fosphenytoin has a maximum infu­
sion rate of 150 mg PE/min; when it is infused faster, hypotension and 
arrhythmias may occur.
Valproate can be given intravenously and may be the appropri­
ate therapy for patients with known idiopathic and symptomatic 
generalized epilepsies. It is also generally appropriate for children 
with a known static cerebral injury presenting with status epilepti­
cus as their first seizure, such as a child with a history of neonatal 
hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy who presents at age 4 in status 
epilepticus. It is contraindicated in children with known or sus­
pected mitochondrial disease, multisystemic disease of unknown 
etiology, or known hepatic disease, or in children under the age of 
2 years.
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus may arise when frequent focal 
dyscognitive seizures or absence seizures occur. In both settings, 
discrete seizures may not be identifiable; instead, the child may 
present with confusion, clouded consciousness, and partial respon­
siveness or a stuporous state, all of which can last hours or even 
days. It should be treated urgently as soon as it is identified, espe­
cially if focal dyscognitive status is suspected, in which case treat­
ment should follow that outlined for convulsive status epilepticus. 
In absence status epilepticus, intravenous benzodiazepines are usu­
ally effective but should be used in conjunction with intravenous 
valproate or oral ethosuximide.
CLASSIFICATION OF EPILEPSIES AND 
EPILEPTIC SYNDROMES
The clinician should attempt to determine whether the seizure disorder 
is focal or generalized, and then whether there is evidence of under­
lying brain dysfunction. Both the focal and generalized epilepsies in 
otherwise developmentally normal children respond favorably to treat­
ment, and there is a good chance of long-­term remission. Structural 
epilepsies may benefit from surgical intervention. Genetic and meta­
bolic epilepsies respond less predictably to treatment, and the chance 
of remission is less certain.
Identification of one of the epileptic encephalopathies of infancy 
and childhood has grave prognostic significance (Table 39.13). These 
epilepsies vary in the seizure types and EEG features but have certain 
features in common: specific age at onset and expression, intractable 
seizures, cognitive dysfunction, arrest in development, conspicuous 
interictal epileptic discharges on the EEG, and a poor response to 
treatment.
Neonatal Period
The paroxysmal disorders seen in the neonatal period (birth to 8 
weeks) are presented in Table 39.14.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 39.5  Common MRI findings due to status epilepticus. Diffusion-­weighted imaging (DWI) (A) sequence 
reveals increased intensity in the left insular and frontal cortices (white arrows) with corresponding decreased 
apparent diffusion coefficient (B). There are similar regions of increased intensity on fluid-­attenuated inver­
sion recovery imaging (C) and contrast enhancement (D) implying a component of vasogenic edema. These 
changes resolved on repeat MRI 1 week later. (From Guerriero RM, Gaillard WD. Imaging modalities to diag­
nose and localize status epilepticus. Seizure Eur J Epilepsy. 2019;68:46–51 [Fig. 1, p. 48].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
690
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.11  Neurocutaneous Syndromes
Clinical Syndromes and Findings
Investigations
Sturge-­Weber Syndrome
Facial hemangioma, “port-­wine stain” upper face, division of cranial nerve V; bilateral in 30%, 
absent in 5%, associated truncal and limb hemangiomas in 45%
CT scan: calcification, MRI scan with gadolinium
EEG: attenuation of background rhythms, epileptiform discharges
Intracranial leptomeningeal angiomatosis
Epilepsy in 70–90%, usually before 2 yr and before hemiparesis, intractable in 35%
Intellectual disability in 50–60%
Hemiparesis in 30%, often with hemisensory deficit and hemianopia
Tuberous Sclerosis
Diagnostic Criteria*
Any One of the Following:
Facial angiofibroma (adenoma sebaceum, nasolabial folds, and nose becomes more prominent 
with age) or periungual fibromas
Physical examination
Cortical tubers, subependymal nodule, giant cell astrocytoma
MRI examination: T1 and T2 sequences with gadolinium
Multiple retinal hamartomas (usually asymptomatic) or multiple renal angiomyolipomas (usually 
asymptomatic, may manifest as hematuria, hypertension, or renal failure)
Funduscopic examination and renal ultrasonography, abdominal 
CT scan
Or Any Two of the Following:
Infantile spasms (seizures in 90%, most commonly generalized; infantile spasms and myoclonus)
History and physical, EEG; focal or generalized abnormalities
Hypomelanotic papules (ash leaf spots; in 80–90%, 1–2 cm oval or leaf-­shaped)
Wood lamp examination in darkened room
Single retinal hamartoma
Funduscopic examination
Subependymal or cortical calcification on CT scan
CT scan of the brain
Single renal angiomyolipomas or cysts
Renal ultrasonography or abdominal CT scan
Cardiac rhabdomyomas (single or multiple; may obstruct outflow, cause arrhythmias, or cause 
conduction defects)
Echocardiography, ECG
First-­degree relative with tuberous sclerosis (autosomal dominant disorder, 80% of cases 
represent new variants)
Examination of parents; echocardiography, MRI scans
Also Associated:
Intellectual disability in 50–66%
Shagreen patches; hamartomatous skin lesion in lumbosacral region in 50%
Pulmonary involvement, fibrosis
Chest radiograph
Skeletal abnormalities
Hand, feet (cystic), long bone (sclerotic) radiographic changes
Epidermal Nevus Syndrome
Hamartomatous lesions; subclassified according to most predominant histologic and clinical 
features (e.g., linear nevus sebaceus, see below)
Careful examination of the scalp, skin folds, and conjunctiva; 
funduscopic examination
Sporadic, affects both sexes equally; CNS abnormalities are common with epidermal nevus 
syndrome, including seizures (25% of patients), intellectual disability, and neoplasia; also, 
skeletal abnormalities, including kyphoscoliosis and hemiatrophy
Spine and limb radiographs, as appropriate
Linear nevus sebaceus; hairless verrucous yellow-­orange or hyperpigmented plaques on the face 
and scalp
Epilepsy in 76%
Intellectual disability in 60%
Associated neuronal migration disorders
MRI scan of the brain
Malignant transformation of a skin lesion
Other Neurocutaneous Syndromes Associated with Seizures
Neurofibromatosis; cutaneous lesions include café-­au-­lait spots, axillary freckling, neural 
tumors; seizure types include generalized tonic-­clonic, partial complex, and partial simple-­
motor
MRI scan of the brain
Incontinentia pigmenti; involvement includes linear papular-­vesicular cutaneous lesions at 
birth, later pigmentation, ocular and dental anomalies; female-­to-­male ratio >20:1 (boys may 
die in utero); seizure types include neonatal onset and later generalized tonic-­clonic
Skin biopsy; ophthalmology examination
Hypomelanosis of Ito (incontinentia pigmenti achromians)
*See http://www.tsalliance.org/healthcare-­professionals/diagnosis/.
CNS, central nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
691
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
Paroxysmal Nonepileptic Disorders
Jitteriness. Jitteriness or tremulousness is a common movement 
disorder of neonates. It can be confused with seizures, especially 
if superimposed on normal tonic postural reflexes. Jitteriness, 
characterized by rhythmic alternating movements of all extremities 
with equal velocity in flexion and extension, only occasionally has a 
true synchronized clonic appearance. Jitteriness is not accompanied 
by eye deviation or staring, is stimulus sensitive, and can usually be 
stopped by gentle passive flexion of the moving limb.
Jitteriness in the newborn can be associated with hypoxic-­ischemic 
encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and drug withdrawal; if 
any of these causative factors are identified, there may also be a higher 
risk of epileptic seizures. In otherwise healthy infants, jitteriness seems 
to be a benign movement disorder, resolving by 10–14 months of age.
Benign Neonatal Sleep Myoclonus
Myoclonic jerks may appear during sleep in some healthy neonates. It has 
been reported within hours of birth and may disappear over the next few 
months or persist into childhood. The jerks can be bilateral and synchro­
nous or asymmetric; they may migrate between muscle groups during an 
episode. They are repetitive but do not disturb sleep. These jerks have been 
described in all stages of sleep but are most prominent in quiet sleep; they 
are not confined to sleep onset. Features distinguishing this phenomenon 
from epilepsy are its presence exclusively during sleep with disappearance 
on awakening, normal EEGs, and normal psychomotor development.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Most neonatal seizures are acute symptomatic seizures, and the num­
ber of children who continue to have seizures after the neonatal period 
is relatively small. Neonatal seizures have been classified according to 
the clinical features as subtle, tonic, clonic, and myoclonic. However, 
not all of these clinical seizure types have consistent ictal EEG patterns. 
The classification of neonatal seizures reflects the variable, poorly orga­
nized, and often subtle clinical expression of epileptic seizures at this 
age. Typical GTC or absence seizures are not seen at this age, perhaps 
because of the limited capacity of the neonatal brain for interhemi­
spheric synchrony. Patterns include the following:
 • Clinical seizures consistently associated with an EEG seizure pattern:
 
• Clonic seizures with focal or multifocal jerking of the face or 
extremities fit this category, as do focal tonic seizures with focal 
Epilepsy diagnosis
First monotherapy
Second monotherapy or
adjunctive therapy
Refer to epilepsy center
Reassess diagnosis; video-EEG
monitoring
Not epilepsy
Revise therapy
Yes, proceed with
presurgical evaluation,
then epilepsy surgery
Dietary therapy may be
considered sooner in
motivated individuals or
those that are tube-fed
Good candidate—
proceed with epilepsy
surgery
Nonstructural with
generalized onset seizures
Revise ASM therapy
Continue trials of medical
therapy: additional one to
five ASM regimens
Consider VNS, dietary
therapy, neurostimulation,
corpus callosotomy
Structural
Consider/evaluate for epilepsy
surgery for TLE with
hippocampal sclerosis or focal
epilepsy with well-defined and
resectable epileptogenic lesion
No
Continue trials of medical
therapy: additional one to five
ASM regimens
In event of persistent ASM
failure (whether due to lack of
efficacy or poor tolerability), re-
evaluate for epilepsy surgery,
including invasive EEG-video
monitoring if appropriate
Not a surgical candidate
Consider VNS, dietary therapy,
neurostimulation, palliative
epilepsy surgery
Fig. 39.6  Additional steps assume that seizures are not controlled despite adequate trial of well-­tolerated 
medication. AED, antiepileptic drug; ASM, antiseizure medication; TLE, temporal lobe epilepsy; VNS, vagus 
nerve stimulation. (From Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in 
Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:1649, Fig. 100.19.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
692
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.12  Management of Convulsive Status Epilepticus
Priority
Examination and Laboratory 
Investigations
Management
On arrival
Airway patency and respiratory rate, inspect 
pharynx, chest auscultation, BP, pulse, 
temperature; level of consciousness; response 
to command, pain; serum Na, K, glucose, 
creatinine, Ca, Mg; CBC, liver function studies, 
AED levels; serum and urine toxins screen; 
arterial blood gases, chest radiograph
Airway protection; suction pharynx and give supplemental oxygen
Rectal antipyretic to lower temperature if elevated, IV access and administer: 25% 
glucose IV, 2–4 mL/kg, and lorazepam* IV, 0.1 mg/kg (to a maximum of 8 mg) as 
a bolus and fosphenytoin IV, 20 mg/kg at 150 mg/min with ECG monitoring and 
collection of serum level after loading dose
*If immediate IV access is not possible, give diazepam 0.3–0.5 mg/kg rectally and 
fosphenytoin IM and arrange for central line or intraosseous access
After initial treatment
Neck stiffness, funduscopy, signs of trauma, 
rashes, symmetry of motor function and 
reflexes
If patient is febrile: appropriate cultures, other studies depending on age and other 
symptoms
If any suspicion of head injury: obtain urgent CT scan
If seizures continue
Patient’s level of consciousness becomes 
depressed with lorazepam and PB, and an EEG 
is necessary to assess adequacy of therapy
Arrange ICU bed and consider intubation; give further bolus of lorazepam 0.05–
0.1 mg/kg, and push PHT serum level above 30 mg/L with further loading dose 
(∼10 mg/kg)
In an ICU setting, if seizures continue with PHT levels of 30–40 mg/L, then add PB 20 
mg/kg IV loading over 15–30 min
Continued clinical or electrical seizures may necessitate induction of pentobarbital 
therapy: loading dose of 5–15 mg/kg, followed by IV infusion of 1–3 mg/kg/hr 
titrated by EEG monitoring to achieve burst-­suppression pattern; maintain for 24–48 
hr and review
Elective intubation and ventilation, arterial line, BP monitoring
After stabilization or in 
tandem with escalating 
therapy
LP; if acute febrile illness with papilledema or 
focal neurologic signs, then CT/MRI first
If LP is delayed and intracranial infection is suspected, then cover with antibiotic and 
antiviral therapy
*Give lorazepam if actively convulsing; this may not be required in patients with serial seizures who can be quickly loaded with fosphenytoin.
AED, antiepileptic drug; BP, blood pressure; Ca, calcium; ICU, intensive care unit; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; K, potassium; LP, lumbar 
puncture; Na, sodium; Mg, magnesium; PB, phenobarbital; PHT, phenytoin.
TABLE 39.13  Cryptogenic and 
Symptomatic Epileptic Encephalopathies
Neonates and Infants
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome)
Early infantile myoclonic epilepsy
Migratory partial seizures of infancy
West syndrome (infantile spasms)
Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infants (Dravet syndrome)
Epilepsy restricted to females with cognitive impairment
Atypical Rett syndrome with early epilepsy
Epilepsy in association with inherited disorders of metabolism (see Table 
39.7)
Lysosomal storage disorders
Urea cycle disorders
Aminoacidurias
Children and Adolescents
Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome
Myoclonic-­astatic epilepsy
Atypical benign partial epilepsy
Acquired epileptic aphasia (Landau-­Kleffner syndrome)
Continuous spike-­and-­wave patterns in slow-­wave sleep
Epilepsy in association with inherited disorders of metabolism
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies
Progressive myoclonus epilepsies
Epilepsy in association with systemic disorders involving the central nervous 
system
Systemic lupus erythematosus, other vasculitides
TABLE 39.14  Paroxysmal Disorders of the 
Neonatal Period
Paroxysmal Nonepileptiform Disorders
Jitteriness
Benign neonatal sleep myoclonus
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Acute metabolic disorders*
Sepsis-­meningitis
Epileptic Syndromes
Benign idiopathic neonatal convulsions
Familial
Nonfamilial
Ohtahara (see EIEE) (see Table 39.18)
Symptomatic focal epilepsy
Brain tumor
Malformations of cortical development
Inherited metabolic disease; mitochondrial disorders
Early-­onset generalized epileptic syndromes with encephalopathy
Early myoclonic encephalopathy
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE)
*Hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia, hyper­
natremia, hyperammonemia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
693
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
tonic posturing of a limb or asymmetric posturing of the axial 
musculature. Clinical seizures with consistent focal jerking or 
posturing of one limb are most consistently correctly identified 
at the bedside and are commonly associated with a focal struc­
tural defect, such as a focal perinatal stroke.
 • Clinical seizures sometimes associated with an EEG seizure pattern:
 
• Myoclonic seizures consist of single or multiple flexor jerks of the 
upper or lower limbs. An ictal EEG pattern is not always seen in 
this group. Fragmentary (multifocal) myoclonus is not always 
associated with an ictal EEG.
 • Clinical seizures not consistently associated with an EEG seizure 
pattern:
 
• These include motor automatisms characterized by a diversity of 
signs, including any of the following: wide-­eyed staring, rapid 
blinking, eyelid fluttering, drooling, sucking, repetitive limb 
movements such as rowing or swimming with the arms or ped­
aling with the legs, apnea, hyperpnea, tonic eye deviation, and 
vasomotor skin color changes. This group of subtle seizures is 
generally associated with EEG background abnormalities such 
as suppression; the seizure itself may not have a consistent EEG 
correlate. This is reflective of diffuse cerebral dysfunction, such as 
seen in hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy or metabolic disorders.
 
• Generalized tonic seizures and focal and multifocal myoclonus 
are also often not associated with neonatal ictal EEG patterns, 
and when seen in stuporous or comatose children, the jerks may 
not be epileptic. However, if the EEG is completely normal, it is 
unlikely that the behaviors of concern represent subtle seizures.
Some simple clinical observations should guide the assessment of 
neonates with episodic abnormal behaviors. Epileptic behaviors are 
typically repetitive and stereotyped but are not provoked by stimula­
tion of the child or increased with increasing intensity of a stimulus. 
Nonepileptic movements may disappear with repositioning of a limb 
or the child. Gentle restraint of a limb should be able to suppress or 
abort nonepileptic motor activity, whereas epileptic movements 
are still palpable. The association of abnormal eye movements with 
unusual behavior or limb movements suggests a seizure rather than 
nonepileptic behavior.
The possible etiologic factors are numerous and diverse (Tables 
39.15 and 39.16). The most common cause is hypoxic-­ischemic enceph­
alopathy (60–65%); it is important to make a positive diagnosis of this 
historically and to exclude conditions such as perinatal local anesthetic 
toxicity, pyridoxine-­dependent seizures, prenatal injury, and metabolic 
encephalopathies that may masquerade as perinatal asphyxia.
Diagnostic Investigations
EEG monitoring is useful in the evaluation of suspicious fluctuations 
in vital signs in neonates who are paralyzed and intubated or comatose, 
or in neonates with subtle but repetitive episodes of unusual behavior.
Many neonatal intensive care units have the capability to perform 
amplitude-­integrated EEG (aEEG), which is a reduced electrode moni­
toring method that uses time-­compressed baseline trends of two or four 
channels of EEG to allow the bedside practitioner to look for changes 
suspicious for seizure. However, both the sensitivity and specificity of 
aEEG are lower than that of full-­montage conventional EEG: <50% if 
only a single channel of aEEG is available, but up to 76% and 78%, 
respectively, when two channels of raw EEG are available for compari­
son and direct review by expert aEEG interpreters. Conventional EEG 
is recommended over aEEG when both are available; however, the use 
of aEEG is associated with lower total seizure duration in neonates 
compared to no monitoring.
Proper treatment must include a thorough search for the cause of 
the seizures because many conditions necessitate specific treatment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for normal development after neonatal seizures depends 
on the cause of the seizures. Approximately 50% of neonates with sei­
zures develop normally, 30% have neurologic sequelae, and 15–20% 
die. Neonates with seizures caused by CNS infection, hypoglycemia, 
TABLE 39.15  Causes of Neonatal Seizures
Ages 1–4 Days
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Drug withdrawal, maternal drug use of narcotics or barbiturates
Drug toxicity: lidocaine, penicillin
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Acute metabolic disorders
Hypocalcemia
Perinatal asphyxia, small for gestational age
Sepsis
Maternal diabetes, hyperthyroidism, or hypoparathyroidism
Hypoglycemia
Perinatal insults, prematurity, small for gestational age
Maternal diabetes
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Sepsis
Hypomagnesemia
Hyponatremia or hypernatremia
Iatrogenic or inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Inborn errors of metabolism
Galactosemia
Glycine encephalopathy
Urea cycle disorders
Pyridoxine deficiency (must be considered at any age)
Ages 4–14 Days
Infection
Meningitis (bacterial), encephalitis (enteroviral, herpes simplex)
Metabolic disorders
Hypocalcemia
Diet, milk formula
Hypoglycemia, persistent
Inherited disorders of metabolism: galactosemia, fructosemia, leucine 
sensitivity
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Anterior pituitary hypoplasia, pancreatic islet cell tumor
Beckwith syndrome
Drug withdrawal, maternal drug use of narcotics or barbiturates
Benign neonatal convulsions, familial and nonfamilial
Kernicterus, hyperbilirubinemia
Ages 2–8 Wk
Infection
Herpes simplex or enteroviral encephalitis, bacterial meningitis
Head injury
Subdural hematoma, child abuse
Inherited disorders of metabolism
Aminoacidurias, urea cycle defects, organic acidurias
Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
Malformations of cortical development
Lissencephaly
Focal cortical dysplasia
Tuberous sclerosis
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
694
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.16  Inherited Disorders of Metabolism and Neurodegenerative Diseases Associated 
with Seizures in Infants
Disorder
Clinical Features and Laboratory Findings
Investigations
Neonates
These disorders are rare. The clinical features are nonspecific and usually do not distinguish between the 
inherited disorders of metabolism; however, they may suggest that a search for these conditions is warranted:
Metabolic or degenerative disorder in another sibling
Normal immediately after birth with symptoms and signs developing in the first days to weeks of life
Food intolerance; vomiting, diarrhea, not settling after feedings
Lethargy, may become stuporous after feeding
Hypotonia
Seizures; tonic, clonic, subtle neonatal seizures; myoclonus in some disorders
Late signs: weight loss, failure to thrive, psychomotor retardation
Initial investigations in neonatal seizures:
Glucose, urinalysis, ketones
Serum glucose, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, blood urea 
nitrogen, creatinine
Serum ammonia, lactate, and pyruvate
Liver function tests, complete blood cell count, 
arterial blood gas measurements
Lumbar puncture and CSF analysis
EEG
CT or MRI scan may be indicated
Maple syrup urine disease
An unusual maple syrup odor of the urine may be detected; severe 
metabolic acidosis and increased anion gap; urine positive 
for ketones; boiled urine reacts with 2,4-­DNPH to give yellow 
precipitate
Serum amino acid analysis; elevated serum leucine, 
isoleucine, and valine
Organic acidurias
Propionic acid
Methylmalonic acid
Isovaleric acid
Glutaric acid
Hyperammonemia, metabolic acidosis and increased anion gap, 
ketosis, low blood urea nitrogen; secondary elevation of lactate and 
hypoglycemia may be present and secondary carnitine deficiency 
may occur; glycine level may be elevated in these disorders
Thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and anemia
Characteristic body odor in some of these disorders
Urine organic acid analysis
Serum carnitine measurement
Serum acylcarnitine profile
Urea cycle disorders
Hyperammonemia without hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis or 
hematologic abnormalities
Serum ammonia. Plasma amino acids and urine orotic 
acid can help define the specific urea cycle defect
Nonketotic hyperglycinemia d-­glyceric 
acidemia (glycine encephalopathy)
Intractable seizures and severe encephalopathy, often with coma, 
within the first weeks of life; may have the clinical syndrome 
of early myoclonic encephalopathy; myoclonic seizures, burst 
suppression on EEG, severe psychomotor retardation
Elevated urine and plasma glycine levels, normal 
organic acid pattern and ammonia level. Ratio of 
CSF:serum glycine necessary to make the diagnosis
Pyridoxine dependency
No specific clinical features; must be suspected in all neonatal 
seizures without alternative cause and especially in those not 
responding to simple measures
Therapeutic trial of pyridoxine; high dosage must be 
given for a period of weeks
Peroxisomal diseases
Zellweger syndrome
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Refsum disease
Characteristic facies
Neonatal form
Infantile form
Screen with serum very-­long-­chain fatty acid analysis, 
specific measurement of phytanic acid, pristanic 
acid, pipecolic acid, red cell plasmalogens, and 
bile acids for biochemical diagnosis. Molecular 
diagnostics using comprehensive gene panels
Infants
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Metabolic acidosis and increased anion gap, lactic acidosis, with 
normal lactate-­to-­pyruvate ratio (10:20); hyperammonemia may 
be seen; normoglycemic; serum and CSF alanine levels may be 
elevated
Lactate-­to-­pyruvate ratio is normal or elevated
The clinical features are nonspecific: encephalopathy, hypotonia, 
and seizures; intermittent hyperventilation may be present. 
Both these disorders can manifest later in childhood with 
developmental delay and episodic symptoms such as ataxia and 
vomiting
Serum lactate and pyruvate measurement
Serum and CSF amino acids measurement
Biotinidase deficiency
Refractory seizures, rash, alopecia; lactic and organic acidosis
Phenylketonuria
Onset in infancy with developmental delay and seizures; seizures 
occur in about 25%, and the infant may have severe epilepsy 
with West syndrome; deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase 
causes the accumulation of phenylalanine and phenylacetic acid
Nearly 100% identified through newborn screening. 
Plasma amino acids will identify elevated 
phenylalanine in affected individuals
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
695
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.16  Inherited Disorders of Metabolism and Neurodegenerative Diseases Associated 
with Seizures in Infants—cont’d
Disorder
Clinical Features and Laboratory Findings
Investigations
Infants—cont’d
Phenylketonuria variant with biopterin 
deficiency
Hypotonia and seizures develop at or after 6 mo of age; 
generalized motor seizures, erratic myoclonus, and oculogyric 
seizures
Nearly 100% identified through newborn screening. 
Plasma amino acids will identify elevated 
phenylalanine in affected individuals
Tay-­Sachs disease
GM2 gangliosidosis
Abnormalities appear in the first weeks to months of life with 
irritability and acoustic startle or myoclonus, not seizures, in the 
first months; developmental delay and cherry-­red macular spots 
are present; seizures develop in the second year of life; erratic 
myoclonus, focal seizures, and slowing of background rhythms 
on EEG
Blood sample and skin biopsy; hexosaminidase A 
deficiency detectable in blood lymphocytes and 
cultured fibroblasts
Sandhoff disease
GM2 gangliosidosis type II
Similar in phenotype to Tay-­Sachs disease
Hexosaminidase B deficiency detectable in blood 
lymphocytes and cultured fibroblasts
GM1 gangliosidosis
Dysmorphic features; three clinical subtypes, infantile with rapid 
progression in first 6 mo of life, seizures are frequent without 
specific characteristics; cherry-­red spots on the maculae; 
juvenile or late-­onset form (6 mo–3 yr); chronic form (4–30 yr). 
Dysmorphic features and skeletal changes similar to Morquio 
mucopolysaccharide storage disorder
Skin biopsy, blood β-­galactosidase deficiency found in 
blood lymphocytes and cultured fibroblasts
Leigh disease (subacute necrotizing 
encephalopathy)
A clinical syndrome resulting from various abnormalities of 
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
Usually manifesting in infancy with regression of motor 
skills, hypotonia, lethargy, respiratory disorders (typically 
hyperventilation and apnea), and seizures; other features are 
nuclear and supranuclear oculomotor paralysis, brainstem 
dysfunction, choreoathetosis, cerebellar ataxia, and pyramidal 
signs
CSF lactate measurement; MRI of the brain (may show 
midbrain periaqueductal signal abnormalities)
Muscle biopsy for oxidative metabolism analysis and 
DNA studies
Menkes disease
Sex-­linked inheritance on long arm of X chromosome; hypotonia, 
failure to thrive, abnormal temperature regulation, hypothermia 
or hyperthermia, fragile wiry hair, poor pigmentation, 
generalized seizures, often infantile spasms
Deficiency of serum copper and ceruloplasmin
Krabbe disease
Appears before 3–6 mo of age; rigidity develops in an irritable, 
crying infant; opisthotonic posturing of the neck and 
trunk; generalized motor seizures may occur, but must be 
distinguished from tonic spasms; affected children become blind 
with optic atrophy
Skin biopsy and blood galactocerebrosidase deficiency
Angelman syndrome
Developmental delay from birth, characteristic facies, ataxia with 
jerky limb movements, inappropriate laughter (“happy puppet”), 
seizures in 86% of patients
Abnormal methylation of maternally inherited 
imprinted region of chromosome 15q11.2. Four 
known genetic mechanisms can cause Angelman 
syndrome; approximately 70% of cases result from 
de novo maternal deletions involving chromosome 
15q11.2-­q13; approximately 2% result from 
paternal uniparental disomy of 15q11.2-­q13; 
a subset of the remainder result from other 
imprinting defects and pathogenic variants in the 
gene encoding the ubiquitin-­protein ligase E3A 
gene (UBE3A)
Early infantile type of ceroid-­
lipofuscinosis
Batten disease
Severe myoclonus at 3–18 mo; hypotonia, ataxia, impaired vision, 
dementia; diffuse cerebellar and cerebral atrophy on EEG; no 
enzymatic defect identified; diagnosis must be based on clinical 
features and skin biopsy showing ceroid
Skin biopsy, inclusion bodies on electron microscopy 
of peripheral lymphocytes (buffy coat EM), rectal 
biopsy; genetic testing available
Other Rare Metabolic Disorders with Encephalopathy Seizures in Infancy
Glutaric aciduria type II, multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Medium-­chain acyl–CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Canavan–van Bogaert disease
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency
Specific testing based on suspected diagnosis
CoA, coenzyme A; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DNPH, dinitrophenylhydrazine; EM, electron microscopy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
696
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
structural brain malformations, intraventricular hemorrhage, and 
hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy have a higher risk of poor outcome 
due to the prevalence of global brain injury in these conditions. Fifty 
percent of neonates with hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy–related 
seizures develop normally, but fewer than 10% of neonates with sei­
zures and intraventricular hemorrhage develop normally. In contrast, 
those infants with seizures caused by hypocalcemia (in the absence 
of asphyxia), drug withdrawal (from maternal drug use), and focal 
arterial ischemic stroke usually do well, as these are either caused by 
reversible, transient, or focal etiologies. The likelihood of recurrent sei­
zures is 15–30% overall.
The EEG may add prognostic information; neonates with a normal 
background pattern are unlikely to have any neurologic deficits and 
are less likely to have seizures as a cause for their paroxysmal events, 
but persistent severe abnormalities of the background rhythms, such 
as burst-­suppression patterns, suppression of background rhythms, 
and electrocerebral silence, have over 90% chance of a poor outcome, 
including death. Moderate abnormalities of the EEG in the form of 
amplitude asymmetries and patterns immature for the patient’s con­
ceptional age are associated with intermediate outcomes and are of less 
value in isolation from other clinical data; these will require long-­term 
neurologic follow-­up. Table 39.17 lists neonatal and childhood epilep­
tic disorders with a typically good prognosis.
Treatment
The primary treatment for neonatal seizures is the treatment of the 
underlying cause. All neonates with seizures should have a trial of 
pyridoxine and folinic acid treatment if the cause is not identified and 
seizures persist. Some neonates also require treatment with an AED, 
traditionally phenobarbital, but levetiracetam and fosphenytoin are 
also used. Protein binding is lower in neonates than in older children, 
and the speed of hepatic metabolism changes significantly in the first 
few days of life, so frequent serum levels of protein-­bound, hepati­
cally metabolized AEDs such as phenobarbital or fosphenytoin are 
necessary for the first several days of treatment, or when making dose 
adjustments.
At an intravenous loading dose of 18–20 mg/kg, phenobarbital 
should produce a serum level of approximately 18–20 mg/L. A daily 
maintenance dose of 3–5 mg/kg, either administered once daily or in 
two divided doses daily, keeps serum levels in this range. The serum 
level can be increased to 40–60 mg/L with further loading doses before 
consideration of a second drug for persistent seizures.
If a self-­limited or correctable short-­term insult is the cause, the cli­
nician may administer a loading dose with phenobarbital and give no 
maintenance therapy, simply observing for recurrent seizures. Alterna­
tive management would be to administer a loading dose of phenobar­
bital and give maintenance doses throughout an illness or to treat for 
a maximum of 3–6 months if the time during which the child is at risk 
for seizures is uncertain.
Epileptic Syndromes
Benign idiopathic neonatal convulsions, familial and nonfamilial. 
Some neonatal seizures occur in otherwise healthy neonates without 
perinatal risk factors or identifiable causes that remit spontaneously 
and are not followed by developmental delay; these include benign 
idiopathic neonatal convulsions and benign familial neonatal 
convulsions. These are diagnoses of exclusion and a complete work-­up 
for other causes of neonatal seizures must be performed before deciding 
upon these etiologies.
Benign idiopathic neonatal convulsions are common and may 
account for 2–7% of neonatal seizures. The disorder is sometimes 
referred to as fifth-­day fits, although the seizures may begin between 1 
and 7 days of age. The seizures are typically focal and multifocal clonic 
seizures that may, in rare cases, develop into status epilepticus. The 
seizures remit within hours or days. Although normal at the onset of 
seizures, affected neonates may become drowsy and hypotonic during 
the seizures and for a few days after the seizures remit. Long-­term fol­
low-­up data are not yet complete, but the majority of affected children 
appear to have normal psychomotor development and no increased 
risk for the development of epilepsy.
Benign familial neonatal convulsions are less common. There is 
a distinctive family history of transient neonatal seizures that shows 
autosomal dominant inheritance. The onset of seizures is usually 
between 2 and 4 days after birth, but in some cases, onset may occur 
at 1–3 months of age. The neonates are otherwise healthy without risk 
factors for seizures. The seizures are usually brief clonic seizures, but 
some neonates have tonic seizures. This group differs from the nonfa­
milial cases in that the seizures may persist longer, the interictal EEG 
is generally nonspecific, and later seizures occur more frequently in 
approximately 10–15% of children. Abnormalities in two potassium 
channel genes, KCNQ2 on chromosome 20 and KCNQ3 on chromo­
some 8, have been found in some kindreds (see Table 39.4).
Vitamin-­dependent seizures. There are rare metabolic disorders that 
present in the first few days of life with encephalopathy and refractory 
seizures; a smaller percentage of these disorders can be treated with 
TABLE 39.17  Childhood Epileptic 
Syndromes with Generally Good Prognosis
Syndrome
Comment
Benign neonatal familial 
convulsions
Dominant, may be severe and resistant during a 
few days
Febrile or afebrile seizures (benign) occur later in 
a minority
Infantile familial 
convulsions
Dominant, seizures often in clusters (overlap with 
benign partial complex epilepsy of infancy)
Febrile convulsions plus 
syndromes
In some families, febrile and afebrile convulsions 
occur in different members, GEFS+
The old dichotomy between febrile convulsions or 
epilepsy does not always hold
Benign myoclonic 
epilepsy of infancy
Often seizures during sleep, one rare variety with 
reflex myoclonic seizures (touch, noise)
Partial idiopathic epilepsy 
with rolandic spikes
Seizures with falling asleep or on awakening; 
focal sharp waves with centrotemporal location 
on EEG; genetic
Idiopathic occipital partial 
epilepsy
Early childhood form with seizures during 
sleep and ictal vomiting; can occur as status 
epilepticus
Later forms with migrainous symptoms; not 
always benign
Petit mal absence 
epilepsy
Cases with absences only, some have 
generalized seizures; 60–80% full remission
In most cases, absences disappear on therapy 
but there are resistant cases (unpredictable)
Juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy
Adolescence onset, with early morning myoclonic 
seizures and generalized seizures during sleep; 
often history of absences in childhood
GEFS+, generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus.
Modified from Deonna T. Management of epilepsy. Arch Dis Child. 
2005;90:5–9; and Seneviratne U. The prognosis of idiopathic general­
ized epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2012;53(12):2079–2090.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
697
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
early diagnosis and administration of the correct vitamin. Pyridoxine-­
dependent and folinic acid–dependent seizures are two such disorders; 
pyridoxine is essential for amino acid metabolism, and folinic acid is 
necessary for DNA synthesis and repair. Multidisciplinary care with 
a geneticist and a neurologist is ideal for children with these rare 
disorders.
Pyridoxine-­dependent seizure is a rare autosomal recessive dis­
order in which seizures usually appear within the first 3 months of 
life, often within hours of birth, but in rare cases, as late as 2–5 years 
of age. The EEG may show focal, multifocal, and generalized epilep­
tiform activity, and the child is encephalopathic. The seizures (myo­
clonic, GTC, and partial) and EEG discharges disappear over hours 
in response to 100 mg of intravenous pyridoxine (vitamin B6), which 
can be repeated 3–5 times as necessary. The children require long-­term 
pyridoxine, 50–100 mg/day.
Folinic acid–responsive seizures present very similarly to 
pyridoxine-­dependent seizures, with medically intractable, relentless 
seizures of multiple types, often within the first days of life. The seizures 
respond to 2.5–5 mg of folinic acid twice daily.
These are rare disorders, but as they are neurologically devastating 
or fatal if untreated, it is reasonable to administer a trial dose of pyr­
idoxine and/or folinic acid to seizing, encephalopathic infants where 
no other cause has been found for their seizures and encephalopathy. 
If there is a clinical, and ideally electrographic, response to the vitamin 
trial, then it is also reasonable to continue the supplement. Nonethe­
less, even with early diagnosis and treatment, these children may have 
developmental delays.
Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease is a subacute encephalop­
athy syndrome manifest with episodes of dystonia, confusion, seizures, 
and coma that responds to acute and chronic biotin and thiamine ther­
apy. SLC19A3 is the responsible gene.
Structural 
focal 
epilepsy. 
Malformations 
of 
cortical 
development. Disorders of cell migration within the CNS may 
result in profound anatomic abnormalities and dysfunction or a 
spectrum of lesser abnormalities, ranging from focal areas of cortical 
dysgenesis or dysplasia and clinical deficits to subcortical collections 
of neurons (heterotopia) seen only under the microscope. Migrational 
abnormalities are rare but are commonly associated with seizures. 
Although these abnormalities are present from birth, seizures may 
develop at any age.
Lissencephaly, or agyria, is a profound abnormality character­
ized by a smooth brain without development of the normal gyral 
pattern and sulci; there are often large heterotopias in the white 
matter, and neuroimaging studies may reveal the appearance of a 
double cortex.
Hemimegalencephaly is characterized by gross enlargement of one 
hemisphere with no normal cortical development within that hemi­
sphere. More restricted abnormalities may occur in the form of a lim­
ited area of gyral enlargement and distortion called pachygyria.
Schizencephaly refers to unilateral or bilateral clefts in the cerebral 
hemispheres, usually with abnormal arrangement (polymicrogyria) of 
the cortical gray matter lining the clefts.
Porencephaly refers to fluid-­filled cavities within the brain. Poren­
cephalic cysts communicate with both the subarachnoid space and the 
ventricular system and are lined not by cortical gray matter but rather 
by white matter because they result from loss of tissue as a consequence 
of insults, typically infarction or hemorrhage, during development.
Early-­onset generalized epileptic syndromes with encephalopathy. 
Early myoclonic encephalopathy appears in neonates before 2–3 
months of age, usually within the first 2 weeks of life. Myoclonus 
appears at the onset but may be fragmentary. Partial motor seizures, 
massive myoclonus, or infantile spasms may also occur. The EEG 
shows a suppression-­burst pattern that may later evolve into a 
hypsarrhythmic pattern. There is a failure or arrest of psychomotor 
development and a high rate of mortality before 12 months of age. 
A number of patients have an inborn error of metabolism, including 
nonketotic hyperglycinemia, d-­glyceric acidemia, propionic acidemia, 
and methylmalonic acidemia; some have a pathologic genetic variant 
(Table 39.18).
Early epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-­burst EEG 
pattern (Ohtahara syndrome) has an onset during the same period. 
The affected child experiences intractable tonic seizures or epileptic 
spasms, and the EEG shows a suppression-­burst pattern. Affected chil­
dren have a severe encephalopathy, and the prognosis for remission 
from seizures or for normal development is very poor. Many of these 
patients have pathologic gene variants or malformations of cortical 
development (see Table 39.18).
There appear to be neonates in whom the EEG features and clinical 
course of these two syndromes overlap; these syndromes may evolve 
into West syndrome and Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome.
TABLE 39.18  Genetic Variants Associated with Epileptic Encephalopathies
Variant Site
Ohtahara 
Syndrome
EME
West Syndrome
SMEI
Atypical RTT with 
Early Epilepsy
EFMR
ARX
Yes
Yes
CDKL5
Yes
Yes
ErbB4
Yes
MAGI2
Yes
PCDH19
Yes
Yes
PNKP
Yes
Yes
SCN1A
Yes
SLC25 A22
Yes
STXBP1
Yes
Yes
Only epileptic encephalopathy syndromes presenting during infancy are included. Some variants may also be associated with other conditions; for 
example, the SCN1A variant is associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures.
EFMR, epilepsy and cognitive impairment limited to females; EME, early myoclonic encephalopathy; RTT, Rett syndrome; SMEI, severe myoclonic 
epilepsy of infancy (also known as Dravet syndrome).
From Beal JC, Cherian K, Moshe SL. Early-­onset epileptic encephalopathies: Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalopathy. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2012;47:317–323 (Table 2, p. 321).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
698
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Infancy
The paroxysmal disorders of infancy (8 weeks to 2 years) are shown in 
Tables 39.4 and Table 39.19.
Paroxysmal Nonepileptic Disorders
Infantile syncope
Cyanotic infant syncope (breath-­holding spells). Cyanotic infant 
syncope consists of episodes of loss of consciousness followed by tonic 
stiffening in crying infants. The peak incidence is between 6 and 18 
months of age, but it may occur in neonates or in children as old as 6 
years of age. The typical clinical picture is an infant who is frightened, 
frustrated, or surprised; begins to cry vigorously; and then becomes 
apneic and cyanotic before becoming unconscious, stiff, or limp. In rare 
cases, typical infant syncope may evolve into a brief GTC seizure. The 
child regains consciousness rapidly after being positioned horizontally 
or stimulated without a prolonged postictal state, although there may 
be a tendency to sleep.
These episodes have also been called breath-­holding spells, anoxic 
seizures, and convulsive syncope, but cyanotic infant syncope may be a 
better term because the loss of consciousness appears to be the result 
of transient impairment of cerebral perfusion. The subsequent tonic 
posturing in the typical attack is not epileptic but is thought to have the 
same brainstem origin as decerebrate or decorticate posturing.
Cyanotic infant syncope is common and is seen in 4.6% of a large 
cohort of children monitored from birth. A thorough history is usually 
sufficient for diagnosing this condition. The crucial diagnostic point is 
the history of an external event precipitating the episode. The differen­
tial diagnosis is noted in Table 39.20.
Although the spells appear to be unpleasant for the child and can 
be frightening to the parents, they do not result in neurologic sequelae 
and do not necessitate intensive investigation. The child should be eval­
uated for anemia; treatment of iron-­deficiency anemia reduces the fre­
quency of syncopal events. Treatment with carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
or valproate may decrease the frequency or severity of postsyncopal 
convulsions in the rare child with epileptic seizures triggered by the 
anoxic event. Children with known brainstem or posterior fossa mal­
formations may also be at higher risk of prolonged syncope and clin­
ically significant anoxia due to their abnormal respiratory drive, and 
these children may benefit from treatment.
Pallid infant syncope. Pallid infant syncope occurs in response 
to transient cardiac asystole in children with a hypersensitive 
cardioinhibitory reflex. This form is much less common than cyanotic 
syncope but more alarming. There is minimal crying, perhaps only a 
gasp, and no obvious apnea before the loss of consciousness. Again, 
there is a precipitating event; the child appears to lose consciousness 
after minimal injury or fright, collapses limply, and then may have 
posturing and clonic movements before regaining consciousness (see 
Table 39.20).
Pallid infant syncope, if frequent and troublesome or if followed 
by prolonged GTC convulsions, can be treated with atropine, which 
blocks the vagus nerve–mediated asystole. Most affected children 
require no medical treatment.
Hyperekplexia. A startle response is normally seen in children and 
adults in response to sudden, unexpected stimuli. There are two phases 
to a startle response: the initial startle followed by an orienting response 
to locate the stimulus. Hyperekplexia is characterized by an excessive 
startle response interfering with daily living, usually causing patients 
to fall stiffly with preserved consciousness (see Chapter 40). This 
disorder may present as early as infancy with hypertonia and dramatic 
startle responses that do not habituate or extinguish with repeated 
stimuli (meaning they continue to startle, no matter how many times 
a stimulus is given in a short period of time). The excessive startle and 
hypertonia (stiffness) can lead to genuinely life-­threatening apneas and 
breath-­holding spells when startled or upset. Generalized seizures have 
been reported in some cases; intellectual disability and delayed motor 
development occur in patients with complex neurodevelopmental 
disorders. The background EEG is usually normal. There may be some 
improvement with benzodiazepines or valproic acid.
Pathogenic variants in glycine receptors and transporter genes have 
been identified to be causally associated with the phenotype. The spe­
cific genes GLRA1, GLRB, SLC6A5, and ATAD1 have been found in 
TABLE 39.19  Paroxysmal Disorders in 
Infants
Nonepileptiform Disorders
Infantile syncope*
Cyanotic breath-­holding spells
Pallid syncope
Shivering attacks
Paroxysmal torticollis
Extrapyramidal drug reactions, dystonia
Gastroesophageal reflux with dystonia†
Rumination†
Stereotypical movements, autism, Rett syndrome, coexisting deafness and 
blindness†
Withholding, constipation†
Masturbation
Spasmus nutans
Opsoclonus
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Myoclonus
Nonepileptic; anxiety, excitement, acute metabolic encephalopathy
Benign myoclonus of early infancy
Hyperexplexia†
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Sleep disorders*
Jactatio capitis, head banging
Acute Symptomatic Seizures, Occasional Seizures
Febrile convulsions*
Meningitis, encephalitis*
Head injury, child abuse
Poisoning
Intercurrent medical illness, renal and liver disease, cardiac left-­to-­right 
shunt, and embolism
Metabolic disease, rickets
Epileptic Syndromes
Symptomatic focal epilepsy†
West syndrome
Early myoclonic encephalopathy‡
Early infantile encephalopathic epilepsy‡
Malformations of cortical development‡
Neurocutaneous disorders (see Table 39.11)
Tuberous sclerosis
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Incontinentia pigmenti
Epidermal nevus syndrome
Severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (Dravet syndrome and its mimics)
*Common.
†See childhood section for discussion.
‡See neonatal section for discussion.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
699
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
families with an autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance pattern. 
Glycine is a co-­agonist for the N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate (NMDA) recep­
tor, which is an excitatory receptor critical for learning and neuronal 
plasticity. Pontine lesions may be seen in some patients.
Sleep disorders. Also referred to as head banging or rocking, 
jactatio capitis nocturna consists of rhythmic to-­and-­fro movements 
of the head or rocking of the body. It occurs typically at the transition 
from wakefulness to sleep, early in the evening, or after arousal during 
the night. This behavior is quite common, occurring in up to 15% of 
children; it begins in infancy or early childhood but may persist up to 
10 years of age. The child is not awake during the episode and does not 
remember the events, which usually last <15 minutes. In most cases, 
it is sufficient to ensure that the bed area is padded to prevent injury.
Shivering attacks. Shivering or shuddering attacks are brief episodes 
characterized by sudden flexion of the head and trunk associated with 
a rapid tremulous contraction of the musculature. The appearance is 
similar to that of a sudden brief shudder experienced normally when 
exposed to cold. In this condition, the shuddering occurs repeatedly. 
Some infants experience more than 100 brief shudders per day. There 
may be clustering, with intervals of several weeks free of the episodes. 
The child may assume a characteristic posture with flexion of the head, 
trunk, and elbows and adduction of the elbows and knees.
The attacks have been described in children between the ages of 4 
months and 10 years, although most often the onset seems to occur 
in infancy and early childhood. The phenomenon is nonepileptic and 
benign, eventually disappearing. Some children and their relatives have 
been reported to have an essential tremor. The shuddering is faster and 
of lower amplitude than myoclonus and is paroxysmal, not sustained, 
as occurs with a tremor. An important epileptic disorder that must be 
ruled out is infantile spasms.
Paroxysmal torticollis. Torticollis is an abnormal posturing of 
the head and neck, with the head flexed toward the shoulder and 
the neck rotated with the chin turned toward the opposite shoulder. 
The posturing is paroxysmal, although variable in duration, lasting 
minutes or days, and there is no loss of consciousness. Some children 
have associated pallor, agitation, and vomiting, and the disorder has 
been suspected to result from labyrinthine dysfunction, like benign 
paroxysmal vertigo of childhood. The disorder is self-­limited and 
remits in early childhood. There is an association with migraine in 
patients later in life and among their relatives.
In older children, torticollis may occur as a focal dystonia persist­
ing to adulthood. Familial cases have been described, and in some, the 
torticollis may be the earliest manifestation of a more generalized dys­
tonia (see Chapter 40).
Sustained abnormal posturing should prompt appropriate radio­
logic investigations to exclude inflammatory or neoplastic disorders of 
the upper cervical spinal cord, posterior fossa, cervical spine, or soft 
tissues of the neck (particularly a retropharyngeal abscess). In very rare 
cases, gastroesophageal reflux manifests with dystonic posturing of the 
neck and upper trunk. Adverse extrapyramidal reactions to phenothi­
azines and related drugs may produce dystonic posturing of the neck 
and trunk.
The pharmacologic treatment for torticollis includes a number of 
different medication classes, including anticholinergics (trihexyphe­
nidyl), dopamine agonists (pramipexole), nonsteroidal antiinflam­
matory drugs (NSAIDs), baclofen, benzodiazepines (clonazepam), 
and β blockers (propranolol). Botox injections may be used for more 
refractory cases. Physical therapy can also be very helpful. The most 
severe cases can be evaluated for surgical intervention, such as selective 
denervation or sternocleidomastoid release.
TABLE 39.20  Differential Diagnosis of Infantile Syncope
Clinical
Cyanotic Infantile 
Syncope
Pallid Syncope
Tonic-­Clonic Seizures
Infantile Spasms
Age range
1–6 yr; peak, 6–18 mo
1–6 yr
All ages
4–12 mo
Precipitating factors
Present (e.g., minor trauma, 
frustration, fright)
Present (e.g., minor trauma, 
frustration, fright)
Usually none
None
Occurrence in sleep
Never
Never
Common
At transition from awake to 
sleep and sleep to awake
Sequence of events
Crying → exhale; apnea 
→ cyanosis, loss of 
consciousness; opisthotonos 
→ relaxation, resumption of 
breathing
Upset, usually not crying → 
sudden pallor → limp fall with 
fainting → tonic posture, or 
clonic jerks may occur
Sudden loss of consciousness 
→ increased tone, followed 
by synchronous jerking 
of body and limbs → 
unconsciousness; duration, 
1–2 min
Sudden sustained flexion or 
extension of proximal limbs 
and trunk; duration, 2–20 sec; 
seizures usually occur 
multiple times daily
Postictal symptoms
Usually minimal; infant may be 
lethargic and irritable
Usually minimal; quick return 
to normal
Usually marked; 
unconsciousness initially, 
then confusion and lethargy
Rapid return to preictal state
Interictal EEG
Normal
Normal
Frequently abnormal with 
epileptiform discharges
Abnormal background and 
epileptiform discharges
Ictal EEG
Reflects global cerebral 
hypoxia, diffuse rhythmic 
slowing → suppression 
→ slowing with return of 
consciousness
Reflects global cerebral 
hypoxia; diffuse, rhythmic 
slowing → suppression 
→ slowing with return of 
consciousness
EEG seizure patterns; postictal 
diffuse suppression, then 
slowing
High-­amplitude slow transient 
waves → diffuse suppression
Pathophysiology
Respiratory arrest without 
asystole
Vagal bradycardia or temporary 
asystole
Primary CNS event
Primary CNS event, age-­related 
epileptic seizure
CNS, central nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
700
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Infantile masturbation. Episodes of genital self-­stimulation may 
occur in young children. Toddlers may assume stereotyped posturing 
with tightening of the thighs or applied pressure to the suprapubic 
or pubic area not associated with manual stimulation of the vulva or 
rhythmic movements. The episodes vary in duration from minutes to 
hours and are often accompanied by irregular breathing, facial flushing, 
and diaphoresis, and the child may be irritated and cry if interrupted. A 
thorough history or a video of the episodes may be sufficient to make 
this diagnosis.
Spasmus nutans. Spasmus nutans is a rare disorder usually of 
unknown origin characterized by nystagmoid eye movements, head 
nodding, and torticollis. Head nodding may develop before the 
nystagmus and can be horizontal, vertical, or mixed. Both the head 
movements and the nystagmus may be paroxysmal, allowing confusion 
with seizures. There is no loss of consciousness during an episode. 
Small-­amplitude rapid eye movements are typical; they tend to be 
asymmetric between the eyes and may even be monocular. The eye 
movements vary in prominence with different directions of gaze.
This is usually a self-­limited disorder with onset between 4 and 18 
months of age and not persisting after age 3 years, although nystag­
mus alone may persist in some children. Investigations should include 
imaging of the brain with special focus on the optic nerves, optic chi­
asma, and brainstem, because some cases have been associated with 
CNS tumors.
Benign paroxysmal vertigo. Benign paroxysmal vertigo may 
be confused with seizures because attacks develop suddenly, are 
accompanied by ataxia, and may cause the infant or young child to fall. 
There is pallor, distress, and assumption of a motionless, often supine, 
position, but no loss of consciousness; older children can recall the 
event. There may be vomiting with associated nystagmus. Attacks last 
seconds to minutes and vary in frequency, sometimes occurring daily. 
Older children can identify symptoms of nausea and vertigo and are 
less likely to be thought to be experiencing seizures. The children are 
normal between attacks. The condition is closely related to migraine, 
with many shared symptoms and the later development of more typical 
migrainous headache (see Chapter 34).
Benign myoclonus of early infancy. This uncommon syndrome 
may resemble the cryptogenic form of infantile spasms at onset, with 
bilateral myoclonic jerks developing in a previously normal infant. 
However, this is a benign, probably nonepileptic condition occurring 
in infants 3–8 months of age and disappearing after a period of weeks 
or months. The pattern of myoclonus may differentiate it from infantile 
spasms, including predominant involvement of the head, neck, and 
upper limbs with adversive head movements or tremors without 
involving the lower limbs. The EEG is normal. Myoclonic movements 
are not accompanied by an EEG seizure pattern. These abnormal 
movements may necessitate monitoring to establish a nonepileptic 
diagnosis. There is no arrest of normal development or regression as 
is seen in West syndrome. Most important, the myoclonus remits, 
not persisting after 2 years of age, and there is increased risk for other 
seizure patterns after its cessation.
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood. Alternating hemiplegia 
of childhood is a rare syndrome of episodic hemiplegia that usually 
manifests in infancy with the following diagnostic criteria:
 1. Onset before age 18 months, often before age 6 months
 2. Recurrent episodes of fluctuating hemiparesis or hemiplegia affect­
ing both sides of the body and disappearing during sleep
 3. Other paroxysmal phenomena: tonic seizures, dystonic posturing, 
choreoathetosis, nystagmus, and other paroxysmal oculomotor 
disturbances; and autonomic dysfunction, occurring during or 
between hemiplegic episodes
 4. Progressive cognitive and neurologic deficits
The pathophysiologic mechanism remains unknown, although 
there are reports of mitochondrial dysfunction in some cases and an 
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance in others (see Chapter 
37). The differential diagnosis includes paroxysmal choreoathetosis 
and dystonia syndromes, familial hemiplegic migraine, transient 
ischemic attacks associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities 
such as moyamoya disease or cardiac emboli, mitochondrial disor­
ders, hyperviscosity, sickle cell anemia crises, inherited disorders 
of metabolism (pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and Leigh dis­
ease), and epileptic seizures with postictal paralysis. Symptomatic 
treatment is available with calcium channel blockers; flunarizine is 
the one commonly cited in the literature but is not available in the 
United States or Japan. An alternative calcium channel blocker would 
be nimodipine.
There have been case reports of a similar-­appearing disorder 
with nocturnal paroxysmal events of flaccid hemiplegia lasting up to 
several hours at a time. The key differentiating factors are that these 
children are essentially normal prior to diagnosis, the events occur 
during sleep, and the children appear to outgrow these spells by mid-­
childhood without significant long-­term neurologic sequelae. This is 
known as benign nocturnal alternating hemiplegia of childhood. 
No consistent gene variants have been associated with this disorder, 
and there is no consistent response to antiepileptics or calcium chan­
nel blockers.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Febrile convulsions. Febrile convulsions are common and are 
defined as seizures occurring between the ages of 6 months and 5 years 
in association with a fever in the absence of intracranial infection. 
Patients with a history of previous afebrile seizures are not included 
in the affected population. The temperature elevation is variable. The 
highest incidence of febrile convulsions occurs between 1 and 2 years 
of age, and 85% of febrile convulsions occur before the age of 4 years. 
The incidence is between 2% and 5%; it is slightly more common in 
males.
The seizures are usually brief with generalized clonic or tonic-­clonic 
motor involvement without any postictal paralysis or a prolonged post­
ictal state of confusion or drowsiness. The seizures generally occur well 
within the first 24 hours of a febrile illness, not necessarily when the 
fever is highest; they may be the first indication of illness. Complex 
febrile convulsions are defined as those lasting longer than 15 min­
utes, recurring during a single febrile illness, having unilateral or focal 
features, or followed by postictal paralysis. Seizures occurring late in 
a febrile illness should raise suspicions of encephalitis, brain abscess, 
or meningitis. Febrile delirium and even rigors may be mistaken for 
seizure activity.
The initial investigation must include a search for the cause of the 
febrile illness. For this diagnosis, it is essential that primary CNS infec­
tion be ruled out as the cause of both the fever and the seizures. A 
lumbar puncture is recommended in children younger than 12 months 
of age if there is any suspicion of intracranial infection, and when fea­
tures of the seizure or postictal state suggest a focal or lateralized sei­
zure. Herpes simplex encephalitis in particular should be considered 
in children presenting with evidence of encephalitis and focal seizures. 
CT, MRI, and EEG may be part of the work-­up if an underlying CNS 
infection is suspected or a neurologic deficit has been revealed by the 
history or examination.
However, if the history is consistent with a febrile seizure, the child 
is in the appropriate age range and is developmentally normal, a fever 
has been documented, and an obvious source of infection has been 
found, extensive investigations are unnecessary. Many clinicians would 
not perform a lumbar puncture or obtain an EEG in an otherwise 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
701
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
healthy child with an uncomplicated febrile seizure over the age of 2 
years who has an obvious source of infection such as otitis media or a 
urinary tract infection.
Treatment of a child still in convulsion on arrival at the hospital 
should include prompt attention to protection of the airway and cir­
culation. Giving acetaminophen rectally should lower the fever. Nasal 
or rectal diazepam or intravenous lorazepam should be administered 
if the child has been seizing for more than 10 minutes. Some children 
may require hospital admission. The family should be advised that 
future fevers with temperatures above 38°C (100.4°F) may be treated 
with regular acetaminophen or ibuprofen to make the child more com­
fortable; however, this does not guarantee that future febrile convul­
sions will be prevented, even if the parents respond to the first elevated 
temperature.
There is no increased rate of mortality from true febrile convul­
sions, and the cognitive and neurologic development can be expected 
to be normal after a simple febrile convulsion. However, approximately 
30% of febrile convulsions recur in future febrile illness, and the par­
ents should be warned of this. Recurrence is most likely in the first 
6–12 months after the initial febrile convulsion. Other factors that 
increase the chance of recurrence are onset at a young age, pre-­existing 
neurologic abnormalities, and family history of epilepsy or febrile 
convulsions.
Most authorities would advise no treatment for almost all children 
with febrile convulsions. Rare exceptions include children presenting 
with prolonged (>15 minutes) seizures and children younger than 12 
months old with multiple recurrences. For children with recurrent 
prolonged febrile seizures, rectal diazepam could be considered as an 
abortive therapy. Children with recurrent episodes of febrile status 
epilepticus, particularly starting under 1 year of age, with focal fea­
tures, or associated with any insidious neurologic or cognitive decline, 
should be referred to a neurologist for further evaluation, particularly 
for sodium channelopathies such as Dravet syndrome or generalized 
epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) (Tables 39.4 and 39.21). 
Informing and reassuring parents of the benign nature and usual 
course of febrile convulsions are very important and may be of greater 
value than any medication.
There appears to be an increased risk of epilepsy among chil­
dren with febrile convulsions. Overall, the risk is approximately 
3%. Risk factors increasing the likelihood of future epilepsy include 
existence of a prior neurologic abnormality, prolonged convul­
sions (>30 minutes), focal or lateralized features of the seizure, and 
repeated convulsions within 24 hours. The incidence of epilepsy 
increases from 3% of those without risk factors to 49% of those with 
three risk factors. Risk factors for epilepsy with generalized seizures 
are more than three febrile seizures and epilepsy in a first-­degree 
relative, which suggests that febrile convulsions in these individuals 
may be a manifestation of an increased predisposition to epilepsy. 
For epilepsy with focal seizures, the risk factors are prolonged con­
vulsions, focal features of the seizure, and repeated seizures within 
24 hours, which suggest either a causative role of febrile convul­
sions in partial epilepsy or a pre-­existing brain lesion. The number 
of recurrences of febrile seizures has not been shown to be a risk 
factor for later epilepsy. There is no evidence that AED treatment 
of febrile seizures affects the risk for later development of afebrile 
seizures.
Epileptic Syndromes
West syndrome. 
 • Peak presentation: ages 4–8 months.
 • Red flags: daily clusters of brief hiccupping or startle-­type seizures, 
particularly upon waking up or falling asleep. Developmental 
regression.
 • Acuity: emergent to urgent; ideally obtain an EEG within a week and 
call a neurologist if this diagnosis is suspected. Must be managed by 
a neurologist due to atypical treatment needs (adrenocorticotropic 
hormone [ACTH]), which may require hospital admission.
 • Prognosis: generally poor, particularly if the diagnosis is missed.
TABLE 39.21  Paroxysmal Disorders of 
Childhood
Nonepileptiform Disorders
Breath-­holding spells*,†
Syncope‡
Migraine and migraine equivalents, recurrent abdominal pain, cyclic vomiting*
Tic*
Spasmodic torticollis†
Drug reactions, dystonia
Paroxysmal choreoathetosis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Benign paroxysmal vertigo†
Myoclonus, nonepileptic; anxiety, excitement, acute metabolic encephalopathy†
Hyperexplexia
Masturbation†
Withholding, constipation*
Daydreaming, staring spells*
Stereotypical movements, autism, coexistent deafness and blindness
Factitious syndrome by proxy (Munchausen syndrome by proxy)
Hyperventilation‡
Psychogenic seizures‡
Transient global amnesia‡
Sleep*
Head banging, jactatio capitis†
Pavor nocturnus
Somnambulism, somniloquy
Acute Symptomatic Seizures, Occasional Seizures
Febrile convulsions*
Brain tumor
Meningitis, encephalitis
Head injury, child abuse
Poisoning
Intercurrent medical illness; renal, liver disease; cardiac right-­to-­left shunt; 
and embolism
Metabolic disease, rickets
Epileptic Syndromes
Benign partial epilepsies*
Symptomatic focal epilepsy*
Epilepsia partialis continua
Rasmussen encephalitis
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy
Epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-­and-­wave pattern during sleep
Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (benign rolandic epilepsy)
Hemiconvulsion hemiplegia syndrome
Childhood absence epilepsy*
Epilepsy with myoclonic absences
Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome
Epilepsy with myoclonic atonia (previously astatic) seizures (Doose syndrome)
Landau-­Kleffner syndrome
Febrile seizures plus 
Panayiotopoulos syndrome
*Common.
†See infant section for discussion.
‡See adolescent section for discussion.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
702
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
West syndrome, or severe encephalopathic epilepsy in infants, 
is characterized by infantile spasms, the hypsarrhythmic EEG pat­
tern, and developmental delay. It is a severe and devastating form of 
epilepsy, usually with evidence of diffuse cerebral dysfunction and a 
poor prognosis in most cases. The incidence is about 1/4,000–6,000 
infants with onset between 3 and 12 months of age; peak onset is 4–8 
months.
A spasm is a brief bilateral tonic contraction of the muscles of the 
trunk, neck, and limbs, usually but not always symmetric. These sei­
zures are commonly overlooked by both families and physicians for 
weeks to months; they can be confused for hiccupping, startling, or 
the Moro reflex, or be subtle enough to be missed entirely. They classi­
cally occur in multiple daily clusters lasting 10–15 minutes, with each 
cluster containing anywhere from a few spasms to dozens. The clus­
ters occur during the transitions between wakefulness and sleep, so 
are most common in the early morning and evening, or occasionally 
around naptimes.
The extent of muscle involvement varies from a powerful contrac­
tion that jackknifes the body to minimal contraction of truncal muscles 
that causes only stiffening. Spasms may involve truncal flexion, exten­
sion, or both; the child may fling out their arms or elevate them for sev­
eral seconds. Eye movements are commonly associated with the spasm, 
either as deviation or as repetitive nystagmoid upward jerks. Apnea is 
common, but tachypnea is uncommon. Children may cry out or seem 
to giggle at the end of the spasm.
As the spasms continue, there may be insidious loss of developmen­
tal motor milestones such as sitting, rolling, babbling, or head control. 
Another commonly described regression is a decline in visual atten­
tiveness, meaning that the child no longer easily regards faces, tracks 
moving objects, or reaches for toys. This is due to the progressive corti­
cal dysfunction caused by the underlying hypsarrhythmic EEG pattern.
The differential diagnosis can include colic, exaggerated Moro 
reflexes, or normal myoclonic jerks on falling asleep or waking. Mul­
tiple myoclonic seizure syndromes, both benign and otherwise, occur 
in this age group and must be distinguished from infantile spasms by 
a neurologist.
Evaluation: EEG, MRI. The term hypsarrhythmia in an EEG report 
is specific for a diagnosis of infantile spasms. The hypsarrhythmic EEG 
pattern is a high-­amplitude, chaotic slowing of generalized distribution 
without interhemispheric synchronization and with multifocal 
epileptiform discharges throughout. Hypsarrhythmia is more frequent 
in younger infants and early in the course of the disorder, and it is more 
common to find some modified variant of it. In a child with a strong 
clinical suspicion of infantile spasms, sleep must be captured in the 
EEG, as early in the course, the hypsarrhythmic pattern is only evident 
during sleep.
Investigation of patients with infantile spasms is directed at deter­
mining the cause and then determining whether there is an underly­
ing genetic, structural, or metabolic etiology. Infantile spasms can be 
caused by a wide variety of neurologic pathology; the most common 
etiologic factor is perinatal hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy. Other 
important associations include intrauterine infection, prematurity, 
intracranial hemorrhage, malformations of cortical development, 
tuberous sclerosis, head injury, CNS infection, and inborn errors of 
metabolism. If infantile spasms are seen in conjunction with agenesis 
of the corpus callosum and retinal abnormalities on eye examination, 
this suggests a diagnosis of Aicardi syndrome. Genes associated with 
West syndrome are noted in Table 39.18.
Approximately 95% of children with an identified cause (structural, 
genetic, or metabolic) have a prognosis of moderate to severe neuro­
logic injury, including refractory epilepsy, cognitive impairment, or 
permanent developmental sequelae.
Approximately 10–15% of patients have no identifiable underlying 
cause and a history of normal development before the onset of their 
illness; this subset is referred to as cryptogenic, or idiopathic, West syn­
drome. This subset of patients is likely to have a much better long-­term 
outcome: 38% of these patients are normal or mildly impaired, in com­
parison with only 5% of symptomatic patients.
A unique subset of patients who may develop infantile spasms is 
children with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). The incidence of infan­
tile spasms in this group is 1–5%. Though they have a genetic disorder 
and baseline neurologic abnormalities, these children have a particu­
larly high response rate to treatment with ACTH with rapid resolution 
of the abnormal hypsarrhythmia on EEG.
About 50% of all infants with West syndrome go on to have other 
seizure types when spasms cease. Persistence of the epilepsy in most 
of the patients is associated with loss of the spasms and development 
of other seizure types, such as tonic seizures, focal seizures, and tonic-­
clonic seizures. Approximately half of children with Lennox-­Gastaut 
syndrome, a combination of cognitive disability, generalized seizures, 
and a distinctive abnormal EEG pattern, have a history of infantile 
spasms. Seizures very similar in appearance to infantile spasms (brief 
myoclonic or tonic seizures occurring in clusters) may recur later in 
childhood, and these are referred to as epileptic spasms.
Treatment with corticosteroids aborts the spasms in a significant 
number of infants. There are two approaches: intramuscular injections 
of synthetic ACTH gel or high-­dose oral steroids. Both treatment reg­
imens generally last 8–12 weeks, and both require frequent monitor­
ing for side effects. The spasms should cease, and the EEG patterns 
improve if the child has responded. The pediatrician may be called 
upon to monitor electrolytes, blood pressures, or signs of illness while 
the child is under treatment. Live vaccinations are generally held for 
6–12 months after a course of immunomodulatory therapy.
Vigabatrin is another effective AED for infantile spasms, and it has 
been shown to be particularly effective in the treatment of infantile 
spasms with tuberous sclerosis or other focal cortical dysplasias. How­
ever, this medication is currently strictly regulated in its prescription, 
and patients on vigabatrin require examinations by an ophthalmologist 
every 3 months due to the small risk of permanent peripheral vision 
loss with prolonged use of the medication. Most patients with infantile 
spasms take vigabatrin for 6 months or less.
Many other antiepileptic medications, including topiramate, lam­
otrigine, valproic acid, cannabidiols, and benzodiazepines, have had 
some efficacy in isolated cases, but this response is unpredictable. 
ACTH, corticosteroids, and vigabatrin are the commonly used medi­
cations with the highest efficacy across multiple etiologies.
Severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (Dravet syndrome). 
 • Peak presentation: ages 9–18 months
 • Red flags: normal development until the onset of multiple episodes 
of prolonged febrile status epilepticus, often with focal features; sei­
zures provoked by warm ambient temperatures, hot baths, fever, or 
vaccinations
 • Acuity: urgent due to the development of medically refractory epi­
lepsy and potential for multiple episodes of status epilepticus
 • Prognosis: poor; identified cause of some cases of so-­called vaccine 
encephalopathy
Severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy is a rare, generalized epilepsy 
appearing in the first year of life. The syndrome differs from the myo­
clonic syndromes already described (early myoclonic encephalopathy 
and early infantile encephalopathic epilepsy) by its later onset and the 
EEG findings. Pathogenic variants in the voltage-­gated sodium channel 
gene SCN1A and other genes are seen frequently in these cases (see 
Table 39.4, Fig. 39.7). Although SCN1A variants are highly associated 
with the Dravet phenotype, some patients with these variants do not 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
703
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
fit the full diagnostic criteria for Dravet syndrome: some manifest as 
genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+). In addition, multi­
ple other genes overlap with the Dravet phenotype (see Fig. 39.7).
The child may initially present with febrile or afebrile seizures, usu­
ally with normal prior psychomotor development preceding the onset 
of seizures, and often with a family history of epilepsy. The seizures 
are generalized or unilateral clonic seizures; myoclonic seizures appear 
later (and may not be a major feature of the disorder, despite the name), 
between 8 months and 4 years of age; and focal seizures and atypical 
absences may occur. The interictal EEG may be normal initially and 
only later show fast, generalized, spike-­and-­wave epileptiform dis­
charges and focal abnormalities.
The seizures are usually refractory to many commonly used AEDs 
due to the fact that these AEDs act on sodium channels and this dis­
order is generally caused by sodium channel mutations. Antiepilep­
tic medications that may worsen seizures or be ineffective in Dravet 
syndrome include phenytoin, lamotrigine, carbamazepine, oxcarbaze­
pine, and vigabatrin. The natural history, disease progression, and age-­
related manifestations are noted in Figure 39.8.
Childhood
The paroxysmal disorders of childhood (2–12 years) are given in Table 
39.21.
Paroxysmal Nonepileptic Disorders
Migraine and migraine equivalents. Migraine is a common 
disorder, and some episodes may be confused with seizures because 
of their paroxysmal nature and association with neurologic deficits or 
altered consciousness (see Chapter 34). The presentation of migraines 
in children may also be markedly different than that in adolescents 
and adults; “migraine equivalents” are paroxysmal disorders that are 
strongly associated with the later development of migraines and may 
share similar underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms.
When evaluating paroxysmal events suspected to be migraines or 
migraine equivalents, the following red flags should prompt expedited 
neuroimaging, specialist evaluation, or emergency room evaluation, 
depending upon the severity of the symptom and how ill the child appears:
 • Sudden severe head pain that awakens the child from sleep
 • Positional symptoms, meaning that the child’s headache or vom­
iting dramatically worsens or improves with simple positional 
changes from lying to sitting
 • Abnormal eye movements, such as prominent nystagmus (jerky eye 
movements) or a forced downward gaze
 • Focal neurologic symptoms including focal limb weakness or facial 
droop
 • Altered mental status
In cyclic vomiting, recurrent attacks of nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain occur on a daily or weekly basis without any evidence 
of intercurrent illness or objective evidence of gastrointestinal pathol­
ogy. There is no confusion or disorientation associated with these 
spells. Typically, there are symptom-­free intervals lasting weeks to 
months, and recurrence is unpredictable. There may be a strong family 
history of migraine, and there appears to be some overlap of the cyclic 
vomiting with migraine.
SCN2A
SCN8A
SCN1B
HCN1
KCNA2
GABRA1
GABRG2
Dravet syndrome
phenotype
SCN1A
PCDH19
CHD2
STXBP1
SCN9A
Fig. 39.7  Genes associated with a Dravet syndrome phenotype. Red, sodium channels; green, potassium 
channels; purple, chloride channels; blue, nonchannels. (From Steel D, Symonds JD, Zuberi SM, et al. Dravet 
syndrome and its mimics: beyond SCN1A. Epilepsia. 2017;58[11]:1807–1816 [Fig. 1, p. 1812].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
704
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Tic disorders. 
 • Peak presentation: age 5–7 years
 • Classical features: no alteration of awareness, stereotyped behav­
iors, a sensation of “compulsion” to perform the behavior and 
“relief” once it is completed
 • Acuity: low
 • Prognosis: excellent, although disabling tics and psychiatric comor­
bidities should be addressed, if present
Tics are common and are sudden, brief, purposeless involuntary 
movements or vocalizations that occur during wakefulness only; chil­
dren may describe a sense of compulsion and can briefly suppress the 
behavior but have a sense of relief when performing the suppressed 
action (Table 39.22) (see Chapter 40). Children may have phonic 
tics (such as tongue clicking or throat clearing), motor tics (such as 
blinking, sniffing, or shrugging), or any combination of both. Tics are 
treated when they become disruptive, socially unacceptable, or phys­
ically uncomfortable, but otherwise they are considered benign and 
normally do not require pharmacologic treatment. Common comor­
bidities that should be screened for include anxiety, attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and obsessive-­compulsive disorder.
They often become noticeable in early grade school years, around 
the time that some children start stimulant medications for ADHD. 
This temporal association has led to the misconception that the stimu­
lant medications have caused the tics.
α2-­Agonists such as clonidine are common first-­line treatments for 
disruptive or disabling tics; more severe tics can be treated with atypi­
cal antipsychotics such as risperidone.
Tourette syndrome is diagnosed when a child has had multiple 
motor tics and at least one phonic tic present for longer than 1 year. 
Other tic disorders can be purely motor or purely phonic and are clas­
sified according to their symptoms and duration (transient vs chronic).
Table 39.22 outlines some of the clinical features of episodic abnor­
mal movements that may appear in children.
Sleep disorders. 
 • Peak presentation: age 2–7 years
 • Classical features: occurring a few hours after falling asleep 
(“around midnight”), nonstereotyped behaviors, screaming, agita­
tion, and inconsolability despite being apparently awake, no mem­
ory of frightening imagery
 • Acuity: low
 • Prognosis: excellent, although children with frequent episodes may 
need to be monitored by their parents to prevent injury during a 
panicked state
Night terrors and confusional arousals. Night terrors are a 
common phenomenon in children and are most frequent in boys 
aged 5–7 years. Up to 15% of children younger than 7 years have 
experienced some form of these episodes. The attacks are characterized 
by sudden arousal from sleep, often screaming in terror, and then 
crying with agitation and tachycardia. There may be vigorous and 
potentially injurious motor activity in older children, such as running 
or hitting the bed or wall. The striking feature of these episodes is 
that the child is inconsolable but seemingly awake. The episodes arise 
out of slow-­wave non–rapid eye movement sleep, usually occurring 
1–2 hours after bedtime, and are not responses to dream imagery 
FSz*
10%
3m
Stage 1
<< Febrile stage >>
Stage 2
<< Worsening stage >>
Stage 3
<< Stabilization stage >>
6m
12m
2y
4y
8y
16y
32y
Age
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Incidence
SE
HS
GMS°
MSz
DD
AA
OS
Ataxia
CG
SUDEP
CPS**
AE
Fig. 39.8  Schematic representation of clinical manifestations of Dravet syndrome and their relative incidence 
according to age. *Moderate fever for 60%; mostly clonic generalized and unilateral motor seizures. **Diffi­
cult distinction between atypical absences and complex partial seizures without ictal EEG recording, so their 
precise incidence is unknown. °Including generalized tonic-­clonic and unilateral seizures. However, unilateral 
seizures are less frequent after the age of 7 years, whereas sleep seizures increase after 6–7 years and 
become predominant after the age of 9–10 years. AA, atypical absences; AE, acute encephalopathy; CG, 
crouching gait; CPS, complex partial seizures; DD, developmental delay; FSz, complex febrile seizures; GMS, 
generalized motor seizures; HS, hyperthermia sensitivity; MSz, myoclonic seizures; OS, obtundation status; 
SE, convulsive status epilepticus; SUDEP, sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. (From Gataullina S, Dulac O. 
From genotype to phenotype in Dravet disease. Seizure. 2017;44:58–64 [Fig. 1, p. 59].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
705
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
(i.e., not nightmares). Episodes last several minutes. Prior sleep 
deprivation, febrile illness, emotional stress, and some medications 
(sedatives/hypnotics, neuroleptics, stimulants, antihistamines) may be 
precipitants. In contrast to the experience of nightmares, children are 
amnestic for the events and their distress in night terrors.
Confusional arousals are less dramatic attacks with similar origin 
from slow-­wave sleep and are more typical in younger children. The 
affected child stirs and begins crying and whimpering inconsolably. 
These arousals may be prolonged in infants, lasting up to 30–40 minutes.
There is no specific treatment for these events; parents should be 
educated about the nature of these arousals and reassured that they are 
self-­limited.
The most important mimic of parasomnias is nocturnal seizures. 
Nocturnal frontal lobe seizures occur during sleep and can have 
bizarre hypermotor behaviors such as rolling, turning, picking, yell­
ing, and fumbling. In school-­aged children, benign rolandic epilepsy 
manifests itself as seizures when coming out of sleep with gurgling, 
salivation, hemifacial and hemibody twitching, and often partially 
preserved consciousness of the event. Important distinguishing histor­
ical factors between seizures and parasomnias are the time of onset 
(seizures: shortly after falling asleep or early in the morning), duration 
(most seizures last 1–2 minutes, and parasomnias can have a signifi­
cantly longer duration), and any associated tongue bite, urinary incon­
tinence, or insidious behavioral or developmental regression.
Somnambulism. Somnambulism, or sleepwalking, is common 
in childhood. Approximately 15% of children have walked in their 
sleep, especially in the 2–3-­year-­old age group, and 2.5% are habitual 
sleepwalkers, having episodes at least once a month. The age at onset 
peaks between 4 and 10 years. There is a family history of sleepwalking 
and other parasomnias in 60–80% of patients. These episodes of 
apparent unresponsiveness and “automatisms” could be mistaken for 
focal dyscognitive seizures or a postictal state.
Self-­stimulatory behavior/stereotypies. Repetitive purposeless 
movements may be performed by children on the autism spectrum or 
with cognitive disabilities. Combined with unresponsiveness, these 
behaviors may be mistaken for automatisms in focal dyscognitive 
seizures. The important features that distinguish such behavior 
from epileptic activity are the setting in which it occurs, the variable 
content and duration of the “attacks,” and the complete failure of the 
episodes to interrupt more stimulating activities. However, it may be 
very difficult to determine the nature of the episodes by interview; 
video and EEG monitoring may be required. These behaviors are 
not harmful and may provide soothing sensory input to the child 
performing them.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Febrile convulsions remain one of the most common causes of occa­
sional seizures in early childhood. Head injury is more common in 
TABLE 39.22  Abnormal Involuntary Movements
Movement
Characteristics
Associations
Tics
Brief involuntary movements (motor tics) or sounds (phonic or vocal tics) occurring against a background 
of normal motor activity
Tics may be simple, sudden brief movements such as shrugging a shoulder, blinking, or grimacing; or 
complex, more coordinated movements that might appear purposeful, such as hitting or touching
Snorting, sniffing, or throat clearing are examples of simple phonic tics, and short utterances, echolalia, 
or coprolalia are complex phonic tics
Idiopathic tic disorders
Tourette syndrome
Tremor
Movements caused by rhythmically alternating contractions of a muscle group and its antagonists
The movements may involve proximal and axial muscles
Classified as resting, postural, or action tremors according to the response to these maneuvers
Physiologic tremor, essential tremor
Chorea
Random brief limb movements of variable duration; these can be incorporated into voluntary 
movements by the patient
SLE
Wilson disease
Rheumatic fever
Autoimmune encephalitis
Postinfectious
Athetosis
Slow writhing movements of the extremities, often distal extremities
The movements are random
Often involuntary movements of this type have some features of chorea and are termed choreoathetoid
Kernicterus
Dystonia
Sustained muscle co-­contraction of agonist and antagonist muscle groups, frequently causing twisting 
and repetitive movements or abnormal postures
The velocity of the movements varies, usually being sustained at the height of the involuntary 
contraction for 1 sec or longer
The duration also varies in different syndromes; in spasmodic torticollis, there may be rhythmic jerks or 
spasms into the abnormal posture
Subclassified by extent (focal, segmental, multifocal, and generalized) and relationship to movement 
(action and rest)
Idiopathic (inherited) syndromes
Postlesional syndromes
Myoclonus
Rapid brief muscle jerks with an irregular or occasionally rhythmic quality
Encephalopathies
Can be epileptic or nonepileptic in origin
Idiopathic and symptomatic epilepsies
Ballismus
Wild, large-­amplitude, irregular limb movements
Postlesional
Asterixis
Repetitive movements caused by sudden, brief, irregular lapses in posture of an extremity
Metabolic encephalopathies
Dyskinesia
Sometimes used as a general term to describe abnormal involuntary movements
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
706
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
childhood than in infancy, but the list of other potential causes of sei­
zures, including brain tumor, intracranial infection, and poisoning, is 
very similar. In addition, some metabolic and neurodegenerative disor­
ders manifest in childhood, not in infancy (Table 39.23).
Epileptic Syndromes
Benign partial epilepsies of childhood. Focal seizures and focal 
EEG discharges usually suggest the presence of a localized cerebral 
lesion. There is a group of idiopathic partial epilepsies beginning 
in children without abnormalities on neurologic examination or 
neuroimaging studies, and frequently, with a family history of epilepsy. 
The benign partial epilepsies of childhood (BPECs) are characterized 
by focal seizures and focal epileptiform discharges, both with age-­
dependent spontaneous recovery, in the absence of anatomic lesions.
Clinically, the seizures begin between 18 months and 12 years of 
age, most often at 8–10 years; there is no neurologic deficit or develop­
mental delay. The seizures are brief and stereotyped in an individual, 
although they vary among patients. The seizures do not have a pro­
longed postictal deficit, are usually infrequent, and respond well to 
AED treatment. The focal epileptiform discharges occur with normal 
background rhythms. The sharp waves or spikes have a characteristic 
structure and are often very frequent, increasing during sleep. Rare 
generalized epileptiform discharges may occur, but if they are prom­
inent, the diagnosis of BPEC should be questioned.
TABLE 39.23  Inherited Disorders of Metabolism and Neurodegenerative Diseases Associated 
with Seizures in Childhood and Adolescence
Name
Clinical Features and Laboratory Findings
Investigations
Syndrome of Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy
Multiple specific disorders cause the clinical syndrome of PME
Prominent myoclonus: irregular repetitive, spontaneous or with action, stimulus sensitive
Associated seizure types: usually tonic-­clonic, but also tonic, absence, and partial seizures
Progressive neurologic deterioration, with prominent ataxia and other motor signs developing later
Progressive dementia, varying in degree between the specific disorders
Most Cases Are Caused by the Following Five Disorders:
Unverricht-­Lundborg
Onset, ages 8–15 yr; myoclonus and GTC seizures, cerebellar ataxia, slowly 
progressive but mild cognitive decline; patients have long survival in 
comparison to other disorders in this group
Chromosome 21q22; cystatin B variants
Clinical diagnosis must exclude other causes of PME 
syndrome
Myoclonus epilepsy and ragged 
red fibers (MERRF)
Onset, ages 5–12 yr (range, 3–62 yr); myoclonus, GTC seizures, progressive 
ataxia, dementia
Other features include deafness, optic atrophy, neuropathy, myopathy, 
pyramidal signs, dysarthria, and nystagmus
There may be clinical overlap with other mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathies: mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic 
acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS) and Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
Serum and CSF lactate and pyruvate measurements
Muscle biopsy; light microscopy, electron microscopy 
(EM), biochemical analysis of oxidative metabolism, 
and DNA studies
Lafora body disease
Onset, ages 10–19 yr; generalized clonic, GTC, and partial seizures with 
visual auras; myoclonus develops later and becomes very disabling; 
severe dementia; death within 5 yr of disease onset
Lafora bodies (intracellular amyloid inclusions) are found in skin, muscle, 
neurons, and hepatocytes
Biopsy of skin must include eccrine sweat glands (i.e., 
axilla) to exclude Lafora bodies
Chromosome 6q24; gene EPM2A produces laforin
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Late infantile form (Jansky-­
Bielschowsky)
Onset, ages 2–4 yr; severe epilepsy, myoclonic, GTC, atonic, atypical 
absence seizures (not tonic, vs Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome), progressive 
severe dementia, ataxia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs, visual loss 
later, usually death in adolescence
Ophthalmologic examination necessary; on EEG, marked photic sensitivity 
to 1-­Hz stimulation, electroretinogram (ERG) and visual evoked potential 
(VEP) abnormalities
Skin, conjunctival, or rectal mucosal biopsy; skin 
biopsy is the most practical and least morbid. EM of 
circulating lymphocytes can be used for screening
Lipopigment accumulation in lysosomes best seen 
in eccrine secretory cells; the inclusions have a 
characteristic structure on EM that differs between the 
different subtypes of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
EEG, ERG, and VEP testing
Juvenile form (Batten-­
Spielmeyer-­Vogt)
Onset, ages 4–10 yr; usually manifests with decreased visual acuity 
secondary to retinal degeneration, psychomotor delay, cerebellar and 
extrapyramidal signs, later onset of seizures, and GTC and myoclonus
Progressive severe dementia accompanies the other neurologic signs
Death in early adulthood
ERG and VEP abnormalities
Same as for the late infantile form
Adult onset (Kufs)
Onset, ages 11–50 yr; dementia, psychiatric symptoms, cerebellar signs, 
and extrapyramidal signs are most prominent; seizures often tonic; visual 
disturbances are less common; fundi are normal; on EEG, marked photic 
sensitivity to 1-­Hz stimulation
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
707
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
The most well-­defined form of BPEC is benign epilepsy with cen­
trotemporal spikes and seizures (BECTS), often referred to as benign 
rolandic epilepsy. Brief hemifacial motor seizures with anarthria and 
drooling are typical, frequently when coming out of sleep. Consciousness 
is typically preserved, although this may not be true with longer seizures. 
A somatosensory aura involving the tongue, cheek, or gums may pre­
cede the motor seizure. Many seizures occur at night as tonic-­clonic sei­
zures, presumably secondary generalized with unwitnessed partial onset. 
Onset is between 3 and 13 years, with a peak onset at 9–10 years; there is 
a male-­to-­female predominance of approximately 3:2.
Management depends on seizure frequency; if the typical EEG 
discharges have been found in a child without seizures or after a first 
seizure, there is usually no indication to treat with AEDs. If seizures 
are infrequent and nocturnal, the option of no treatment should be 
discussed. AED treatment should be considered for patients experi­
encing more frequent seizures, troublesome seizures during the day, 
or seizures associated with any morbidity such as postictal headaches 
or lethargy. The seizures are usually controlled easily with a variety of 
AEDs, including carbamazepine or levetiracetam.
The seizures of BPEC resolve spontaneously before 16 years of age, 
and the EEG may be helpful in deciding when to withdraw treatment. 
Patients older than 14 years who are seizure-­free for 1–2 years with 
normal EEGs should withdraw from treatment; the clinician should 
strongly consider a trial of withdrawal in patients 10–14 years old who 
are seizure-­free and have a normal EEG. Younger patients with active 
EEGs are likely to have recurrence of seizures with AED withdrawal; 
TABLE 39.23  Inherited Disorders of Metabolism and Neurodegenerative Diseases Associated 
with Seizures in Childhood and Adolescence—cont’d
Name
Clinical Features and Laboratory Findings
Investigations
Sialidosis
Type 1
Onset, ages 8–20 yr; decreased visual acuity and macular cherry red spot; 
action-­ and stimulus-­induced myoclonus; cerebellar ataxia; no dementia 
or decreased length of survival
A peripheral neuropathy may be present
Urine specimen, blood sample for cultured leukocytes, 
and skin biopsy to obtain cultured fibroblasts for 
enzyme analysis
Type 2
Onset, ages 10–30 yr; described in Japanese patients
Coarse facial features and PME syndrome
Elevated excretion of urinary sialylated oligosaccharides, enzyme analysis 
shows deficiency of α-­N-­acetylneuraminidase (both type 1 and type 2)
Same as for type 1
Less Common Causes of PME Syndrome in This Age Group:
Juvenile neuronopathic Gaucher disease; PME, supranuclear palsy, and splenomegaly; no dementia; pancy­
topenia on CBC, leukocytes show low β-­glucocerebrosidase activity
CBC, leukocytes for enzyme analysis
Dentatorubral-­pallidoluysian atrophy, seen in Japanese patients; PME is one manifestation
Clinical diagnosis in life
Neuroaxonal dystrophy; may appear as PME; also, chorea, lower motor neuron signs; axon steroids in 
neurons, may be seen in autonomic nerve endings around eccrine secretory coils
Peripheral nerve biopsy, skin biopsy
Late-­onset GM2 gangliosidosis; sensitivity to acoustic stimulus; myoclonus, severe dementia, dystonia, 
pyramidal signs; cherry red spot may be seen on the macula
Hexosaminidase A activity
Pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration (Hallevorden-Spatz disease)
Clinical diagnosis in life
Action myoclonus–renal failure syndrome, described in French-­Canadians; tremor, PME, and, later, protein­
uria and renal failure; no dementia
Clinical diagnosis, renal function
Other Rare Disorders with Seizures in Childhood and Adolescence
Juvenile Huntington disease
Onset, age >3 yr; developmental delay; dystonia; parkinsonian features 
may be present
GTC, atypical absence, myoclonic seizures
Alpers syndrome
Progressive neurologic degeneration of childhood
A clinical syndrome; suspected to be a mitochondrial encephalopathy
Normal at birth, then failure to thrive with developmental delay, myoclonic 
jerks, seizures, episodes of status epilepticus, hypotonia, and visual loss 
followed by spastic quadriparesis
Epilepsia partialis continua may be present
The spectrum of clinical features includes deafness, ataxia, chorea, and 
liver disease
Muscle biopsy
Rett syndrome
Onset, ages 1–2 yr; in girls only; delay or regression in motor development, 
loss of language, ataxia, “hand-­ringing” mannerism
Seizures occur later; myoclonic, partial, and GTC
Episodes of apnea, ataxic breathing, and hyperventilation; pyramidal signs
Muscle biopsy for mitochondrial enzyme analysis 
and histologic study, although cause is unknown; 
genetic testing
Maple syrup urine disease
Less severe forms may manifest late, even in adulthood, with episodic 
symptoms of encephalopathy and ataxia
Serum amino acids and possibly seizures
Porphyria
Onset, late adolescence, after puberty; 15% of affected patients have 
seizures during an acute attack of porphyria
Urinary and/or stool porphyrins
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GTC, generalized tonic-­clonic; PME, progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
708
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
if seizures and/or abnormal EEGs persist well into the teenage years, 
syndromic diagnosis should be reconsidered. Subtle neuropsychologic 
deficits may be present in children with BECTS, suggesting that this 
disorder may not be entirely as “benign” as once thought.
Benign childhood epilepsy with occipital paroxysms forms a sub­
set of idiopathic partial epilepsies of childhood. There are two types 
of this subset: one with early onset (peak onset at 3–5 years), noc­
turnal seizures with tonic eye deviation, and vomiting, and another 
with later onset (peak onset at 7–9 years) characterized by seizures 
beginning with visual symptoms, which is consistent with an occip­
ital origin. These are also referred to as Panayiotopoulos syndrome 
and the benign occipital epilepsy of Gastaut, respectively. Hemi­
clonic seizures or the automatisms of temporal lobe complex seizures 
often follow according to whether the seizure spreads to suprasylvian 
or infrasylvian regions. A severe headache may follow the visual auras 
and a diagnosis of childhood migraine is often considered. The EEG 
typically shows high-­amplitude sharp waves or spike-­and-­wave com­
plexes recurring at 0.5–1 Hz posteriorly, usually maximal in the occip­
ital regions. The discharges are present when the eyes are closed and 
should disappear with eye opening. There is some controversy about 
the specificity of the electroclinical features and whether these cases 
are true variants of benign childhood epilepsy. The conditions are rela­
tively uncommon, and the same EEG pattern may be seen with symp­
tomatic occipital epilepsy.
Acquired epileptic aphasia and continuous spike-­and-­wave 
patterns in slow-­wave sleep. These two conditions are age-­related 
epileptic encephalopathies with disturbances in language and 
cognition occurring in association with persistent focal or bilaterally 
synchronous epileptiform activity and seizures without an underlying 
structural lesion. In each, the epileptiform activity is thought to disturb 
synaptogenesis and connectivity in the maturing brain. Although they 
are rare, some authorities consider them part of the spectrum of benign 
childhood epilepsy.
Epileptic aphasia, or Landau-­Kleffner syndrome, begins in a pre­
viously normal child (peak age at onset, 5–7 years) with the regression 
of language. There is severe auditory agnosia, speech may disappear, 
and the child often appears to be deaf due to impairment of cortical 
processing of sound and language. There is usually a marked deteri­
oration in behavior as well, and social interactions become altered. 
Childhood psychosis and the autistic spectrum disorders are often 
considered in the differential diagnosis, although the age of behavioral 
regression is atypical for those disorders and should be a red flag when 
this clinical history presents. Seizures occur but are not frequent and 
cannot explain the language deficits. The EEG in sleep shows almost 
continuous bilateral epileptiform discharges maximal over the tempo­
ral regions. The seizures are partial and easily controlled with medica­
tion, but the language regression and the EEG discharges do not remit 
with conventional AEDs. Treatment with corticosteroids does improve 
the condition in many children, but more than half have persistent lan­
guage and learning deficits, despite the eventual disappearance of the 
EEG abnormalities.
In continuous spike-­and-­wave patterns in slow-­wave sleep or 
electrical status epilepticus of slow-­wave sleep (CSWS and ESES, 
respectively), there is a more diffuse cognitive dysfunction, and more 
than 85% of the sleep EEG record is occupied by epileptiform dis­
charges. The disorder typically manifests at 5–7 years of age, and there 
is a broader spectrum of seizure types, including absences, atonic sei­
zures, and focal dyscognitive seizures, which may be frequent in some 
patients. In Landau-­Kleffner, the speech and auditory disturbances are 
the most striking feature, and in CSWS, executive and behavioral dys­
function predominate. Both are caused by heterozygous variants in the 
ionotropic NMDA glutamate receptor subunit 2A gene (GRIN2A) and 
inherited as autosomal dominant.
Symptomatic focal (localization-­related) epilepsy. The most 
common seizure type in children with focal epilepsy with an identified 
cause is the focal dyscognitive seizure. Focal dyscognitive seizures 
may arise from temporal, frontal, parietal, or occipital lobes, but most 
often from the temporal lobe. The causes of focal epilepsy in childhood 
are diverse and include birth asphyxia, later anoxic episodes, head 
injury, neoplasms, infection, malformations of cortical development, 
the cerebral lesions of neurocutaneous syndromes, vascular 
malformations, and cerebral infarction. MRI is a crucial diagnostic 
procedure and can reveal a variety of structural abnormalities.
Focal epilepsy commonly evolves as a medically refractory disorder; 
in some patients, it can be amenable to surgical resection. The inves­
tigation of children for epilepsy surgery is a highly specialized process 
that follows documentation of medical intractability, which is defined 
as failure of at least two appropriately chosen and optimized antiepilep­
tic medications. Concordant evidence of a single epileptogenic region 
within the brain must be found with ictal video and EEG monitoring, 
both structural neuroimaging (MRI) and functional neuroimaging 
(single-­photon emission computed tomography and PET), and neuro­
psychologic evaluation (see Fig. 39.4). If a focus can be demonstrated, 
it must be shown that resection of that area will not cause unacceptable 
loss of sensorimotor or cognitive function.
Childhood absence epilepsy. Childhood absence epilepsy is 
an idiopathic generalized epilepsy beginning in previously normal 
children between 4 and 12 years of age, with peak incidence at 6–7 years 
of age; females are more frequently affected. It accounts for only about 
8–10% of school-­aged children with epilepsy. There is a family history 
of epilepsy in approximately 15–25% of patients. The absence seizures 
are simple, or more often, complicated with mild automatisms or other 
motor features. Absence seizures are very frequent, occurring daily, but 
they generally respond well to antiepileptic therapy. The EEG is normal 
apart from runs of 3-­Hz spike-­and-­wave complexes; clinical seizures 
are associated with discharges lasting more than 2–3 seconds. The 
discharges and clinical seizures can be produced by hyperventilation. 
Prognosis is generally favorable, with remission in approximately 
80% of cases by late adolescence. GTC seizures occur in 40–50% of 
patients with childhood absence epilepsy. They typically develop years 
after the onset of absences and may appear after remission from the 
absence seizures. Usually, the tonic-­clonic seizures are infrequent and 
medically controllable.
Treatment with ethosuximide or valproate controls absence seizures 
in most patients. However, ethosuximide offers no protection against 
tonic-­clonic seizures, whereas valproate is also effective against tonic-­
clonic seizures. Therefore, valproate is the drug of choice if both seizure 
types are present. If either ethosuximide or valproate proves ineffective 
after an adequate trial at maximum tolerated doses, a trial of the other 
should be commenced. Combination ethosuximide and valproate 
therapy has been effective in some patients with absence seizures not 
controlled by either drug alone. Clonazepam may also be effective, but 
it is associated with sedative and behavioral side effects. Alternatives 
may include lamotrigine, topiramate, or zonisamide; medications such 
as carbamazepine or phenytoin that are specific for focal-­onset seizures 
will in fact exacerbate absence seizures.
Epilepsia partialis continua and Rasmussen encephalitis. 
Epilepsia partialis continua describes continuous focal motor seizures 
usually manifesting as repetitive clonic jerks of the face, upper limb, 
lower limb, or larger portion of one half of the body that continue 
in this localized manner for hours to days or months. These seizures 
are caused by cortical processes that directly overlie the motor cortex 
that include vascular lesions, focal cortical dysplasia, neoplasms, 
and unidentified focal areas of atrophy. More generalized metabolic 
disorders such as mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic 
acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS) and an inherited disorder of 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
709
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
metabolism (nonketotic hyperglycinemia) have also been reported to 
cause epilepsia partialis continua.
The focal seizures in this condition are generally impossible to con­
trol with AEDs, and surgical management with a limited cortical resec­
tion may be necessary. The risk of motor and sensory deficits limits 
possible resections, and careful mapping of the site of seizure onset and 
its relationship to functional cortex is required.
Rasmussen encephalitis is a clinically defined syndrome of pre­
dominantly hemispheric cerebral dysfunction, with onset of seizures 
between 2 and 10 years of age. A variety of seizure types can occur, 
including focal motor seizures and focal dyscognitive seizures with 
secondary generalization, myoclonus, and epilepsia partialis continua; 
they are refractory to management with AEDs. The disorder is char­
acterized by a progressive hemiparesis, language disturbances if the 
dominant hemisphere is affected, and intellectual decline. Progressive 
hemispheric atrophy, maximal in the central, temporal, and frontal 
regions, can be documented with neuroimaging studies. Pathologic 
specimens show nonspecific changes suggestive of immune-­mediated 
encephalitis, although no etiologic agent has been identified. Worsen­
ing of the neurologic deficits can be expected over time, although the 
seizures may lessen and even “burn out.”
Functional hemispherectomy performed early in the course of the 
disease before complete hemiparesis should control seizures, arrest the 
motor deterioration, and, in most cases, lead to stabilization or even 
improvement in language and intellectual function. However, signifi­
cant morbidity and mortality rates are associated with the surgery, and 
the child is left with a paretic upper limb, although he or she can walk 
unaided.
Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome. Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome is char­
acterized by generalized seizures and epileptiform discharges with 
delayed cognitive development and behavioral problems beginning 
between the ages of 1 and 8 years. The patients have a mixed seizure 
disorder with multiple seizure types; the typical seizures are tonic 
seizures, atypical absences, and atonic seizures, although patients 
may also have tonic-­clonic, myoclonic, and focal dyscognitive sei­
zures. The seizures are not easily controlled and are usually frequent, 
often with several occurring per day. Episodes of status epilepticus 
are common, and nonconvulsive stupor with continuous spike-­and-­
wave discharges or a stuporous state with repeated tonic seizures is 
typical. The waking EEG has abnormally slow background activity, 
and the EEG correlates of sleep may also be poorly organized. The 
epileptiform abnormalities consist of slow (<3 Hz) spike-­and-­wave 
discharges, multifocal spikes, or sharp waves and paroxysmal fast 
activity (>10 Hz) in sleep.
Treatment is always indicated, but AEDs are rarely able to control 
seizures completely. More often, some reduction in the frequency and 
severity of seizures may be obtained. Patients commonly need com­
binations of AEDs to address their multiple seizure types. Valproate 
should be used as a first-­line agent for patients with atonic, tonic, and 
myoclonic seizures and may be helpful with tonic-­clonic seizures. 
Patients with refractory tonic-­clonic seizures or focal seizures as well 
as generalized seizures may benefit from the addition of lamotrigine. 
Combinations of AEDs must be monitored carefully for drug toxicity 
and unwanted interactions. Carbamazepine has been reported to exac­
erbate atypical absence seizures in some patients. Phenytoin can be an 
effective drug in controlling GTC and tonic seizures. Barbiturates may 
be effective, although they are often poorly tolerated in children with 
abnormalities of tone, and drug-­related drowsiness may exacerbate 
tonic seizures in some patients. Other alternatives include clonazepam, 
topiramate, and levetiracetam. Felbamate and cannabidiols have been 
reported to improve control of the debilitating tonic or atonic “drop 
attacks” in patients with this syndrome.
A major source of morbidity and an important management issue 
are repeated falls associated with tonic and atonic seizures. Appropri­
ate restriction in daily activities and the wearing of helmets with face 
protection are often required. Division of the anterior portion of the 
corpus callosum (anterior corpus callosotomy) has been successful in 
controlling the falls associated with tonic or atonic seizures, but it is 
considered a palliative and not a curative surgical procedure, and the 
goal is not complete seizure freedom.
Adolescence
The paroxysmal disorders of adolescence (12–18 years) are shown in 
Table 39.24.
TABLE 39.24  Paroxysmal Disorders of 
Adolescence
Nonepileptiform Disorders
More Common
Syncope
Migraine
Psychogenic nonepileptic behavioral events
Dissociative states, conversion disorders
Panic attacks, hyperventilation
Daydreaming
Sleep
Nocturnal myoclonus, hypnic jerks
Narcolepsy
Somnambulism
Somniloquy
Less Common
Episodic rage
Malingering
Paroxysmal choreoathetosis
Tremor
Tic
Drug reactions, dystonia
Transient global amnesia
Acute Symptomatic Seizures, Occasional Seizures
More Common
Drug abuse
Reflex seizures (see Table 39.1)
Head injury
Meningitis and encephalitis
Less Common
Brain tumor
Intercurrent medical illness, endocrine disorder, systemic neoplasia
Epileptic Syndromes
More Common
Reflex seizures (see Table 39.1)
Symptomatic localization-­related epilepsy
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
Less Common
Juvenile absence epilepsy
Epilepsy with generalized tonic-­clonic seizures on awakening
Epilepsia partialis continua (Kojewnikow syndrome)
Rasmussen encephalitis
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy
Autosomal dominant epilepsy with auditory features (ADEAF)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
710
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Paroxysmal Nonepileptiform Disorders
Syncope. Loss of consciousness with falling is the salient feature 
of syncope (see Chapter 7 and Table 39.25). Children may be able to 
describe a distinct trigger, such as needles or the sight of blood, and 
often describe palpitations, tunnel vision, and nausea. There may be 
a family history of vasovagal syncope. Cardiac arrhythmias should be 
ruled out; autonomic testing may be beneficial in patients with very 
frequent syncope.
Paroxysmal psychiatric events. Psychogenic nonepileptic 
seizures (PNESs) are events where the patient may have dramatic 
convulsions, stiffening, unresponsiveness, or dissociative symptoms 
including amnesia of the events. They are common but are frequently 
misdiagnosed as epileptic seizures, leading to unnecessary interventions 
including intubation, hospitalization, invasive testing, or simply 
years of antiepileptic medications that do not help the patient (Table 
39.26). Most cases are best thought of as a manifestation of psychiatric 
illness, such as post-­traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, or depression. 
Nonepileptic behavioral events should be treated compassionately by 
the physician as a sign of significant psychiatric distress, and not as 
malingering or a factitious disorder.
TABLE 39.25  Differential Diagnosis of Syncope
Clinical
Syncope
Tonic-­Clonic Seizures
Precipitating factors
Almost always patient is standing; environment is warm; fright; pain Usually none, although sleep deprivation or awakening may 
be contributory
Prodrome
Lightheaded, dizzy, queasy; vision dims; loss of color, “gray out”; 
sweating
May be averted by head down or recumbency
Aura or sense of déjà vu or jamais vu may be present
Occurrence in sleep
Never
Common
Evolution
Limp faint → fall → motionless unconsciousness, often with pallor, 
clammy skin; there may be a tonic phase with generalized 
stiffening
Sudden loss of consciousness → increased tone and massive 
truncal flexion or extension, followed by synchronous jerking 
of body and limbs with rubor or cyanosis and sweating → 
unconsciousness
Skin
Pale and cool
Flushed, cyanosed, warm
Incontinence
Rare
Occasional
Self-­injury
Rare
Common (biting tongue)
Degree of postictal confusion
Minimal
Marked
Family history
Often positive for syncope
May be positive for seizures
Interictal EEG
Usually normal
Frequently abnormal, epileptiform discharges
TABLE 39.26  Differential Diagnosis of Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizures
Clinical Factors
Psychogenic Seizures
Epileptic Seizures
Age at onset
Usually older than 8–10 yr
Predominates in girls; 15–30% of patients are boys
Either sex; no sex predominance
Duration of seizures
May be very prolonged
Usually seconds to minutes
Evolution
May have a very gradual onset and ending
Usually more abrupt onset
Quality of convulsive movements
Thrashing, asynchronous limb movements, often with 
partial responsiveness
Usually rhythmic and synchronous with loss of consciousness
Stereotypical attacks
Typically variable
Typically stereotyped
Examination during the seizure
May resist examination, combative
Usually unresponsive and amnestic for ictal events
Self-­injury
Rare
Common in GTC seizures
Incontinence
Rare
Common in GTC seizures
During sleep
No; may occur nocturnally, but while the patient is awake
Common
Changes in seizure frequency with 
medication
Rare
Usual
Interictal EEG
Repeatedly normal
Often abnormal
Ictal EEG
No EEG seizure patterns; normal rhythms while patient is 
unresponsive
EEG seizure patterns
Pitfalls in diagnosis
	1.	Psychologic factors may not be immediately apparent
	2.	Misleading information may be given by parents (as in 
factitious [Munchausen] syndrome by proxy)
	1.	Asynchronous vigorous automatisms are found in frontal lobe 
seizures
	2.	Bilateral limb movements and posturing without loss of 
consciousness occur in supplementary motor seizures
	3.	EEG seizure patterns may be absent during some seizures 
(e.g., auras, SMA)
GTC, generalized tonic-­clonic; SMA, supplementary motor area.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
711
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
Among adults, 20% of patients referred with refractory seizures are 
found to have psychogenic nonepileptic behavioral events; in children, 
the number is smaller. Both epileptic seizures and nonepileptic behav­
ioral events can coexist in the same person, likely due to the high inci­
dence of anxiety and depression in people living with epilepsy, as well 
as the stress associated with an unpredictable chronic illness. Typically, 
they are characterized by marked motor activity such as pelvic thrust­
ing, arching of the back, thrashing of the limbs, and even self-­injury. 
The episodes may have a gradual onset with buildup of motor activity, 
and they usually last longer than epileptic seizures (see Table 39.26). 
Other forms that the psychogenic nonepileptic behavioral events may 
take include a gradual slump to a motionless supine position with unre­
sponsiveness and eyes closed, often with some flickering of the eyelids.
Other types of paroxysmal psychiatric events include panic attacks 
and rage attacks. Panic attacks may begin without the patient being 
able to identify an external precipitant, and then the sense of dread 
or fear may be mistaken for a psychic aura. Many of the symptoms 
experienced, including palpitations, paresthesia, formication, light­
headedness, and carpopedal spasm, result from hyperventilation and 
tachycardia. There may be some apparent disturbance of conscious­
ness. Historically, the sequence of events is important, especially the 
hyperventilation and associated symptoms. The patient may be asked 
to hyperventilate in the office to see whether symptoms are reproduced; 
hyperventilation must continue for 3–5 minutes with good effort for a 
negative result to be useful.
Rage attacks may also be confused with epileptic seizures. Often 
seen in intellectually impaired patients, they represent intense frustra­
tion in the presence of an inability to vent the frustration in other ways 
or to communicate it. Rage attacks may also occur in children with 
normal intelligence or in those taking anabolic steroids.
The interictal EEG is repeatedly normal in patients with psycho­
genic nonepileptic behavioral events but may be abnormal in children 
with both epileptic and nonepileptic events. For definitive diagnosis, 
it may be necessary to record a clinical episode with continuous video 
and EEG monitoring.
Treatment of psychogenic nonepileptic behavioral events must 
include an identification of underlying psychosocial and psychiatric 
problems. Major mood disorders and severe environmental stress, 
especially sexual abuse, are common among children and adolescents 
with psychogenic seizures and should be considered in every case. This 
history, though uncomfortable for both parties to discuss, must be 
specifically asked about and may require multiple visits to develop the 
necessary rapport to receive a truthful answer.
Presentation of a nonepileptic diagnosis to the patient after moni­
toring of a typical spell must be positive (“These attacks are not epilep­
tic and will not necessitate chronic medication or further neurologic 
investigation”) and truthful (“We don’t know exactly what is causing 
them, but emotional factors are clearly playing a major role”). This 
diagnosis can be received with disbelief or hostility by families for 
multiple reasons. First, the societal stigma against psychiatric illness 
may make it difficult for parents to accept that a child has a psychi­
atric disorder; a genuine neurologic disorder is almost preferable to 
some families and they may visit multiple medical centers searching 
for a positive organic diagnosis. Second, even if the family accepts the 
diagnosis, there may be the perception that these events are “all in the 
child’s head” or “attention-­seeking,” leading to a nontherapeutic famil­
ial and medical response to the diagnosis. If the child has been having 
events for a prolonged period of time, there is immense social pressure 
to continue having events, as they may feel that their peers, family, and 
school would react negatively to the psychiatric diagnosis after having 
been supportive of the presumptive epileptic diagnosis.
Terminology and phrasing are critical when discussing this diag­
nosis with families. Referring to them as “psychiatric” or “hysteric” 
or “conversion disorders” may come across as dismissive, particularly 
given the stigma around mental illness.
The prognosis of nonepileptic behavioral events in the pediatric 
population is much better than in adults, with 80% of patients seizure-­
free at the 3-­year follow-­up. Involvement of psychiatry and counsel­
ing is critical; in particular, cognitive-­behavioral therapy appears to 
be specifically helpful in allowing people to achieve some conscious 
control over the physical symptoms of their psychiatric illness and to 
modulate their stress responses. However, the practitioner should be 
familiar with the concept of nonepileptic behavioral events. The degree 
and duration of pretreatment disability (school withdrawal, etc.) is a 
prognostic marker of response to treatment.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
The causes of acute symptomatic seizures in adolescence include those 
described in the preceding neonatal and childhood sections, except for 
febrile convulsions. Head injury may be more common among adoles­
cents because participation in contact sports and motor vehicle acci­
dents occur in the middle to late teen years. Recreational drug use can 
be associated with seizures.
Epileptic Syndromes
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy has an 
onset between 12 and 18 years of age. The hallmark of the disorder 
is early-­morning myoclonus involving axial and upper limb muscles, 
usually with sparing of the facial muscles. Episodes typically occur on 
awakening. Tonic-­clonic seizures occur in the majority of patients. 
A history of early-­morning myoclonic jerks may not be volunteered 
and should be asked of all patients presenting with GTC seizures. The 
patients may not have identified the myoclonus and instead describe 
nervousness, shakiness, or clumsiness for the first 1–2 hours of a 
morning, such as dropping their toothbrush or spilling their cereal. 
Fatigue, sleep deprivation, stress, and alcohol exacerbate the seizures; 
some patients have their first seizure shortly after starting college due 
to a combination of the aforementioned risk factors. The tonic-­clonic 
seizures typically begin with a clustering of repeated myoclonic jerks. 
Absence seizures occur in 15–40% of patients. Neurologic examination 
findings, brain MRI, and cognition are normal. The interictal EEG 
shows spike-­and-­wave complexes at 3.5–6 Hz. Linkage analysis of 
patients and their family members has suggested that the disorder is 
linked to chromosome 21.
Valproate is the preferred AED, as it has efficacy on all seizure types 
in this disorder. Lamotrigine is another effective agent and is preferen­
tially used in adolescent and adult women because of the potential side 
effect profile of valproate (weight gain, teratogenicity, and potential 
hormonal disturbances including polycystic ovarian syndrome). Alter­
natives may include topiramate, zonisamide, and benzodiazepines, 
although extensive data concerning their efficacy in this setting are not 
available.
The seizures are well controlled in 80–90% of patients, but lifelong 
treatment is required. It is estimated that more than 90% of patients 
suffer relapse within the first 6–12 months after cessation of AEDs, and 
relapse is still common, even with prolonged periods of seizure free­
dom. Although many benign childhood-­onset epilepsies remit with 
adolescence, most adolescent-­onset epilepsies do not remit.
Juvenile absence epilepsy. In comparison with childhood absence 
epilepsy, juvenile absence epilepsy has a later onset, at about the time of 
puberty, and the seizures are less frequent (less than daily). Neurologic 
examination findings and IQ are normal. The EEG shows generalized 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
712
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
spike-­and-­wave discharges, usually at rates faster than 3 Hz. Tonic-­
clonic seizures may occur, usually on awakening, more frequently than 
in childhood absence epilepsy.
The treatment is the same as that for childhood absence epilepsy, 
but the prognosis for complete remission therapy is less favorable.
Epilepsy with generalized tonic-­clonic seizures on awakening. 
This idiopathic generalized epilepsy involves GTC seizures occurring 
more than 90% of the time within 2 hours of awakening or in an early-­
evening period of relaxation. Sleep deprivation and disruption are 
often potent precipitants of seizures. The age at onset of the seizures 
is usually between 10 and 20 years; a family history of epilepsy occurs 
in approximately 10–13% of cases. Myoclonic and absence seizures 
may also be present, and the distinction between juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy and juvenile absence epilepsy is not clear. The EEG may show 
generalized spike-­and-­wave complexes or polyspikes.
Treatment starts with valproate, although barbiturates may be very 
effective. Lamotrigine is also used because of concern about the side 
effects of valproate. Topiramate and zonisamide may also be helpful. 
The prognosis for complete control of seizures with therapy is very 
good: 65–79% of patients have experienced remission with therapy. 
Avoidance of precipitating factors that disrupt sleep patterns is import­
ant. The relapse rate if AEDs are stopped is high (83%) (Fig. 39.9 and 
Table 39.27).
RARE STATUS EPILEPTICUS SYNDROMES
FIRES (febrile infection–related epilepsy syndrome), a subgroup of 
NORSE (new-­onset refractory status epilepticus), is a rare, devas­
tating disorder of presumed immunologic etiology. FIRES occurs in 
previously healthy children (mean age ∼8 years) and manifests with 
a nonspecific febrile illness 24 hours to 2 weeks before the onset of 
acute, recurrent, multiple difficult-­to-­treat seizures (status epilepticus). 
The interictal periods are characterized by severe depressed levels of 
consciousness (Fig. 39.9 and Table 39.27). The cerebrospinal fluid may 
be normal or reveal a mild pleocytosis. MRI may initially be normal 
or nonspecific. The differential diagnosis must include other causes of 
severe encephalopathy with status epilepticus (Table 39.28). Patients 
with FIRES have no evidence of autoimmune encephalitis antibodies 
or pathogens noted on brain biopsy. In addition, there is no evidence 
for pathologic variants in fever-­sensitive epilepsy genes. In contrast, 
adult patients with a NORSE-­like phenotype may have identifiable eti­
ologies in ∼50% of cases (Table 39.29).
The acute phase of FIRES lasts ∼3 weeks but then transitions into 
a chronic phase characterized by drug-­resistant epilepsy, severe cogni­
tive impairment, and bilateral mesial temporal atrophy.
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG USE
The goal of AED therapy is to use a single agent in adequate dosages 
to completely control seizures. If seizures recur, the dosage of an 
AED should be gradually increased to achieve the maximum toler­
ated dose for the patient without causing symptoms of drug toxicity. 
Therapeutic ranges are derived from population studies in which 
the serum levels of patients with seizures controlled by an AED 
were compared with those of patients experiencing side effects. The 
therapeutic levels should be used as a guide and may also be used 
to assess compliance.
Around 67% of all seizure patients achieve seizure freedom on 
their first antiepileptic medication; the response rate is strongly tied 
to underlying etiology. If one agent does not control the seizures, 
another AED should be substituted and tried as monotherapy with 
a period of overlap during the transition period from one antiepi­
leptic to another. An adequate trial of therapy entails the maximum 
tolerated dose of an AED for a period of time in which several of the 
patient’s seizures (or clusters of seizures) would usually occur or for 
at least 2 months, whichever is longer. This interval may be shortened 
in infants and children with very frequent seizures. Changes in AED 
dosages and regimens should be made gradually, and due regard must 
Incidence (%)
Prodromic phase
Acute phase
Chronic phase
Female
10
20
30
60
80
100
150
200
250
• Focal/multifocal seizures
• Focal to bilateral seizures
• Myoclonic seizures
• Tonic seizure
• NCSE
Male
Time (d)
• Drug-resistant epilepsy
• Neurologic deﬁcit
• Cognitive impairment
• Behavioral disturbances
• Death
100
80
60
40
20
10
• Fever
• URI
• GTI
• Headache
Negative
family
history
Family
history 
Antecedent
history 
Negative
antecedent
history
Fig. 39.9  Clinical findings in FIRES (febrile infection–related epilepsy syndrome) and NORSE (new-­onset 
refractory status epilepticus), including family history, antecedents, and sex predominance. The graph shows 
the symptoms during the prodromic phase, type of seizures in the acute phase, and clinical findings during 
the chronic phase. GTI, gastrointestinal tract infections; NCSE, nonconvulsive status epilepticus; URI, upper 
respiratory infection. (From Specchio N, Pietrafusa N. New-­onset refractory status epilepticus and febrile 
infection-­related epilepsy syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2020;62:897–905, Fig. 1, p. 899.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
713
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
be given to time taken to reach steady-­state serum concentrations on 
the new regimen (see Fig 39.6; Tables 39.30 and 39.31). Drug changes 
can be made gradually on an outpatient basis, but the physician must 
warn the parents and child that AED toxicity or an increase in the sei­
zure frequency may occur during the changeover period. More rapid 
medication changes, especially if barbiturates are to be stopped, often 
require that the patient be admitted to the hospital during the change­
over period.
Only about an additional 10% of patients achieve better control 
with the addition of a second drug to the first; 20–30% of patients 
with epilepsy have medically refractory epilepsy. Failure to respond to 
two AEDs at maximum tolerated doses should prompt a referral for 
assessment in a specialty epilepsy program. In some patients, resistance 
to AEDs may be genetically determined by mutations affecting drug 
transport or in metabolizing proteins such as the multidrug resistance–
associated family of drug transporters.
It is important to design dosage schedules that are realistic. Dos­
ing more often than 3 times a day may result in a high incidence of 
poor compliance. Parents must be advised to be careful with other 
prescribed and over-­the-­counter medications. Many medications may 
interfere with AED metabolism.
Special considerations for women with epilepsy who take antie­
pileptic medications and are of childbearing age include the terato­
genicity of several antiepileptic medications, including valproic acid. 
Additionally, valproic acid is known to increase the risk of polycystic 
ovarian syndrome, with its attendant hormonal and metabolic dis­
turbances. Finally, several antiepileptic medications have significant 
interactions with hormonal contraception, and the provider should 
familiarize themselves with these interactions to avoid failure of 
either medication.
Stopping Antiepileptic Drugs
Most children (60–75% of patients) remain seizure-­free when AEDs 
are withdrawn after a seizure-­free interval on medication for more 
than 2 years. If relapse occurs, it is generally in the first few months 
after cessation of medication, and 60–80% of the relapses occur 
before 12 months after cessation. Patients with underlying neurologic 
disorders and deficits and those with multiple seizure types are more 
likely to suffer relapse. A long duration of epilepsy before remission 
carries a slightly higher risk of relapse. The EEG is a strong predictor 
in idiopathic epilepsy; among patients with frequent epileptic dis­
charges that are recorded in generalized epilepsy, the rate of relapse 
is higher. For most children with epilepsy, it is recommended that 
children who have been seizure-­free for 2 years undergo a trial of 
AED withdrawal.
LIFESTYLE
Parents should be encouraged to let their children lead a normal life­
style, although some activities are inherently more dangerous for peo­
ple with epilepsy. In general, climbing to significant heights, bathing, 
and swimming alone are not safe for children with active epilepsy. 
However, the clinician must stress the importance of avoiding overpro­
tection of the child. Participation in sports and other school activities 
should be encouraged within the limits of avoiding dangerous activities 
such as rock climbing and scuba diving, in which even a brief loss of 
TABLE 39.27  Clinical Features of Febrile 
Infection–Related Epilepsy Syndrome (FIRES)
Age of onset: 2–17 (median 8) yr
Medical history: febrile seizures in rare cases, no epilepsy or other chronic 
disease, normal psychomotor development
Family history: uninformative, e.g., no allergies and especially no other 
family member with FIRES
Prodromal phase:
	 Different types of febrile infections often flulike
	
Frequently followed by an afebrile and asymptomatic interval of 1–2 days 
resulting in a consistent neurologic syndrome
Neurologic syndrome:
	
Peracute/explosive onset of multifocal or generalized seizures of different 
types directly evolving into super-­refractory status epilepticus
	
Without other neurologic features (pure seizure phenotype)
EEG: global slowing or multifocal discharges with bilateral frontotemporal 
predominance, or both
CSF: normal or pleocytosis, normal protein concentration, no oligoclonal 
bands
MRI (during the acute phase of status epilepticus):
	
No or nonextensive bitemporal or diffuse abnormalities
	
Sporadic involvement of the basal ganglia, diffuse cortical edema, and/or 
hydrocephalus
Cause: extensive infectiologic (e.g., brain biopsies), metabolic (e.g., muscle 
biopsy), and genetic investigations (e.g., POLG, SCN1A, PCDH19 genes, 
CNVs, exome sequencing) without causative findings
Coexisting autoimmunities: some patients with autoantibodies (e.g., TPO 
or GluR antibodies)
Treatment: resistance to nearly all drugs and even anesthetics
Outcome:
	
Almost always chronic epilepsy without silent period
	
Often global brain atrophy after a few weeks with mild to severe neuro­
psychologic impairments
CNVs, copy number variants; GluR, glutamate receptor; TPO, thyroid 
peroxidase.
From van Baalen A, Vezzani A, Hausker M, et al. Febrile infection-­
related epilepsy syndrome: clinical review and hypotheses of epilepto­
genesis. Neuropediatrics. 2017;48:5–18 (Table 1, p. 6).
TABLE 39.28  Differential Diagnoses of 
FIRES
Febrile seizure and febrile status epilepticus
Infectious encephalitis: can occur without significant CSF pleocytosis or MRI 
changes
Limbic encephalitis and other neuronal antibody-­associated epileptic enceph­
alitis
Hashimoto encephalopathy/steroid responsive encephalopathy
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome
Alpers disease: hepatic mitochondrial DNA depletion caused by POLG1 
variants affecting the posterior cortex
Acute necrotizing encephalopathy caused by RANP2 variants
Acute-­onset epilepsy triggered by fever in young girls associated with 
PCDH19 variants
Dravet syndrome
Primary angiitis of the CNS in childhood
Biotin-­ (and/or thiamin-­) responsive basal ganglia disease with SLC19A3 
variants
Citrullinemia with elevation of the amino acid citrulline in the CSF, mimicking 
encephalitis
CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FIRES, febrile 
infection–related epilepsy syndrome.
Adapted from van Baalen A, Vezzani A, Hausler M, et al. Febrile 
infection-­related epilepsy syndrome: clinical review and hypotheses of 
epileptogenesis. Neuropediatrics. 2017;48:5–18.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
714
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 39.29  NORSE: Prominent Presentation Features of the Most Frequent Etiologies
Categories
*
Most Frequent Findings
Clinical Clues
Unknown
50%
No specific findings
Prodromal mild febrile illness in 65% of cases
Typically severe and prolonged SE
Inflammatory and 
autoimmune 
encephalitis
40%
Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis 
(Anti-­Hu, -­Ma2/Ta, -­CV2/CRMP-­5, 
-­amphiphysin, -­VGCC, -­mGluR5)
Cognitive, especially memory impairment, behavioral changes, temporal lobe 
seizures, sleep disturbance
Hu: often more diffuse encephalomyelitis
Ma2/Ta: hypothalamic dysfunction
CV2/CRMP5: diffuse encephalomyelitis, chorea
Surface-­binding autoantibodies
Anti-­NMDAr
Mostly young females
Prodromal fever, short-­term memory loss, psychiatric symptoms, hallucinations, 
orolingual dyskinesia, autonomic and respiratory failure
Children: behavioral changes, movement disorders
EEG: extreme delta brushes (50%)
Anti-­VGKC complex
Mostly elderly males
LGI-­1: limbic encephalitis, faciobrachial dystonic seizures, SIADH
Caspr2: episodic ataxia
Anti-­GABA(B)r
Limbic encephalitis
Anti-­GABA(A)r
Multifocal neocortical encephalitis
Anti-­AMPAr
Prominent psychiatric symptoms, cerebellar ataxia
Anti-­Glycine-­r
No specific features
Anti-­GAD
No specific features
Steroid-­responsive encephalopathy 
with autoimmune thyroiditis
Rapid-­onset dementia, myoclonus, strokelike episodes
Anti-­TPO, anti-­TG
Infectious encephalitis
10%
HSV1
Enterovirus
CMV
EBV
VZV
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Bartonella henselae
Arboviruses (WNV, tick-­borne virus, 
etc.)
Temporal involvement
Rash, acute lower motor neuron syndrome
Immunodeficiency: gastrointestinal symptoms, retinitis, pneumonitis
Adenopathies, ataxia
Immunodeficiency: CNS lymphoma
Rash
Respiratory symptoms, EEG: extreme spindles
Children: cat-­scratch disease with skin lesion and regional adenopathy
Flulike episode
WNV: parkinsonism, acute lower motor neuron syndrome, EEG: triphasic waves
Genetic disorders
Rare
SCN1A
PCDH19
CADASIL
Mitochondrial disorders
MELAS
POLG1
Dravet syndrome
Epilepsy and cognitive impairment limited to female
Migraine, strokes, visual problems, cognitive deterioration
Elevated CSF lactate and strokelike episodes
Occipital seizures, epilepsia partialis continua, liver failure, nystagmus, ataxia.
*Proportions mainly reflect adult population. There is a lack of data in pediatric population.
AMPA, α-­amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­méthylisoazol-­4-­propionate; CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoen­
cephalopathy; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; GABA; γ-­aminobutyric acid; 
GAD, glutamic acid decarboxylase; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LGI1, leucine-­rich glioma inactivated 1; MELAS, syndrome of mitochondrial enceph­
alomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; NMDA; N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate; PCDH, protocadherin; POLG1, mitochondrial DNA polymerase 
gamma; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion; SCN, neuronal voltage-­gated sodium channel; SE, status epilepticus; TG, 
thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroperoxidase; VGKC, voltage-­gated potassium channel complex; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus; WNV, West Nile virus.
From Sculier C, Gaspard N. New onset refractory status epilepticus (NORSE). Seizure Eur J Epilepsy. 2019;68:72–78 (Table 1, p. 74).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
715
CHAPTER 39  Paroxysmal Disorders
TABLE 39.30  Established Efficacy of Antiseizure Medications by Seizure Type (FDA Indications 
and Class I–III Evidence)
Antiseizure 
Medication
FDA-­APPROVED INDICATIONS
Other Noteworthy 
Efficacy Evidence
MONOTHERAPY VS 
ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY 
INDICATION
SEIZURE TYPE OR SYNDROME INDICATION
Monotherapy
Adjunctive Focal
Generalized 
Tonic-­Clonic Absence
Myoclonic
LGS
IS
Therapy and Seizure 
Type
Phenobarbital
X
X
X
Primidone
X
X
X
Phenytoin
X
X
X
X
Methsuximide
X
X
X
Two class IV trials 
supporting efficacy for 
focal-­onset seizures
Ethosuximide
X
X
X
Clonazepam
X
X
X
X
Carbamazepine X
X
X
Valproate
X
X
X
X
X
X
Initial monotherapy for 
generalized tonic-­clonic 
and myoclonic seizures
Felbamate
Conversion to 
monotherapy
X
X
X
X
Gabapentin
X
X
Initial monotherapy for 
focal seizures
Lamotrigine
Conversion to 
monotherapy
X
X
X
X
Initial monotherapy for 
absence seizures
Topiramate
X
X
X
X
X
Tiagabine
X
X
Levetiracetam
X
X
X
X
Initial monotherapy for 
focal seizures
Oxcarbazepine
X
X
X
Zonisamide
X
X
Initial monotherapy for 
focal seizures
Pregabalin
X
X
Lacosamide
X
X
X
Rufinamide
X
X
Vigabatrin
X
X
X
X
Ezogabine/
retigabine
X
X
Clobazam
X
X
Perampanel
X
X
X
X
Efficacy against myoclonic 
seizures
Eslicarbazepine
X
X
X
Brivaracetam
X
X
X
Cannabidiol
X
X (also 
DS)
Cenobamate
X
X
X
DS, Dravet syndrome; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; IS, infantile spasms; LGS, Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome.
From Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, et al., eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:1651, Table 
100.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
716
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
awareness could result in serious injury or death. If seizures are well 
controlled, minimal restrictions apply. In children with active seizures 
characterized by loss of consciousness, the physician makes judgments 
on the basis of an individual assessment considering the nature of the 
seizures, their frequency, and the degree of supervision during the 
activity in question. Driving restrictions vary from state to state; it is 
advisable that an adolescent be seizure-­free for at least 2 years before 
applying for a driver’s permit. In general, heavy-­impact contact sports 
such as football are best avoided by children with active epilepsy but 
are not contraindicated for children in remission. In adolescents, some 
advice regarding birth control may be necessary because many adoles­
cents are unaware of the interaction of AEDs and oral contraceptives.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 39.31  Management of Seizures 
Refractory to Medical Therapy
Incorrect Diagnosis
Review seizure type
Focal dyscognitive seizures may be mistaken for absence seizures
Reflex epilepsy with uncontrolled precipitating factors, photosensitivity, 
reading epilepsy
Repeat EEG with hyperventilation, photic stimulation, and sleep recording
If results are negative, consider nonepileptic paroxysmal disorders
Psychogenic nonepileptic behavioral events (see Table 39.26)
Migraine
Porphyria, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia
Continuing seizures: admit for video/EEG monitoring to record the event
Inappropriate Medication
Review anticonvulsant levels
A second AED may have caused a drop in the serum level of a first-­line drug
Review seizure type
Phenobarbital and carbamazepine may exacerbate atypical absence seizures
Drowsiness caused by phenobarbital and benzodiazepines may exacerbate 
tonic seizures
Phenytoin often worsens the function of patients with progressive myoclonus 
epilepsy syndromes
Noncompliance with Medication or Medical Advice
Check AED levels; ask patient to record medication doses taken
Check sleep habits, drug use; arrange review by social worker, psychiatrist
Inability to cope with epilepsy and avoidance of precipitating factors (adoles­
cence, low intelligence, dysfunctional home situation)
Review all patient’s prescribed and over-­the-­counter medications; urine drug 
screen for drug abuse
Exacerbation by other medication or toxins
Intercurrent Illness or Metabolic Complication from 
Another Medication
Serum Na+, K+, glucose, Ca2+, Mg2+, creatinine, liver function studies, com­
plete blood cell count, pregnancy test
Intractable Epilepsies
Up to one third of cases of symptomatic focal epilepsy are refractory to 
current medical therapy
After an adequate attempt with two first-­line medications and available new 
AEDs, refer for epilepsy surgery assessment
Symptomatic generalized epilepsies such as West syndrome and Lennox-­
Gastaut syndrome are often refractory
Need to reassess goals of therapy
Refer for surgical assessment if there are recurrent falls caused by tonic or 
atonic seizures in an older child
Epilepsy with progressive neurologic deterioration: e.g., brain tumor, inher­
ited disorders of metabolism, degenerative neurologic disease, progressive 
myoclonus epilepsy, phakomatosis, systemic or cerebral vasculitis
Review history, family history, and physical examination; repeat neuroimag­
ing; repeat EEG studies
AED, antiepileptic drug.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
716.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Berg AT, Shinnar S, Levy SR, et al. How well can epilepsy syndromes be iden­
tified at diagnosis? A reassessment 2 years after initial diagnosis. Epilepsia. 
2000;41:1269–1275.
Brown TR, Holmes GL. Epilepsy. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1145–1151.
Bye AM, Kok DJ, Ferenschild FT, et al. Paroxysmal non-­epileptic events in 
children: a retrospective study over a period of 10 years. J Paediatr Child 
Health. 2000;36:244–248.
Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League 
Against Epilepsy. Proposal for revised classification of epilepsies and epi­
leptic syndromes. Epilepsia. 1989;30:389–399.
Dreifuss FE, Nordli DR. Classification of epilepsies in childhood. In: Pellock J, 
Dodson WE, Bourgeois BFD, eds. Pediatric Epilepsy: Diagnosis and Thera­
py. 2nd ed. New York: Demos; 2001:69–80.
Fisher FS, Cross JH, D’Souza C, et al. Instruction manual for the ILAE 2017 
operational classification of seizure types. Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):531–542.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediat­
rics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
Kotagal P, Lüders HO, eds. The Epilepsies: Etiologies and Prevention. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press; 1999.
Kramer U, Nevo Y, Neufeld MY, et al. Epidemiology of epilepsy in childhood: 
a cohort of 440 consecutive patients. Pediatr Neurol. 1998;18:46–50.
Lerche H, Jurkat-­Rott K, Lehmann-­Horn F. Ion channels and epilepsy. Am J 
Med Genet. 2001;106:146–159.
Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, et al. ILAE classification of the epilepsies: 
Position paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and Terminolo­
gy. Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):512–521.
Shorvon SD. The etiologic classification of epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2011;52(6):1052–
1057.
Trinka E, Cock H, Hesdorffer D, et al. A definition and classification of status 
epilepticus -­ Report of the ILAE Task Force on Classification of Status 
Epilepticus. Epilepsia. 2015;56(10):1515–1523.
Wyllie E, ed. The Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. Phila­
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
Neonatal Period
Daoust-­Roy J, Seshia SS. Benign neonatal sleep myoclonus: a differential diag­
nosis of neonatal seizures. Am J Dis Child. 1992;146:681.
Parker S, Zuckerman B, Bauchner H, et al. Jitteriness in full-­term neonates: 
prevalence and correlates. Pediatrics. 1990;85:17–23.
Shuper A, Zalzberg J, Weitz R, et al. Jitteriness beyond the neonatal period: a 
benign pattern of movement in infancy. J Child Neurol. 1991;6:243–245.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Mizrahi EM. Neonatal seizures and neonatal epileptic syndromes. Neurol Clin. 
2001;19:427–463.
Painter MJ, Scher MS, Stein AD, et al. Phenobarbital compared with phenytoin 
for the treatment of neonatal seizures. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:485–489.
Epileptic Syndromes
Mizrahi EM, Clancy RR. Neonatal seizures: early-­onset seizure syndromes 
and their consequences for development. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 
2000;6:229–241.
Plouin P. Benign familial neonatal convulsions and benign idiopathic neonatal 
convulsions. In: Engel JP, Pedley TA, eds. Epilepsy: A Comprehensive Text­
book. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997:2247–2255.
van Karnebeek CDM, Sayson B, Lee JJY, et al. Metabolic evaluation of epilep­
sy: a diagnostic algorithm with focus on treatable conditions. Front Neurol. 
2018;9:1016.
Watanabe K, Miura K, Natsume J, et al. Epilepsies of neonatal onset: seizure 
type and evolution. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1999;41:318–322.
Early-­Onset Generalized Epileptic Syndromes with 
Encephalopathy
Dulac O. Epileptic encephalopathy. Epilepsia. 2001;42(suppl 3):23–26.
Lombroso C. Early myoclonic encephalopathy, early infantile epileptic enceph­
alopathy, and benign and severe infantile myoclonic epilepsies: a critical 
review and personal contributions. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1990;7:380–408.
Wang PJ, Lee WT, Hwu WL, et al. The controversy regarding diagnostic crite­
ria for early myoclonic encephalopathy. Brain Dev. 1998;20:530–535.
Cyanotic and Pallid Infant Syncope
DiMario FJ. Prospective study of children with cyanotic and pallid breath-­
holding spells. Pediatrics. 2001;107:265–269.
Kelly AM, Porter CJ, McGoon MD, et al. Breath-­holding spells associated with 
significant bradycardia: successful treatment with permanent pacemaker 
implantation. Pediatrics. 2001;108:698–702.
Mocan H, Yildiran A, Orhan F, et al. Breath holding spells in 91 children and 
response to treatment with iron. Arch Dis Child. 1999;81:261–262.
Sleep Disorders
Dyken ME, Lin-­Dyken DC, Yamada T. Diagnosing rhythmic movement disor­
der with video-­polysomnography. Pediatr Neurol. 1997;16:37–41.
Shivering Attacks
Kanazawa O. Shuddering attacks—report of four children. Pediatr Neurol. 
2000;23:421–424.
Paroxysmal Torticollis
Chaves-­Carballo E. Paroxysmal torticollis. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 1996;3:255–
256.
Drigo P, Carli G, Laverda AM. Benign paroxysmal torticollis of infancy. Brain 
Dev. 2000;22:169–172.
Masturbation
Finklestein E, Amichai B, Jaworowski S, et al. Masturbation in prepubescent 
children: a case report and review of the literature. Child Care Health Dev. 
1996;22:323–326.
Spasmus Nutans
Shaw FS, Kriss A, Russel-­Eggitt I, et al. Diagnosing children presenting with 
asymmetric pendular nystagmus. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2001;43:622–627.
Benign Paroxysmal Vertigo
Herraiz C, Calvin FJ, Tapia MC, et al. The migraine: benign paroxysmal vertigo 
of childhood complex. Int Tinnitus J. 1999;5:50–52.
Russell G, Abu-­Arafeh I. Paroxysmal vertigo in children—an epidemiological 
study. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1999;49(suppl 1):S105–S107.
Benign Myoclonus of Early Infancy
Maydell BV, Berenson F, Rothner AD, et al. Benign myoclonus of early infan­
cy: an imitator of West’s syndrome. J Child Neurol. 2001;16:109–112.
Pachatz C, Fusco L, Vigevano F. Benign myoclonus of early infancy. Epileptic 
Disord. 1999;1:57–61.
Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood
Chaves-­Vischer V, Picard F, Andermann E, et al. Benign nocturnal alternating 
hemiplegia of childhood: six patients and long-­term follow-­up. Neurology. 
2001;57:1491–1493.
Ducros A, Denier C, Joutel A, et al. The clinical spectrum of familial hemiple­
gic migraine associated with mutations in a neuronal calcium channel. N 
Engl J Med. 2001;345:17–24.
Mikati MA, Kramer U, Zupanc ML, et al. Alternating hemiplegia of child­
hood: clinical manifestations and long-­term outcome. Pediatr Neurol. 
2000;23:134–141.
Acute Symptomatic Seizures and Occasional Seizures
Baumann RJ, Duffner PK. Treatment of children with simple febrile seizures: 
the AAP practice parameter. American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2000;23:11–17.
Knudsen FU. Febrile seizures: treatment and prognosis. Epilepsia. 2000;41:2–9.
Shinnar S, Pellock JM, Berg AT, et al. Short-­term outcomes of children with 
febrile status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 2001;42:47–53.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
716.e2
Epileptic Syndromes
Dulac O, Plouin P, Schlumberger E. Infantile spasms. In: Wyllie E, ed. The 
Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippin­
cott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:415–452.
Wong M, Trevathan E. Infantile spasms. Pediatr Neurol. 2001;24:89–98.
Severe Myoclonic Epilepsy in Infancy
Scheffer IE, Wallace R, Mulley JC, et al. Clinical and molecular genetics of 
myoclonic-­astatic epilepsy and severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy 
(Dravet syndrome). Brain Dev. 2001;23:732–735.
Paroxysmal Nonepileptic Disorders
Rand DC, Feldman MD. Misdiagnosis of Munchausen syndrome by proxy: a 
literature review and four new cases. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 1999;7:94–101.
Rosenow F, Wyllie E, Kotagal P, et al. Staring spells in children: descrip­
tive features distinguishing epileptic and nonepileptic events. J Pediatr. 
1998;133:660–663.
Wyllie E, Glazer J, Benbadis S, et al. Psychiatric features of children and adoles­
cents with pseudoseizures. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1999;153:244–248.
Tic Disorders
Jankovic J. Tourette’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1184–1192.
Marcus D, Kurlan R. Tics and its disorders. Neurol Clin. 2001;19:735–758.
Sleep Disorders
Guilleminault C, Pelayo R. Narcolepsy in children: a practical guide to its 
diagnosis, treatment and follow-­up. Paediatr Drugs. 2000;2:1–9.
Laberge L, Tremblay RE, Vitaro F, et al. Development of parasomnias from 
childhood to early adolescence. Pediatrics. 2000;106:67–74.
Ohayon MM, Guilleminault C, Priest RG. Night terrors, sleepwalking, 
and confusional arousals in the general population: their frequency 
and relationship to other sleep and mental disorders. J Clin Psychiatry. 
1999;60:268–276.
Stores G. Children’s sleep disorders: modern approaches, developmental ef­
fects, and children at special risk. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1999;41:568–573.
Hyperekplexia
Vergouwe MN, Tijssen MA, Peters AC, et al. Hyperekplexia phenotype due 
to compound heterozygosity for GLRA1 gene mutations. Ann Neurol. 
1999;46:634–638.
Self-­Stimulatory Behavior
Tan A, Salgado M, Fahn S. The characterization and outcome of stereotypic 
movements in non-­autistic children. Mov Disord. 1997;12:47–52.
Epileptic Syndromes
Andermann F, Zifkin B. The benign occipital epilepsies of childhood: an 
overview of the idiopathic syndromes and of the relationship to migraine. 
Epilepsia. 1998;39(suppl 4):S9–S23.
Baglietto MG, Battaglia FM, Nobili L, et al. Neuropsychological disorders 
related to interictal epileptic discharges during sleep in benign epilepsy of 
childhood with centrotemporal or rolandic spikes. Dev Med Child Neurol. 
2001;43:407–412.
Holmes GL. Clinical spectrum of benign focal epilepsies of childhood. Epilep­
sia. 2000;41:1051–1052.
Koutroumanidis M. Panayiotopoulos syndrome. BMJ. 2002;324:1228–1229.
Robinson R, Gardiner M. Genetics of childhood epilepsy. Arch Dis Child. 
2000;82:121–125.
Symptomatic Focal (Localization-­Related) Epilepsy
Berg AT, Shinnar S, Levy SR, et al. Early development of intractable epilepsy in 
children: a prospective study. Neurology. 2001;56:1445–1452.
Canafoglia L, Franceschetti S, Antozzi C, et al. Epileptic phenotypes associated 
with mitochondrial disorders. Neurology. 2001;56:1340–1346.
Shields WD. Catastrophic epilepsy in childhood. Epilepsia. 2000;41(suppl 
2):S2–S6.
Childhood Absence Epilepsy
Panayiotopoulos CP. Absence epilepsies. In: Engel JP, Pedley TA, eds. Epilepsy: 
A Comprehensive Textbook. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997:2327–
2346.
Wirrell E, Camfield C, Camfield P, et al. Prognostic significance of failure of 
the initial antiepileptic drug in children with absence epilepsy. Epilepsia. 
2001;42:760–763.
Epilepsia Partialis Continua and Rasmussen Encephalitis
Hart Y, Andermann F. Rasmussen’s syndrome. In: Lüders HO, Comair YG, 
eds. Epilepsy Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
2001:145–156.
Lennox-­Gastaut Syndrome
Farrell K. Symptomatic generalized epilepsy and the Lennox-­Gastaut syn­
drome. In: Wyllie E, ed. The Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles and Practice. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:525–536.
Myoclonic Astatic Epilepsy
Oguni H, Fukuyama Y, Tanaka T, et al. Myoclonic-­astatic epilepsy of early 
childhood—clinical and EEG analysis of myoclonic-­astatic seizures, and 
discussions on the nosology of the syndrome. Brain Dev. 2001;23:757–764.
Singh R, Andermann E, Whitehouse WP, et al. Severe myoclonic epilepsy of 
infancy: extended spectrum of GEFS. Epilepsia. 2001;42:837–844.
Adolescence
Andriola MR, Ettinger AB. Pseudoseizures and other nonepileptic paroxys­
mal disorders in children and adolescents. Neurology. 1999;53(5 suppl 
2):S89–S95.
Epileptic Syndromes
Dugan P, et al. Auras in generalized epilepsy. Neurology. 2014;83(16):1444–
1449.
Genton P, Gelisse P. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Arch Neurol. 2001;58:1487–
1490.
Janz D. The idiopathic generalized epilepsies of adolescence with childhood 
and juvenile age of onset. Epilepsia. 1997;38:4–11.
Scheffer IE. Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia. 
2000;41:1059–1060.
Diagnostic Evaluation of a Seizure Disorder
Duchowny M. Recent advances in candidate selection for pediatric epilepsy 
surgery. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2000;7:178–186.
Kuzniecky RI, Barkovich AJ. Malformations of cortical development and 
epilepsy. Brain Dev. 2001;23:2–11.
Liamsuwan S, Grattan-­Smith P, Fagan E, et al. The value of partial sleep depri­
vation as a routine measure in pediatric electroencephalography. J Child 
Neurol. 2000;15:26–29.
Raybaud C, Guye M, Mancini J, et al. Neuroimaging of epilepsy in children. 
Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am. 2001;9:121–147.
Strain JD, Kushner DC, Babcock DS, et al. Imaging of the pediatric patient 
with seizures. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Crite­
ria. Radiology. 2000;215(suppl):787–800.
van Karnebeek CDM, Sayson B, Lee JJY, et al. Metabolic evaluation of epilep­
sy: a diagnostic algorithm with focus on treatable conditions. Front Neurol. 
2018;9:1016.
Sharma S, Prasad AN. Inborn errors of metabolism and epilepsy: current 
understanding, diagnosis, and treatment approaches. Int J Mol Sci. 
2017;18(7):1384.
Antiepileptic Drugs
Bourgeois BFD. New antiepileptic drugs in children: which ones for which 
seizures. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2000;23:119–132.
Diaz-­Arrastia R, Agostini MA, Van Ness PC. Evolving treatment strategies for 
epilepsy. JAMA. 2002;287:2917–2920.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
716.e3
Gericke CA, Picard F, de Saint-­Martin A, et al. Efficacy of lamotrigine in 
idiopathic generalized epilepsy syndromes: a video–EEG-­controlled, open 
study. Epileptic Disord. 1999;1:159–165.
O’Brien TJ, Cascino GD, So EL, et al. Incidence and clinical consequence of 
the purple glove syndrome in patients receiving intravenous phenytoin. 
Neurology. 1998;51:1034–1039.
Panayiotopoulos CP. Treatment of typical absence seizures and related epilep­
tic syndromes. Paediatr Drugs. 2001;3:379–403.
Pedley TA, Hirano M. Is refractory epilepsy due to genetically determined 
resistance to antiepileptic drugs? N Engl J Med. 2003;15:1480–1482.
Wallace SJ. Myoclonus and epilepsy in childhood: a review of treatment 
with valproate, ethosuximide, lamotrigine and zonisamide. Epilepsy Res. 
1998;29:147–154.
Wallace SJ. Newer antiepileptic drugs: advantages and disadvantages. Brain 
Dev. 2001;23:277–283.
Genetics
Fasham J, Leslie JS, Harrison JW, et al. No association between SCN9A and 
monogenic human epilepsy disorders. PLoS Genet. 2020;16(11):e1009161.
Hebbar M, Mefford HC. Recent advances in epilepsy genomics and genetic 
testing. F1000Research. 2020;9:185.
Poduri A, Sheidley BR, Shostak S, et al. Genetic testing in the epilepsies—
developments and dilemmas. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014;10:293–299.
Pong AW, Pal DK, Chung WK. Developments in molecular genetic diag­
nostics: an update for the pediatric epilepsy specialist. Pediatr Neurol. 
2011;44:317–327.
Ream MA, Patel AD. Obtaining genetic testing in pediatric epilepsy. Epilepsia. 
2015;56(10):1505–1514.
Stamberger H, Nikanorova M, Willemsen MH, et al. STXBP1 encephalopathy. 
Neurology. 2016;86:954–962.
Wheless JW, Fulton SP, Mudigoudar BD. Dravet syndrome: a review of cur­
rent management. Pediatr Neirol. 2020;107:28–40.
FIRES
Beal JC, Cherian K, Moshe SL. Early-­onset epileptic encephalopathies: 
Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalopathy. Pediatr Neurol. 
2012;47:317–323.
Gataullina S, Dulac O. From genotype to phenotype in Dravet disease. Seizure. 
2017;64:58–64.
Guerriero RM, Gaillard WD. Imaging modalities to diagnose and localize 
status epilepticus. Seizure. Eur J Epilepsy. 2019;68:46–51.
Lee YJ. Febrile infection-­related epilepsy syndrome: refractory status epilepti­
cus and management of strategies. Ann Child Neurol. 2020;28(1):8–15.
Sculier C, Gaspard N. New onset refractory status spilepticus (NORSE). Sei­
zure. Eur J Epilepsy. 2019;68:72–78.
Specchio N, Pietrafusa N. New-­onset refractory status epilepticus and febrile 
infection-­related epilepsy syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2020;62:897–905.
Steel D, Symonds JD, Zuberi SM, et al. Dravat syndrome and its mimics: 
beyond SCN1A. Epilepsia. 2017;58(11):1907–1816.
van Baalen A, Vezzani A, Häusler M, Kluger G. Febrile infection-­related 
epilepsy syndrome: clinical review and hypotheses of epileptogenesis. 
Neuropediatrics. 2017;48:5–18.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
