630
Stroke is a sudden focal neurologic syndrome caused by an abrupt 
and critical interruption of the normal metabolic function of the cen­
tral nervous system (CNS), typically due to ischemia or hemorrhage. 
Depending on where in the CNS this interruption occurs, the symp­
toms of stroke can be striking, such as acute lateralized weakness, 
though at times are subtle, mimicking other and sometimes more 
benign neurologic processes or producing clinically asymptomatic 
lesions that are discovered only on imaging studies or detailed neu­
ropsychological evaluation. Despite this variability in presentation, 
stroke is a serious medical emergency and is among the 10 most com­
mon causes of death in childhood; prompt recognition and manage­
ment are essential, as effective interventions that can minimize the 
sequelae of stroke are time dependent and some must be initiated 
within hours of symptom onset. The sequelae are not trivial: In addi­
tion to lasting lateralized weakness (paralysis, paresis), other symp­
toms such as learning disabilities, disturbances of language, visual 
deficits, and seizures may persist throughout adulthood. Physicians 
should recognize both common and rare disorders that can predis­
pose to stroke to counsel patients and their families on the risk and 
recognition of stroke and to institute available prophylactic measures 
to minimize that risk. Additionally, clinicians should be aware of phe­
nomena that can mimic the symptoms of stroke to avoid unnecessary 
investigations or interventions.
DEFINITIONS
Stroke is a sudden focal neurologic syndrome caused by cerebrovas­
cular disease, which refers to any abnormality of the brain resulting 
from a pathologic process of the blood vessels, such as occlusion of the 
lumen by an embolus or thrombus, rupture of a vessel wall or alteration 
in vessel wall permeability, increased viscosity, vessel inflammatory 
disorders, or other changes in the quality of blood flow through the 
cerebral vessels. Brain injury from stroke occurs in one of two general 
forms:
Ischemia consists of inadequate brain perfusion with consequent lack 
of oxygen or other blood-­delivered substances necessary for normal 
metabolic function.
Hemorrhage occurs when blood is released into the extravascular cra­
nial space, producing focal brain injury from irritation and pressure 
exerted by the space-­occupying mass of blood.
Rarely metabolic stroke due to mitochondrial disorders, hypoglycemia, 
or organic acidemias may produce stroke in the absence of ischemia or 
hemorrhage.
Arterial ischemic stroke (AIS) typically occurs via one of three 
mechanisms: embolism, thrombosis, or global cerebral hypoperfusion. 
Ischemic brain injury may rarely be secondary to metabolic derange­
ments or arterial vasospasm. Figures 37.1 through 37.4 demonstrate 
the arterial vascular supply to the brain.
Embolic stroke occurs when material formed within a vessel out­
side the brain travels to and lodges in a blood vessel supplying the 
brain, blocking cerebral perfusion. Emboli originate most commonly 
in the heart, arising from a thrombus on a cardiac chamber wall or 
from a vegetation on valve leaflets. Artery-­to-­artery emboli are com­
posed of clot or platelet aggregates that originate in vessels proximal to 
the brain that ultimately travel to and occlude flow in vessels critical for 
cerebral perfusion. Systemic vein-­to-­cerebral artery emboli (i.e., para­
doxical emboli) are possible in the presence of the right-­to-­left shunts 
of cyanotic congenital heart disease or a patent foramen ovale.
Thrombosis denotes vascular occlusion caused by a localized pro­
cess within a blood vessel or vessels. Although atherosclerosis under­
lies most thrombotic processes affecting adults, it is not common in 
children. Localized luminal clot formation in cerebral vessels occurs 
in polycythemia or in a hypercoagulable state. Alternatively, anatomic 
abnormalities may lead to clot formation or mechanical obstruction 
as is found in fibromuscular dysplasia, arteritis (vasculitis), or arterial 
dissection.
Global cerebral hypoperfusion due to systemic hypotension or 
cardiac pump failure (resulting from congenital heart disease or its 
surgical repair) can result in cerebral ischemic injury. With dimin­
ished cerebral perfusion, brain injury is more diffuse than the more 
focal injuries characteristic of thrombotic and embolic cerebral 
events.
Metabolic stroke occurs when a physiologic stressor produces met­
abolic demands that exceed the ability to provide sufficient metabolic 
substrate to the brain, provoking an energy failure state that results 
in an acute neurologic deficit. Common stressors include prolonged 
fasting with hypoglycemia, intercurrent illness, or seizures. Patients 
with certain inborn errors of metabolism or mitochondrial disorders 
are more susceptible to metabolic decompensation and therefore met­
abolic stroke.
Vasospasm, a contraction of the wall of intracranial arteries caus­
ing luminal narrowing, is most often seen after subarachnoid hemor­
rhage but may also occur in the setting of CNS infections. Narrowed 
vessels are unable to perfuse areas of the brain sufficiently and cerebral 
ischemia may occur.
Intracranial hemorrhage arises in one of two patterns:
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) occurs when blood flows out of the 
intracranial vascular bed onto the surface of the brain to mix with 
cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid space. The most common 
source of such intracranial bleeding in early childhood is an arte­
riovenous malformation (AVM). Ruptured intracranial aneu­
rysms also cause SAH, especially in older children (Table 37.1).
Intraparenchymal hemorrhage denotes bleeding into the paren­
chyma of the brain. The severity and spectrum of deficits caused 
by intraparenchymal hemorrhage are determined by the extent and 
location of bleeding in the brain (Table 37.2).
Stroke
Raquel Farias-­Moeller
37
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
631
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
Venous stroke occurs when there is occlusion of the dural venous 
sinuses (Table 37.3). Thrombosis may occur in cerebral veins that con­
duct deoxygenated blood from the brain parenchyma to the dural sinus 
system (Fig. 37.5). These sinuses—the sagittal, straight, transverse, 
cavernous, and petrous—then convey the blood to the jugular veins. 
Occlusion of flow anywhere in these venous conduits leads to local 
underdrainage, which may lead to ischemia and even hemorrhage.
THE SYMPTOMS OF STROKE
The primary symptom of a stroke is a sudden neurologic deficit, a 
localized interruption of the functions for which the compromised area 
of brain tissue is responsible. The location, or focality, of the resultant 
Anterior cerebral
artery (ACA)
Anterior
communicating
artery (ACom)
Middle cerebral
artery-bifurcation
Middle cerebral
artery-M2 segment
Middle cerebral
artery-M1 segment
Carotid siphon
Internal carotid
artery (ICA)
Fig. 37.1  Magnetic resonance angiogram of the intracranial portion of 
the internal carotid artery and its main branches. (From Goldstein LB. 
Approach to cerebrovascular diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. 
Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2388, 
Fig. 378-­2.)
Posterior cerebral
artery (PCA)
Superior cerebellar
artery (SCA)
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
(AICA)
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
(PICA)
Basilar artery
Left vertebral
artery
Right vertebral
artery
Fig. 37.2  Magnetic resonance angiogram of the intracranial portion of 
the vertebrobasilar system. (From Goldstein LB. Approach to cerebro­
vascular diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medi­
cine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2389, Fig. 378-­3.)
Thalamus
Internal
capsule
posterior limb
Globus
pallidus
Putamen
Caudate
ACA
PCA
PCA
deep branches
ACA
deep branches
MCA
superior division
MCA
deep branches
MCA
inferior division
Anterior choroidal
artery
Internal capsule
anterior limb
Fig. 37.3  Anatomic distribution of blood flow from major intracranial 
vessels in the cerebral hemispheres. ACA, anterior cerebral artery; 
MCA, middle cerebral artery; PCA, posterior cerebral artery. (From Lem­
kuil BP, Drummond JC, Patel PM. Central nervous system physiology: 
cerebrovascular. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and 
Physiology for Anesthesia. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:175, Fig. 
9.2A.)
Superior
cerebellar artery
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Basilar
artery
Anterior spinal
artery
Vertebral artery
(paramedian
branches)
Fig. 37.4  Anatomic distribution of blood flow from major intracranial 
vessels in the cerebral hemispheres and infratentorial structures. (From 
Lemkuil BP, Drummond JC, Patel PM. Central nervous system physiol­
ogy: cerebrovascular. In: Hemmings HC Jr, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology 
and Physiology for Anesthesia. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:175, 
Fig. 9.2B.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
632
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
deficit depends on the laterality and whether the event occurred in the 
cortex, the subcortical areas, the cerebellum, or the brainstem, as well 
as the pathways that were interrupted (Table 37.4). The duration of the 
neurologic deficit may vary. Focal neurologic deficits in stroke are usu­
ally chronic and static, though with intense rehabilitation, some degree 
of recovery is expected. Stroke recrudescence, in which a pre-­existing 
stroke-­induced deficit can temporarily worsen during an acute stressor, 
can occur as well. Finally, although alterations of blood flow often 
result in permanent deficits, some cause only temporary ones: tran­
sient ischemic attacks (TIAs) are brief episodes of focal, nonepileptic 
neurologic deficit attributable to interruption of cerebral perfusion; the 
onset is abrupt, and, by definition, symptoms last less than 24 hours 
with complete recovery afterward; most TIAs last only a few minutes.
The degree to which a neurologic deficit is symptomatic is influ­
enced not only by the location of the lesion but also by the age and 
developmental status of the patient. Neonates and infants often present 
with vague symptoms that may mimic a variety of conditions, such as 
lethargy, apnea, or feeding intolerance. Older children and adolescents 
present similarly to adults, with distinct focal neurologic deficits; how­
ever, more globally diffuse presentations can occur and do so more 
commonly than in adults, and must be distinguished from mimicking 
conditions such as migraine headache or acute disseminated enceph­
alomyelitis. When symptoms are diffuse or there is a depressed level 
of consciousness, detailed neurologic examination may uncover subtle 
focal deficits that increase the suspicion of stroke. Examination may 
also allow the clinician to determine when symptoms are attributable 
to CNS-­based pathology other than stroke, to pathophysiology outside 
the CNS, or to a psychogenic cause.
Stroke symptoms, such as weakness or sensory deficits, may present 
in isolation, but a combination of deficits is common. Similar symp­
toms may be attributable to strokes affecting different brain territo­
ries. Diagnostic delays in pediatric stroke can be related to the lack of 
awareness among families and medical staff members as to the risk and 
presentation of pediatric stroke, as well as higher incidence of stroke 
mimics, conditions that present similarly to stroke despite being due 
to a different etiology. These mimics vary in severity and morbidity 
TABLE 37.1  Causes of Spontaneous Subarachnoid Hemorrhage in Young Adults
Cerebral aneurysm rupture
Perimesencephalic hemorrhage
Vascular malformation rupture (arteriovenous malformation, arteriovenous 
fistula, cavernous malformations)
Other
Congenital disorders
Coarctation of the aorta
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Menkes kinky hair syndrome
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis complex
Neurofibromatosis 1 (von Recklinghausen disease)
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-­Osler disease)
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Systemic vascular disease
Hypertension
Cerebral embolism
Moyamoya disease
Cerebral venous occlusive disease
Eclampsia
Hematologic disorders
Hemophilia
Aplastic anemia
Sickle cell anemia
Leukemias
Thrombocytopenic purpura
Anticoagulant therapy
Thrombolytic therapy
Infectious diseases
Infective endocarditis
Tuberculous meningitis
Luetic meningoencephalitis
Fungal central nervous system infections
Infectious mononucleosis
Tick-­borne relapsing fever
Autoimmune disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
Kawasaki disease
Other systemic diseases
Heat stroke
Conn syndrome
Thyrotoxicosis
Wolman disease
Spinal endometriosis
Neoplasms
Gliomas
Meningiomas
Acoustic neuromas
Choroid plexus papillomas
Pituitary adenomas
Pineocytomas
Chordomas
Subependymomas
Metastatic carcinoma
Intraspinal neoplasms
Drugs
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Ephedrine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Oral contraceptive pills
Phencyclidine
Alcohol
Miscellaneous
α-­Galactosidase deficiency
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Klippel-­Trénaunay-­Weber syndrome
Parry-­Romberg syndrome
3-­M syndrome
From Biller J. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009:290, Table 15-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
633
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
TABLE 37.2  Causes of Spontaneous 
Intracerebral Hemorrhage in Young Adults
Vascular malformations
AVMs
Capillary telangiectasias
Cavernous malformations
Developmental venous anomalies
Aneurysms
Saccular
Infective
Traumatic
Neoplastic
Arterial hypertension
Secondary
Primary
Bleeding diatheses
Leukemia
Thrombocytopenia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Polycythemia
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Hemophilia
Hypoprothrombinemia
Afibrinogenemia
Selective factor deficiencies
von Willebrand disease
Sickle cell anemia
Antiplatelet therapy
Anticoagulant therapy
Thrombolytic therapy
Icelandic form of CAA
Arteritis/arteriopathies
Infectious vasculitides
Multisystem vasculitides
Isolated CNS angiitis
Moyamoya disease
HANAC syndrome
Drug related
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Phenylpropanolamine
Pentazocine-­pyribenzamine
Phencyclidine
Heroin
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
Other drugs
Intracranial tumors
Primary malignant or benign
Metastatic
Cerebral venous occlusive disease
Miscellaneous
Post–carotid endarterectomy
Post–selective neurosurgical procedures
Post–spinal anesthesia
Postmyelography
Cold related
Post–painful dental procedures
Protracted migraine
Methanol intoxication
AVM, arteriovenous malformation; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; 
CNS, central nervous system; HANAC, hereditary angiopathy with 
nephropathy, aneurysms, muscle cramps.
From Biller J. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009:263, Table 14-­1.
and are often more prevalent in children than in adults. Stroke mimics 
vary by stroke symptom and differ in etiology according to age (Table 
37.5). The following sections describe the most common symptoms 
with which children with stroke can present.
Weakness
Children with stroke most often present with unilateral weakness sec­
ondary to injury of the corticospinal tract, which originates in the 
motor cortex in the precentral gyrus and sends motor information 
to the spinal cord. Hemiparesis manifests as unilateral weakness and 
hemiplegia as unilateral paralysis, or complete loss of strength. The 
motor cortex is organized by the region of the body it controls (Fig. 
37.6). The localization and severity of weakness, as well as the type 
(flaccid or spastic), depend on the location of the stroke and the timing 
of examination.
Localization and Severity of Weakness
The upper motor neurons of the corticospinal tracts originate in the 
cerebral cortex, decussate (i.e., cross sides) in the brainstem, and termi­
nate on lower motor neurons and interneurons in the spinal cord (Fig. 
37.7). Due to this crossing, lesions above the decussation cause con­
tralateral motor deficits. In cortical strokes affecting upper motor neu­
rons, the location of the injury determines which body parts are weak, 
as well as the degree of weakness. Given the large topographic distri­
bution of the motor cortex and different vascular territories that supply 
it, a substantially large stroke in the motor cortex may cause weakness 
in only a relatively small area of the body. In contrast, a very small 
stroke in the internal capsule may cause complete hemiplegia, due to 
the compact nature of the corticospinal tract in this area. If a stroke in 
the brainstem causes unilateral weakness, it is typically accompanied 
by other signs of brainstem dysfunction.
The severity of unilateral weakness may vary from severe hemi­
plegia to subtle hemiparesis. On examination, hemiparesis may be 
accompanied by pronator drift, slowing of rapid alternating move­
ments, or decreased arm swing during gait. Pronator drift is assessed 
by asking the patient to extend the arms at the shoulder while keeping 
the elbows straight with the palms facing up in a supinated position, 
as if carrying a tray. The patient is then asked to close the eyes and 
maintain the arms in this position. In pronator drift, the affected arm 
will slowly drift down and the hand may pronate. Assessing rapid 
alternating movements involves asking the patient to perform a series 
of repetitive movements as quickly though dexterously as possible. 
Movements include alternating supination and pronation of the fore­
arm to tap the plantar and palmar surfaces of the hands against the 
thighs, touching each of the fingers to the thumb in succession in 
a repeating fashion, or tapping the floor by repeatedly flexing and 
extending the ankles. The weak limb will perform these movements 
with decreased speed and dexterity in comparison to the unaffected 
limb. Decreased arm swing can be observed when the patient is 
asked to ambulate; the affected arm does not swing as much as the 
unaffected arm.
Characterization of Weakness: Flaccid or Spastic
Tone is the resistance of muscle to stretch; the maintenance of normal 
tone requires intact central and peripheral nervous systems (see Chap­
ter 35). Acutely following a stroke, weakness is usually flaccid, or hypo­
tonic. For infants and young children, the flaccid weakness manifests 
symptomatically as decreased or absent spontaneous movement of the 
affected limbs, while passive movements of the affected limbs are met 
with little to no resistance. Such deficits in older children and adoles­
cents are noticeable to both the patient and observers alike, and muscle 
group testing can further localize specific areas of weakness.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
634
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
With time, patients with weakness from stroke typically develop 
increased tone, or spasticity, as well as clonus in the affected limbs. 
Spasticity generally involves antigravity muscles, primarily the arm 
flexors and leg extensors. As a result, the arms become flexed and 
pronated, while the legs become extended and adducted, with plantar 
flexion of the foot and inversion of the ankle. If the hand is affected, 
cortical thumbing, consisting of adduction and flexion of the thumb, 
may occur. Testing for spasticity involves moving the relaxed affected 
extremity several times through its range of motion and assessing 
for freedom of movement. The extremity is then suddenly stretched 
through that range of motion at a higher velocity, at which point, if 
there is spasticity, tone will notably increase and the limb will “catch,” a 
finding referred to as the clasp-­knife response.
In addition to developing spasticity, patients with stroke affecting 
the corticospinal tracts develop brisk and hyperactive deep tendon 
reflexes due to the interruption of descending inhibitory upper motor 
TABLE 37.3  Causes of Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
Idiopathic
Prothrombotic state
Protein C or S deficiency
Antithrombin deficiency
Factor V Leiden variant
Activated protein C resistance
Prothrombin G20210A variant
Variants in thrombomodulin
Platelet glycoprotein IIIa (β3) variant
Heparin cofactor II deficiency
Variants in plasminogen gene
MTHFR C677 variant
Dysfibrinogenemia
Elevated plasminogen activator inhibitor
Tissue plasminogen activator deficiency
Increased factors VIII, IX, X; von Willebrand factor
Variants in tissue factor pathway inhibitor
Sickle cell disease and trait
Reactive thrombocytosis and essential thrombocythemia
Pregnancy and puerperium
Postoperative state
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Homocystinuria
Cancer
Inflammatory bowel diseases
Dehydration
Congestive heart failure
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Marasmus
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Nephrotic syndrome
Thrombocytopenia
Essential thrombocythemia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Thrombotic microangiopathies
Polycythemia vera and secondary polycythemia
Hyperlipidemia
Familial histidine-­rich glycoprotein deficiency
Drugs
Asparaginase
Estrogen and oral contraceptives
Androgen
Drugs—cont’d
ε-­Aminocaproic acid
Cisplatin and etoposide
Medroxyprogesterone
Heparin (heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia)
Immunoglobulin G (intravenous immunoglobulin)
Infections
Herpes zoster virus
Myeloidosis
Mucormycosis
Aspergillosis
Pneumococcal meningitis
Syphilis
HIV
Otitis media
Mastoiditis
Sinusitis
Peritonsillar abscess
Endotoxemia
Trichinosis
Sepsis
Vasculitides
Behçet disease
Sarcoidosis
Polyangiitis with granulomatosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
Trauma
Head trauma
Neurosurgical procedures
Strangulation
Intravenous catheters
Cardiac pacemakers
Others
Osteopetrosis
Malignant atrophic papulosis (Kohlmeier-­Degos disease)
Chronic lung disease
Diabetes mellitus
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Arteriovenous malformation
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Cerebral arterial occlusions
Neoplasm (meningioma, metastasis, glomus tumors)
From Biller J. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009:237, Table 12-­3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
635
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
neuron pathways and increased activity of the γ neuron reflex loop (see 
Chapter 35). Hyperactive reflexes are often accompanied by patho­
logic clonus, consisting of repetitive, rhythmic muscle contractions 
in response to tendon percussion or stretch of that muscle. Healthy 
neonates may have several beats of physiologic clonus; clonus in older 
infants or in children, adolescents, or adults is generally considered 
pathologic. Greater than 10 beats upon elicitation is considered sus­
tained clonus and is indicative of more severe hypertonia. Pathologic 
spread of reflexes, in which antagonist or nearby adjacent muscle 
groups contract along with the muscle whose stretch reflex is being 
tested, is an additional sign of hypertonia. Other specific pathologic 
reflexes may be present if the relevant portion of the corticospinal tract 
is affected. Plantarflexion of the great toe is the physiologic response 
to stroking the foot in an arc from the heel, along the lateral aspect 
of the plantar surface, and across the ball of the foot to the great toe. 
Patients with an upper motor neuron lesion affecting control of the leg 
and foot will demonstrate the Babinski response, in which the great 
toe dorsiflexes rather than plantarflexes. The Hoffmann sign is elicited 
when the examiner flicks the fingernail of the patient’s middle finger 
rapidly downward; if present, the index finger and the thumb invol­
untarily flex.
Sensory Deficits
The somatosensory cortex, located in the postcentral gyrus in the 
parietal lobe, posterior to the motor cortex, interprets sensory infor­
mation from the periphery. The sensory cortex is organized topo­
graphically in a manner similar to the organization of the motor 
cortex (see Fig. 37.6) and shares the same vascular supply (see Figs. 
37.1 and 37.3). Sensory information being received in the somato­
sensory cortex must first travel through ascending tracts in the spinal 
cord: the spinothalamic tracts and the dorsal columns (see Fig. 37.7); 
the former decussate within the spinal cord near their point of ori­
gin, whereas the latter cross the midline in the medulla. Each path­
way conveys different sensory modalities and both ascend through 
the brainstem, arriving at the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the 
thalamus. Symptoms vary by where in these pathways stroke occurs. 
Given the shared blood supply to the motor and sensory cortices, 
cortical strokes tend to produce combined motor and sensory symp­
toms. Cortical strokes also tend to interrupt not just primary sen­
sory information, but also the meaningful interpretation of sensory 
information. In contrast to strokes within the sensory cortex, strokes 
affecting pathways as they traverse the thalamus and other relays 
may produce isolated sensory deficits affecting just primary sensory 
modalities. The sensory tracts may also suffer infarction at the level 
of the brainstem, in which case cranial neuropathies or brainstem 
syndromes may ensue.
The most common sensory deficit following a stroke is a loss of 
sensation, or hypoesthesia, which may range from partial to com­
plete numbness. Lesions of the somatosensory cortex may involve 
more complex sensory deficits like agraphesthesia, which refers to 
the loss of directional orientation across the surface of the skin, and 
Superior
sagittal
sinus
Cortical
veins
Internal cerebral
veins
Basal vein
of Rosenthal
Vein of
Galen
Straight
sinus
Torculum
Transverse
sinus
Sigmoid
sinus
Internal
jugular
vein
Inferior
petrosal
sinus
Fig. 37.5  Parasagittal magnetic resonance venogram showing venous 
structures. (From Goldstein LB. Approach to cerebrovascular diseases. 
In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Phil­
adelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2393, Fig. 378-­10.)
TABLE 37.4  Clinical Manifestations of 
Ischemic Cerebrovascular Disease
Occluded Artery
Typical Major Clinical 
Manifestations*
Internal carotid artery
Ipsilateral visual loss
Ipsilateral middle cerebral artery syndrome
Anterior choroidal artery
Contralateral hemiparesis
Contralateral sensory impairment
Contralateral visual field defect
Anterior cerebral artery
Contralateral leg > arm paresis
Contralateral leg > arm sensory deficit
Middle cerebral artery
Contralateral hemiparesis affecting face and 
arm > leg
Contralateral sensory deficit affecting face and 
arm > leg
Contralateral visual field defect
Aphasia (dominant hemisphere)
Contralateral hemispatial neglect (nondominant 
or dominant hemisphere)
Posterior cerebral artery
Contralateral homonymous hemianopia 
(or homonymous superior or inferior 
quadrantanopia)
Contralateral sensory deficits (thalamic 
involvement)
Basilar artery tip
Bilateral central visual loss
Confusion
Basilar artery
Ipsilateral cranial nerve deficit
Contralateral hemiparesis
Contralateral sensory impairment affecting arm 
and/or leg
Coordination deficit
Vertebral artery, posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery
Ipsilateral sensory impairment over the face
Dysphagia
Ipsilateral Horner syndrome
Ataxia
Superior cerebellar artery
Gait ataxia
Ipsilateral limb ataxia
Variable contralateral limb weakness
*Note: Not all may be present.
From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2397, Table 379-­2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
636
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
which on examination manifests as the inability to recognize a num­
ber or letter drawn on the skin. Extinction to simultaneous stimu­
lation refers to the inability to recognize a sensory stimulus on the 
affected side when that stimulus is presented bilaterally at the same 
time, despite being able to recognize the stimulus on the affected side 
when it is presented in isolation. A patient may detect light brush­
ing of the skin of the cheek on the affected side when presented in 
isolation though fail to detect brushing of the cheek on the affected 
side when both cheeks are brushed simultaneously. In the subacute 
and chronic stages of stroke a child may have lingering hypoesthe­
sia, but also may have altered sensation, or dysesthesia. The ability 
of children to recognize and describe sensory deficits is dependent 
on developmental status. Children may use terms like “pins and nee­
dles,” “burning,” “bubbles,” or just “pain” to describe dysesthesia. In 
thalamic strokes that affect the sensory relay nuclei, dysesthesia may 
provoke severe pain: Thalamic pain syndrome (or Dejerine-­Roussy 
syndrome) is characterized by a profound hemi-­body sensory loss 
that is eventually replaced by pain, paresthesia, and hyperalgesia of 
the hemibody contralateral to the stroke.
Language Deficits
Children with acute stroke may present with a sudden language deficit, 
the nature of which is determined by the location of the stroke. Bro­
ca’s area, in the inferior frontal gyrus, is mainly responsible for speech 
TABLE 37.5  Distinguishing Clinical and Imaging Features of Stroke Mimics
Disorder
Clinical Distinction from Stroke
Imaging Distinction from Stroke
Migraine
Evolving or “marching” symptoms, short duration, complete 
resolution, headache, personal or family history of migraine
Typically normal
Migrainous infarction is extremely rare
Seizure*
Positive symptoms, Todd paralysis is postseizure and time limited Normal or may identify source of seizures (e.g., 
malformation, old injury)
Infection
Fever, encephalopathy, gradual onset, meningismus
Normal or signs of encephalitis/cerebritis, which are 
typically diffuse and bilateral. Arterial ischemic stroke 
and cerebral sinovenous thrombosis can occur in 
bacterial meningitis
Demyelination
Gradual onset, multifocal symptoms, encephalopathy
Accompanying optic neuritis or transverse myelitis
Multifocal lesions, characteristic appearance (e.g., 
patchy in acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, 
ovoid in multiple sclerosis), typical locations (e.g., 
pericallosal in multiple sclerosis), less likely to show 
restricted diffusion
Hypoglycemia
Risk factor (e.g., insulin therapy), related to meals, additional 
systemic symptoms
Bilateral, symmetric
May see restricted diffusion
Posterior dominant pattern
Hypertensive encephalopathy 
(posterior reversible 
leukoencephalopathy syndrome)
Documented hypertension, bilateral visual symptoms, 
encephalopathy
Posterior dominant, bilateral, patchy lesions involving 
gray and white matter; usually no restricted diffusion
Inborn errors of metabolism
Pre-­existing delays/regression, multisystem disease, abnormal 
biochemical profiles
May have restricted diffusion lesions but bilateral, 
symmetric, not conforming to established vascular 
territories. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
changes (e.g., high lactate in mitochondrial myopathy, 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike 
episodes)
Vestibulopathy
Symptoms limited to vertigo, imbalance (i.e., no weakness); 
gradual onset
Normal
Acute cerebellar ataxia
Sudden-­onset bilaterally symmetric ataxia; postviral
Normal
Channelopathy
Syndromic cluster of symptoms not localizing to single lesion; 
gradual onset, progressive evolution
Normal
Alternating hemiplegia
History of contralateral events
Choreoathetosis/dystonia
Normal
Functional neurologic disorders
Recent psychosocial stressors
Failure of signs and symptoms to localize to a specific lesion 
within the neural axis
Presence of inconsistent examination findings
Positive Hoover sign (when being evaluated for supposed lower 
extremity weakness, the patient with a functional disorder will 
exert downward pressure at the heel of the unaffected limb if 
the examiner holds the heel while asking the patient to raise 
the affected leg off the bed)
Normal
*Seizures, however, can also herald the onset of true stroke.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
637
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
production. Wernicke’s area, located in the junction of the superior 
temporal gyrus and the parietal cortex adjacent to auditory regions, is 
responsible for speech recognition. In most individuals these language 
areas are located in the left hemisphere. Lesions in and around Broca’s 
and Wernicke’s areas, or in the white matter tracts connecting these 
areas, lead to speech disturbances, or aphasias.
Types of Aphasias
The examination of a patient with suspected aphasia must consider age 
and developmental stage, as the evaluation requires pre-­existent lan­
guage production and comprehension, as well as the ability to follow 
commands, such as the repetition of words. Aphasias can be broadly 
divided into expressive (nonfluent) and receptive (fluent) and can 
be further categorized based on the ability to repeat words or phrases 
(Table 37.6).
The prototypical expressive aphasia is Broca aphasia, the evalua­
tion of which typically reveals a frustrated patient who is able to com­
prehend language while being unable to speak or repeat phrases. In 
the most severe form, the patient is mute, whereas in the milder forms 
the patient may produce speech with frequent paraphasic errors (e.g., 
responding “pan” when asked to name a pen). An additional expres­
sive aphasia is transcortical motor aphasia, in which a patient retains 
the ability to comprehend and repeat speech but is unable to produce 
spontaneous speech.
The prototypical receptive aphasia is Wernicke aphasia, in which 
comprehension of language is impaired but prosody or fluency of 
speech is preserved. The content of speech is often nonsensical and the 
words are often malformed; however, since the patient cannot under­
stand their own nonsensical speech, frustration or concern with the 
deficit is absent. With pure Wernicke aphasia repetition is impaired. 
An additional expressive aphasia in which repetition is preserved is 
transcortical sensory aphasia.
Additional aphasia syndromes include global aphasia, in which 
both production and comprehension are impaired; mixed transcortical 
aphasia, in which both receptive and expressive language are impaired 
but the repetition of words is preserved; and conduction aphasia, in 
which the comprehension and production of speech are preserved but 
the repetition of words is impaired.
Visual Deficits
Visual deficits vary depending on the location and extent of stroke; 
determining the nature and degree of a visual disturbance can aid in 
localization and assist in visual therapies (Fig. 37.8). The optic nerves 
carry visual information from the nasal and temporal visual fields of 
each eye. Within the optic chiasm, fibers from the nasal visual field of 
each eye decussate and join with fibers from the temporal visual field, 
which do not cross the midline, forming the optic tracts, such that the 
left visual fields from both eyes are registered by the right hemisphere, 
and the right visual fields from both eyes by the left hemisphere. The 
optic tracts pass from the chiasm to the left and right lateral geniculate 
nuclei of the thalami. From the lateral geniculate nucleus, information 
travels though superior and inferior optic radiations: The superior radi­
ations travel through the parietal lobes and contain information of the 
inferior visual fields, while the inferior radiations travel through the tem­
poral lobes and carry information of the superior visual fields, with both 
arriving at the visual cortex within the corresponding occipital lobes. 
Fibers specifically serving central vision come together tightly and syn­
apse at the innermost folding of the calcarine gyrus in the occipital lobe.
The vascular supply to these areas is varied. The lateral geniculate 
nucleus is supplied by the anterior choroidal artery, a branch of the 
internal carotid artery. The superior optic radiation is supplied by a 
branch of the middle cerebral artery, while the inferior optic radiation 
is supplied by the middle and posterior cerebral arteries. Lesions in 
the calcarine gyrus have dual blood supply from the posterior cere­
bral artery and posterior branches of the middle cerebral artery; an 
ischemic lesion of one vascular territory often results in a contralateral 
hemianopia with sparing of the macular or central vision. The occipital 
cortex itself is in the territory of the posterior cerebral artery.
Toes
Ankle
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Index
Thumb
Neck
Brow
Eyelid and eyeball
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
Knee
M
A
S
T
I
C
A
T
I
O
N 
S
A
L
I
V
A
T
I
O
N 
VO
CAL
IZA
TIO
N 
Fingers
A  Motor
Genitalia
Toes
Foot
Leg
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Head
Arm
Neck
Elbow
Forearm
Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Index
Thumb
Eye
Nose
Face
Upper lip
Lips
Lower lip
Teeth, gums and jaw
Tongue
Pharynx
Intra-abdominal
Fingers
B  Sensory
Fig. 37.6  The topographic organization of the primary somatic sensory (A) and motor (B) areas of the cortex. 
The relative size of each body area represented within the homunculus is indicative of the amount of cortical 
tissue dedicated to processing sensory (A) or motor (B) information for that body area. (From Huether SE, 
McCance KL, Brashers VL. Understanding Pathophysiology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Fig. 14.9.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
638
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Leg
Leg
Arm
Arm
Rostral
midbrain
Rostral
pons
Caudal
medulla
RF
L4
Ventral posterolateral (VPL)
nucleus of the thalamus
Cerebral peduncle
Oculomotor nerve
Medial lemniscus
Posterior column nuclei
Medial lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
From pain and temperature
(and some touch) receptors
C8
Spinothalamic
tract
Lissauer’s tract
Rostral 
Caudal 
P
o
st
c
e
nt
r
al
 
g
y
r
u
s
Internal capsule 
Cerebral peduncle 
Basal pons 
Pyramid
Pyramidal decussation 
Lateral corticospinal tract 
Anterior corticospinal tract
To skeletal muscle 
Rostral
midbrain
Rostral
pons
Caudal
medulla
C8
L4
P
re
c
e
nt
ra
l 
g
y
r
u
s
A
B
Fig. 37.7  A, Corticospinal tracts. Fibers from the precentral gyrus and other nearby cortical areas descend 
through the cerebral peduncles, pons, and medullary pyramids; most cross in the pyramidal decussation to 
form the lateral corticospinal tract. Those that do not cross in the pyramidal decussation form the anterior 
corticospinal tract; most of these fibers cross in the anterior white commissure before ending in the spinal 
gray matter. Most corticospinal fibers do not synapse directly on motor neurons; they are drawn that way 
here for simplicity. B, Spinothalamic tract. Pain, temperature, and some touch and pressure afferents end in 
the posterior horn. Second-­ or higher-­order fibers cross the midline, form the spinothalamic tract, and ascend 
to the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus (and also to other thalamic nuclei not shown). 
Thalamic cells then project to the somatosensory cortex of the postcentral gyrus, to the insula, and to other 
cortical areas (also not shown). Along their course through the brainstem, spinothalamic fibers give off many 
collaterals to the reticular formation (RF). The inset to the left shows the lamination of fibers in the posterior 
columns and the spinothalamic tract in a leg–lower trunk–upper trunk–arm sequence. The inset to the right 
shows the longitudinal formation of the spinothalamic tract. Primary afferents ascend several segments in 
Lissauer’s tract before all of their branches terminate; fibers crossing to join the spinothalamic tract do so 
with a rostral inclination. As a result, a cordotomy incision at any given level will spare most of the information 
entering the contralateral side of the spinal cord at that level, and to be effective, the incision must be made 
several segments rostral to the highest dermatomal level of pain. (A and B, From Vanderah TW, Gould DJ. 
Nolte’s The Human Brain. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Figs. 10-­22 and 10-­24.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
639
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
Ischemic lesions of the visual pathway may involve the retina or 
optic nerve, though the latter is rare in children, with demyelinating 
disease being a more common etiology of optic nerve lesions in chil­
dren and adolescents. Lesions in the retina or optic nerve affect one 
eye and can result in scotoma (i.e., a blind spot), central blurry vision, 
or, if severe, monocular blindness; pupillary response is often affected, 
resulting in a relative afferent pupillary defect, in which shining a 
light on the affected eye results in decreased pupillary constriction rel­
ative to shining a light in the unaffected eye. Strokes affecting the optic 
chiasm result in bitemporal hemianopias, in which vision loss affects 
the right and left temporal visual fields, though this finding is less fre­
quently due to stroke and is more commonly due to perichiasmatic 
masses such as pituitary or sellar masses, craniopharyngiomas, or 
aneurysms. Retrochiasmatic lesions are associated with contralateral 
hemianopias (visual field defect corresponding to the opposite visual 
field) or quadrantanopias depending on whether the optic tracts, radi­
ations, or occipital lobes are involved (see Fig. 37.8).
Lesions within visual processing centers in the occipital and parietal 
lobes may produce disorders of visual cognition. Visual information 
from the occipital lobe is transmitted superiorly to the parietal lobe for 
spatial processing (“where” pathways) and inferiorly to the temporal 
lobe for identification (“what” pathways). The left inferior identifica­
tion pathways are specialized for visual word processing; lesions in the 
TABLE 37.6  Aphasia Types and 
Distinguishing Features
Aphasia Type
Fluency
Comprehension Repetition
Broca
Absent
Present
Absent
Transcortical motor
Absent
Present
Present
Wernicke
Present
Absent
Absent
Transcortical sensory
Present
Absent
Present
Mixed transcortical
Absent
Absent
Present
Conduction
Present
Present
Absent
Global
Absent
Absent
Absent
LGN
(Brain viewed from above)
Upper bank
of calcarine sulcus
Lower bank
of calcarine sulcus
Optic
radiations
Meyer
loop
Optic
tract
Left
Right
Field of vision
Left
superior
quadrantanopia
Left
inferior
quadrantanopia
Left
homonymous
hemianopia
Left
superior
quadrantanopia
Left
homonymous
hemianopia
Left
hemianopia,
right eye
Bitemporal
hemianopia
Blind, right eye
Visual field
defects
Left
eye
Right
eye
Fig. 37.8  Visual field defects produced by lesions as different places in the visual pathway. Regions of normal 
vision are indicated in white; regions of loss of vision are indicated in black. LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus. 
(From Corbett JJ, Chen J. The visual system. In: Haines DE, Mihailoff GA, eds. Fundamental Neuroscience 
for Basic and Clinical Applications. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:299, Fig. 20.16.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
640
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
left inferior temporal occipital region result in alexia, the inability to 
read. The right identification pathways are specialized for processing 
faces; lesions in the right inferior temporal or occipital regions may 
lead to an inability to recognize faces, or prosopagnosia. When ische­
mic lesions to the visual pathways occur bilaterally, several syndromes 
may occur. Balint syndrome is characterized by optic ataxia (i.e., dif­
ficulty using visual attention to guide extremity movements), ocular 
apraxia (i.e., inability to use visual attention to guide ocular move­
ments), and simultanagnosia (i.e., inability to visually survey a scene), 
and is caused by lesions of the bilateral parietal-­occipital junctions due 
to medial cerebral artery-­posterior cerebral artery watershed strokes. 
On examination, a patient with Balint syndrome manifests optic ataxia 
by misdirecting the finger to the target on finger-­to-­nose testing. With 
ocular apraxia, the patient is unable to track the examiner’s finger with 
the eyes when directed but is able to move the eyes to commands such 
as “look left” or “look right.” When assessing for simultanagnosia, the 
patient may be shown a drawing of one large letter or number com­
posed of smaller versions of a different letter or number. The patient 
may only see the small letters or numbers, but not the larger letter or 
number they create.
When a stroke in the bilateral occipital cortex occurs (e.g., from 
bilateral posterior cerebral artery stroke), cortical blindness may 
occur. With cortical blindness, the pupillary light responses are pre­
served, but the brain cannot decode visual information. The patient 
may be clearly visually impaired, stumble with objects or not blink 
to threat, or even deny the blindness and confabulate what is being 
seen. The confabulation in the setting of cortical blindness is referred 
to as Anton syndrome. Children who have cortical blindness from 
a remote stroke may have wandering eyes or roving eye motions, 
which must be distinguished from the roving eye movements seen in 
septo-­optic dysplasia or the rapid, multidirectional eye movements, 
opsoclonus, seen in opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia syndrome. The 
former is distinguished from cortical blindness by the presence of 
optic nerve hypoplasia and multiple pituitary deficiencies, whereas 
the latter is distinguished by the rapid and darting nature of the 
eye movements, irregular myoclonic jerks, and ataxia, as well as an 
association with tumors such as neuroblastoma as part of a parane­
oplastic syndrome, or as a postinfectious sequela of certain viral or 
bacterial infections.
Coordination, Precision, and Gait Disorders
Cerebellar strokes may present with acute changes in the quality of 
movements consisting of incoordination (ataxia), loss of precision 
(dysmetria), difficulty with rapid alternating movements (dysdiado­
chokinesia), or gait disorders. Articulation of words (dysarthria) is 
also associated with cerebellar strokes and should be distinguished 
from aphasia. Infants and younger children may present with an 
inability to sit unsupported or reach for objects with the precision 
observed by caregivers prestroke. The older and cooperative child 
may be examined via the finger-­to-­nose and heel-­to-­shin tests: 
Patients with dysmetria and ataxia will lack coordination and pre­
cision, missing and oscillating around the target when using the 
affected limb. With dysarthria, comprehension and expression 
should be intact, though it may be difficult to understand the words 
being spoken. Cerebellar lesions may result in difficulty maintaining 
a standing position with the feet close together; gait is wide based and 
unsteady. Ataxia, dysmetria, and dysdiadochokinesia are ipsilateral 
to the cerebellar hemisphere that has suffered ischemia. If these defi­
cits are bilateral and acute, alternative diagnoses like intoxication or 
inflammatory, infectious, or postinfectious pathologies must be con­
sidered, including acute cerebellar ataxia, cerebellitis, or hemophago­
cytic lymphohistiocytosis.
Children who present with cerebellar stroke may have significant 
headache and vomiting due to hydrocephalus from pressure in the 
posterior fossa crowding the fourth ventricle. More severe cases may 
result in obtundation from increased intracranial pressure. The blood 
supply to the cerebellum is via the vertebrobasilar system through the 
superior cerebellar arteries, the anterior inferior cerebellar arteries, and 
the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries. These vessels also supply the 
brainstem; cerebellar stroke is often accompanied by signs and symp­
toms of brainstem dysfunction.
Brainstem Syndromes
The brainstem contains many critical gray and white matter structures, 
such as the corticospinal tracts, the dorsal columns and spinothalamic 
tracts, cranial nerve nuclei, connections with the cerebellum, the retic­
ular activating system, and ascending neurotransmitter-­specific pro­
jection pathways. The vascular supply of the brainstem corresponds to 
its three levels, with the midbrain supplied by the superior cerebellar 
arteries (with the exception of the superior midbrain that is supplied 
by the posterior cerebral arteries), the pons supplied by the anterior 
inferior cerebellar arteries, and the medulla supplied by the posterior 
inferior cerebellar arteries. These three arteries arise from the verte­
brobasilar system. Given the dense organization of these structures and 
the nature of their blood supply, symptoms of brainstem stroke are var­
ied and localization is often challenging. Presenting symptoms, such 
as nausea or vertigo, are often vague and may mimic migraine, benign 
positional paroxysmal vertigo, seizure, or other sometimes less emer­
gent diagnoses, leading to diagnostic delays and significant morbidity 
and mortality.
Table 37.7 describes classic brainstem syndromes. The hallmark of 
a brainstem stroke is crossed paresis, which consists of facial weak­
ness ipsilateral to the stroke with contralateral limb hemiparesis. This 
pattern of findings is due to the notion that all cranial nerves, with 
the exception of cranial nerve IV, project ipsilaterally and the corti­
cospinal tracts do not cross the midline until the cervicomedullary 
junction, rostral to the brainstem. Depending on whether a brainstem 
lesion is located more medially or dorsolaterally determines the nature 
of symptoms: medial brainstem strokes are primarily motor, whereas 
dorsolateral brainstem strokes are predominantly sensory. Dorsolat­
eral brainstem strokes may also affect the cerebellar peduncles, leading 
to deficits in coordination and movement precision. Ventral pontine 
stroke from a basilar artery thrombosis or embolism may present with 
locked-­in syndrome, in which the patient is awake and conscious but 
unable to move or communicate except for blinking and vertical eye 
movements. Locked-­in syndrome must be distinguished from coma by 
determining the level of consciousness.
Seizures
Seizures are a common presenting symptom in pediatric stroke, occur­
ring in the majority of neonates and ∼30% of older children. Children 
who have had a stroke are also at risk for developing epilepsy, some­
times years after a stroke; in some cases, seizures may be refractory 
to treatment and may lead to adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes.
While seizures in neonatal AIS are common, symptoms can be sub­
tle. Pauses in breathing or even true apneic spells may not be noticed 
if not accompanied by cyanosis or unless continuous cardiorespiratory 
monitoring is in place; myoclonic activity may be confused for benign 
neonatal movements. Electroencephalogram can assist in determin­
ing whether a particular event of concern is seizure-­related. Perinatal 
stroke is a risk factor for infantile spasms, a rare and potentially dev­
astating epileptic syndrome characterized by developmental delays, a 
specific electroencephalographic pattern termed hypsarrhythmia, and 
frequent seizures. The seizures—epileptic spasms—consist of an abrupt, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
641
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
brief contraction followed by a more sustained but less intense tonic 
contraction lasting no more than several seconds. The spasms involve 
the muscles of the neck, trunk, and extremities. Spasms may be flexor, 
extensor, or mixed and occur in clusters typically after waking from 
sleep. Infantile spasms are considered a relative neurologic emergency, 
as treatment must be initiated soon after diagnosis to mitigate neuro­
cognitive deterioration. Infantile spasms typically present months after 
stroke and are thought to be due to maladaptive changes in regulatory 
GABAergic pathways of brain development.
Disorders of Consciousness
Pediatric stroke may present with diffuse neurologic features such 
as alteration in consciousness or coma. Disorders of consciousness 
may arise from bilateral cerebral hemispheric, bi-­thalamic, or brain­
stem infarctions; however, disordered consciousness may also be due 
to increased intracranial pressure from a large unilateral infarction 
leading to herniation and brainstem compression, in which case the 
Cushing triad of hypertension, bradycardia, and abnormal respiration 
may indicate the need for emergent intervention. Lastly, disordered 
consciousness may be secondary to prolonged seizures or the effects of 
medications given to control seizures.
STROKE SYNDROMES BY AGE
The risk factors and etiologies of stroke are diverse, are highly age 
dependent, and differ based on whether the stroke is ischemic or hem­
orrhagic, venous or arterial. The evaluation and management of stroke 
differ depending on the age of the patient and the clinical setting. 
Despite these differences, the evaluation of a suspected acute stroke 
must be done emergently and should include verification of history, 
vital signs, comprehensive physical examination including detailed 
neurologic examination, laboratory studies, and neuroimaging. Estab­
lishing the time at which the child was last seen normal is crucial, as 
interventions aimed at reperfusing ischemic brain tissue are highly 
time-­dependent. For children over the age of 2 years, examination 
should include the Pediatric National Institutes of Health (NIH) Stroke 
Scale (Table 37.8).
Acute laboratory studies should be tailored according to age and 
often include CBCs, electrolytes, basic chemistry, glucose, prothrom­
bin time, international normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, 
and toxicology screen. These essential screening laboratories aid in 
detecting stroke mimics such as severe hypoglycemia or toxic inges­
tion and laboratory derangements that must be urgently addressed, as 
well as limitations to administer hyperacute therapies for stroke such as 
thrombolytics in select patients. Once the patient has been stabilized, 
neuroimaging usually occurs.
Imaging modality depends on acuity, age, and clinical status. In neo­
nates, open fontanels and decreased bone mineralization allow for head 
ultrasonography to quickly evaluate for intraparenchymal or intraventric­
ular hemorrhage. Outside the neonatal period, or when children present 
to the emergency department from home, noncontrast CT of the head 
(CTOH) is often performed first as it is widely available and fast, does not 
require sedation, is sensitive for acute hemorrhage, and may be used to 
rule out alternative diagnoses. In ischemic stroke, a noncontrast CTOH 
may be normal early after symptom onset or show findings of ischemia, 
which manifest as subtle hypodense areas. With time these hypodensities 
TABLE 37.7  Common Brainstem Syndromes, Cardinal Symptoms, Anatomic Localization, and 
Vascular Supply
Syndrome
Signs/Symptoms
Localization
Vascular Supply
Weber (superior alternating 
hemiplegia)
Ipsilateral CN III palsy, contralateral 
hemiparesis (including the lower face)
Medial midbrain/cerebral 
peduncle
Deep penetrating artery from posterior 
cerebral artery
Benedikt (paramedian midbrain)
Ipsilateral CN III palsy, contralateral involuntary 
movements
Ventral midbrain involving the 
red nucleus
Deep penetrating artery from posterior 
cerebral artery or paramedian penetrating 
branches of basilar artery
Nothnagel
Ipsilateral CN III palsy, contralateral dysmetria 
and limb ataxia
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Deep penetrating artery from posterior 
cerebral artery
Foville (inferior medial pontine)
Ipsilateral CN VI and VII (upper and lower facial 
weakness) with or without contralateral 
hemiparesis
Caudal pontine tegmentum 
involving the facial colliculus
Pontine perforator branches off the basilar 
artery
One and a half
Ipsilateral CN VI palsy, bilateral internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia
Paramedian pons involving 
the paramedian pontine 
reticular formation and medial 
longitudinal fasciculi
Paramedian pontine perforators off the 
basilar artery
Wallenberg (lateral medullary)
Ipsilateral facial and contralateral body 
hypoalgesia and thermoanesthesia, 
ipsilateral palatal weakness, dysphagia, 
dysarthria, nystagmus, vertigo, nausea/
vomiting, ipsilateral Horner syndrome, skew 
deviation singultus
Lateral medulla
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Dejerine (medial medullary)
Ipsilateral tongue weakness and contralateral 
hemiparesis with or without contralateral 
loss of proprioception and vibratory sense
Medial medulla
Vertebral artery or anterior spinal artery
CN, cranial nerve.
Data from Eckerle BJ, Southerland AM. Bedside evaluation of the acute stroke patient. In: Barrett KM, Meschia JF, eds. Stroke. Neurology in 
Practice. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell; 2013:1Y15.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 37.8  Pediatric NIH Stroke Scale: Instructions
	1a.	Level of Consciousness (LOC): For children age 2 yr and up, the investigator must choose a response, even if a full evaluation is prevented by such obstacles 
as an endotracheal tube, language barrier, or orotracheal trauma/bandages. A 3 is scored only if the patient makes no movement (other than reflexive posturing) 
in response to noxious stimulation. For infants age 4 mo up to age 2 yr, multiply the score for this item by 3, and omit scoring items 1b and 1c.
	1b.	LOC Questions: The patient is asked the month and their age. The answer must be correct; there is no partial credit for being close. Aphasic and stuporous 
patients who do not comprehend the questions will score 2. Patients unable to speak because of endotracheal intubation, orotracheal trauma, severe dysarthria 
from any cause, language barrier, or any other problem not secondary to aphasia are given a 1. It is important that only the initial answer be graded and that the 
examiner not “help” the patient with verbal or nonverbal cues.
Modified for children, age 2 yr and up. A familiar family member must be present for this item: Ask the child, “How old are you?” or “How many years old are you?” for 
question number 1. Give credit if the child states the correct age or shows the correct number of fingers for their age. For the second question, ask the child, “Where is XX?”, 
with XX referring to the name of the parent or other familiar family member present. Use the name for that person that the child typically uses (e.g., “mommy”). Give credit if 
the child correctly points to or gazes purposefully in the direction of the family member. Omit this item for infants age 4 mo up to age 2 yr. See comment under item 1a.
	1c.	LOC Commands: The patient is asked to open and close the eyes (for children older than age 2 yr, this command to open and close the eyes is 
suitable and can be scored as for adults) and then to grip and release the nonparetic hand. For children older than age 2 yr, substitute the command to 
grip the hand with the command “show me your nose” or “touch your nose.” Substitute another one-­step command if the hands cannot be used. Credit 
is given if an unequivocal attempt is made but not completed due to weakness. If the patient does not respond to command, the task should be demonstrated to 
them (pantomime) and score the result (i.e., follows no, one, or two commands). Patients with trauma, amputation, or other physical impediments should be given 
suitable one-­step commands. Only the first attempt is scored. Omit this item for infants age 4 mo up to age 2 yr. See comment under item 1a.
	 2.	Best Gaze: Only horizontal eye movements will be tested. Voluntary or reflexive (oculocephalic) eye movements will be scored, but caloric testing is not done. 
If the patient has a conjugate deviation of the eyes that can be overcome by voluntary or reflexive activity, the score will be 1. If the patient has an isolated 
peripheral nerve paresis (CN III, IV, or VI), score a 1. Gaze is testable in all aphasic patients. Patients with ocular trauma, bandages, pre-­existing blindness, or 
other disorder of visual acuity or fields should be tested with reflexive movements and a choice made by the investigator. Establishing eye contact and then 
moving about the patient from side to side will occasionally clarify the presence of a partial gaze palsy.
	 3.	Visual: Visual fields (upper and lower quadrants) are tested by confrontation, using finger counting (for children older than 6 yr) or visual threat (for children age 4 mo 
to 6 yr) as appropriate. Patient must be encouraged, but if they look at the side of the moving fingers appropriately, this can be scored as normal. If there is unilateral 
blindness or enucleation, visual fields in the remaining eye are scored. Score 1 only if a clear-­cut asymmetry, including quadrantanopia, is found. If patient is blind from 
any cause, score 3. Double simultaneous stimulation is performed at this point. If there is extinction, patient receives a 1 and the results are used to answer question 11.
	 4.	Facial Palsy: Ask or use pantomime to encourage the patient to show teeth or raise eyebrows and close eyes. Score symmetry of grimace in response to 
noxious stimuli in the poorly responsive or noncomprehending patient. If facial trauma/bandages, orotracheal tube, tape, or other physical barrier obscures the 
face, these should be removed to the extent possible.
	 5 and 6.	Motor Arm and Leg: The limb is placed in the appropriate position: extend the arms (palms down) 90 degrees (if sitting) or 45 degrees (if supine) 
and the legs 30 degrees (always tested supine). Drift is scored if the arm falls before 10 sec or the leg before 5 sec. For children too immature to follow 
precise directions or uncooperative for any reason, power in each limb should be graded by observation of spontaneous or elicited movement 
according to the same two grading scheme, excluding the time limits. The aphasic patient is encouraged using urgency in the voice and pantomime but 
not noxious stimulation. Each limb is tested in turn, beginning with the nonparetic arm. Only in the case of amputation or joint fusion at the shoulder or hip, or 
immobilization by an IV board, may the score be 9, and the examiner must clearly write the explanation for scoring as a 9.
	 7.	Limb Ataxia: This item is aimed at finding evidence of a unilateral cerebellar lesion. Test with eyes open. In case of visual defect, ensure testing is done in intact visual 
field. The finger-­nose-­finger and heel-­shin tests are performed on both sides, and ataxia is scored only if present out of proportion to weakness. In children, substitute 
this task with reaching for a toy for the upper extremity, and kicking a toy or the examiner’s hand, in children too young (under 5 yr) or otherwise 
uncooperative for the standard exam item. Ataxia is absent in the patient who cannot understand or is paralyzed. Only in the case of amputation or joint fusion may 
the item be scored 9, and the examiner must clearly write the explanation for not scoring. In case of blindness, test by touching nose from extended arm position.
	 8.	Sensory: Sensation or grimace to pin prick when tested, or withdrawal from noxious stimulus in the obtunded or aphasic patient. For children too young or otherwise 
uncooperative for reporting gradations of sensory loss, observe for any behavioral response to pin prick, and score it according to the same scoring 
scheme as a “normal,” “mildly diminished,” or “severely diminished” response. Only sensory loss attributed to stroke is scored as abnormal and the examiner 
should test as many body areas (arms [not hands], legs, trunk, face) as needed to accurately check for hemisensory loss. A score of 2, “severe or total,” should only be given 
when a severe or total loss of sensation can be clearly demonstrated. Stuporous and aphasic patients will therefore probably score 1 or 0. The patient with brainstem stroke 
who has bilateral loss of sensation is scored 2. If the patient does not respond and is quadriplegic, score 2. Patients in a coma (item 1a = 3) are arbitrarily given a 2 on this item.
	 9.	Best Language: A great deal of information about comprehension will be obtained during the preceding sections of the examination. For children age 6 yr 
and up with normal language development before onset of stroke: The patient is asked to describe what is happening, to name the items on the 
naming sheet, and to read from the list of sentences. Comprehension is judged from responses here as well as to all of the commands in the preceding 
general neurologic exam. If visual loss interferes with the tests, ask the patient to identify objects placed in the hand, repeat, and produce speech. The intubated 
patient should be asked to write. The patient in a coma (question 1a = 3) will arbitrarily score 3 on this item. The examiner must choose a score in the patient 
with stupor or limited cooperation, but a score of 3 should be used only if the patient is mute and follows no one-­step commands. For children age 2–6 yr (or 
older children with premorbid language disability), score this item based on observations of language comprehension and speech during the 
preceding examination. For infants age 4 mo to 2 yr, score for auditory alerting and orienting responses.
	10.	Dysarthria: If the patient is thought to be normal, an adequate sample of speech must be obtained by asking the patient to read or repeat words from the list. If the 
patient has severe aphasia, the clarity of articulation of spontaneous speech can be rated. Only if the patient is intubated or has another physical barrier to producing 
speech may the item be scored 9, and the examiner must clearly write an explanation for not scoring. Do not tell the patient why they are being tested.
	11.	Extinction and Inattention (Formerly Neglect): For children age 2 yr and up: Sufficient information to identify neglect may be obtained during the prior 
testing. If the patient has a severe visual loss preventing visual double simultaneous stimulation, and the cutaneous stimuli are normal, the score is normal. If 
the patient has aphasia but does appear to attend to both sides, the score is normal. The presence of visual spatial neglect or anosognosia may also be taken as 
evidence of abnormality. Since the abnormality is scored only if present, the item is never untestable. For children age 4 mo to 2 yr, score as a 1 if there is 
either a sensory or motor deficit; score as a 2 if there are both sensory and motor deficits on the general neurologic examination.
CN, cranial nerve; NIH, National Institutes of Health.
Adapted from Ichord RN, Bastian R, Abraham L, et al. Interrater reliability of the Pediatric National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (PedNIHSS) in a 
multicenter study. Stroke. 2011;42:613–617.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
643
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
become more evident. Conversely, CTOH is very sensitive for hemorrhage, 
which is manifested by hyperintensity in the location of the bleeding. Brain 
MRI that includes diffusion-­weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion 
coefficient (ADC) sequences is more sensitive for the diagnosis of ischemic 
stroke. Figure 37.9 demonstrates characteristic CT and MRI changes in 
acute ischemic stroke, while Table 37.9 describes the typical findings in 
stroke on MRI based on the timing of imaging. Often imaging of the intra­
cranial and cervical vessels may be necessary and can be done with mag­
netic resonance angiography (MRA), computed tomography angiography 
(CTA), or a conventional angiography, depending on the circumstances of 
the patient. Pediatric stroke algorithms are useful in determining the most 
appropriate imaging of patients with stroke according to symptoms and 
availability of imaging modality (Fig. 37.10).
The outcome of stroke varies considerably by age, risk factors, eti­
ology, and management. In general, up to 10% of affected children die, 
and more than half of the survivors incur a functional or cognitive neu­
rologic deficit. Predictors of poor outcome are not well understood; 
establishing long-­term rehabilitative care, decreasing recurrence risk, 
and screening for chronic complications of stroke, such as epilepsy and 
intellectual disability, can improve outcomes.
PERINATAL STROKE
Perinatal stroke is a diverse group of cerebrovascular injuries occur­
ring between 20 weeks of fetal life and 28 days of postnatal life. Strokes 
affecting early brain development are estimated to have an incidence as 
high as 1 in 1,600. The consequences of these injuries include cerebral 
palsy, epilepsy, and cognitive and behavioral challenges. Presentation 
may be acute or remote, strokes may be due to arterial or venous pro­
cesses, and injury may be ischemic or hemorrhagic.
Perinatal stroke can be divided broadly into neonatal stroke and 
presumed perinatal stroke based on the timing of presentation. Neo­
natal stroke presents acutely and symptomatically during the neonatal 
period—often within the first week of life—and consists of neonatal 
AIS, neonatal hemorrhagic stroke, and cerebral sinovenous throm­
bosis (CSVT). Presumed perinatal stroke presents remotely outside 
of the neonatal period, may be symptomatic or incidentally identified 
on neuroimaging, and consists of presumed perinatal AIS, presumed 
perinatal hemorrhagic stroke, and periventricular venous infarction. 
Stroke diagnosed in the fetus through the use of fetal imaging or on 
neuropathologic examination of stillborn children is referred to as in 
utero stroke and in survivors typically presents as presumed perinatal 
stroke.
Neonatal Stroke
Stroke is surprisingly common in the neonatal period. The incidence of 
neonatal AIS is as high as 1 in 2,200 live births, similar to the incidence 
of large-­artery AIS in adults and more than 10 times greater than the 
incidence of AIS in children; the incidence in neonates born before 
34 weeks’ gestation is higher than that in term neonates. Neonatal 
A
B
C
Fig. 37.9  Acute arterial ischemic stroke. CT and MRI demonstrate an arterial ischemic stroke in a 1-­day-­old 
term infant who presented with a right focal seizure. A, An axial CT image reveals hypodensity (white arrow) 
in the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory consistent with acute infarction. B, Axial MRI diffusion-­
weighted trace image of the same patient reveals a clearly demarcated area of infarct as a region of hyperin­
tensity (white arrow) in the left MCA territory. C, Apparent diffusion coefficient map reveals region of signal 
hypointensity and restricted diffusion (white arrow) to match area of signal hyperintensity observed in (B). 
(With permission from Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic stroke: presentation, risk factors, 
evaluation and outcome. Pediatric Neurol. 2014;51:760–768, Fig. 2.)
TABLE 37.9  Stroke Appearance According to Timing of Acquisition of MRI
Timing
DWI
ADC
T1
T2
FLAIR
Hyperacute, 0–6 hr
Hyperintense
Hypointense
Acute, 6–24 hr
Hyperintense
Hypointense
Hypointense
Hyperintense
Hyperintense
Subacute, 1–7 days
Hyperintense
Isointense
Hypointense
Hyperintense
Hyperintense
Chronic, >1 mo
Variable
Hyperintense
Hypointense
Hyperintense
Variable
ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; DWI, diffusion-­weighted imaging; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery.
From Tong E, Hou Q, Fiebach J, et al. The role of imaging in acute ischemic stroke. Neurosurg Focus. 2014;36:E3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
644
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
hemorrhagic stroke is less common, affecting approximately 1 in 9,500 
live births; neonatal CSVT is even less common.
Clinical Presentation and Mimics
Neonatal AIS is the most common type of perinatal stroke, and focal 
motor seizures are the most frequent presenting symptom, occurring 
in up to 90% of affected term newborns. Other presenting symptoms 
include encephalopathy in ∼66% of affected neonates, feeding difficul­
ties, apnea, and tone abnormalities. Lateralized findings, most typi­
cally motor weakness or decreased tone, may be present, though their 
absence does not exclude cerebral infarction. Furthermore, dimin­
ished extremity movement on the side of a focal seizure may repre­
sent postictal paralysis rather than paresis from upper motor neuron 
injury caused by cerebral infarction. Preterm neonates with AIS are 
commonly asymptomatic and may be incidentally diagnosed on rou­
tine screening cerebral ultrasound. Preterm infants with AIS most fre­
quently present with respiratory difficulties, though seizures, feeding 
difficulty, and abnormal tone may occur as well. Presenting features 
for neonates with AIS are summarized in Table 37.10. Neonates with 
hemorrhagic stroke and with CSVT present similarly, with a combina­
tion of encephalopathy, seizures, feeding and respiratory difficulties, 
and focal neurologic deficits. Neonates with hemorrhagic stroke may 
also have a bulging fontanelle or widening of the cranial suture lines.
Seizures are the most common presentation of neonatal stroke, and 
are also the most common stroke mimic. Neonatal seizures may occur 
in the setting of hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), cerebral mal­
formations, meningitis, sepsis, acute metabolic derangements, inborn 
errors of metabolism, kernicterus, neonatal abstinence syndrome, and 
Strokelike symptoms
29 days - 18 years
Hyperacute*
<6 hours from last known
asymptomatic
MRI
(Preferred)
Noncontrast CT
Optional:
CTA Head and Neck
(unless thrombolysis
considered)
*Hyperacute: Additional imaging (sequences or modalities) to be performed as clinically warranted.
DWI
FLAIR
GRE or SWI
3D MRA TOF (Brain)
Optional:
pCASL
Noncontrast CT
Optional:
CTA Head and Neck
DWI
FLAIR
GRE or SWI
3D MRA TOF (Brain)
MRA Neck +/– gad
T1
T2
MRV +/– gad (if CSVT
suspected)
Optional:
T1 postgad
DTI
pCASL
Pre / postgad VWI
CT
MRI
(Preferred)
CT
Non-hyperacute
Fig. 37.10  Algorithm demonstrating proposed imaging modalities according to symptomatology and 
modality of image. CSVT, cerebral sinovenous thrombosis; CT, computed tomography (of the head); CTA, 
computed tomographic angiography; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; DWI, diffusion-­weighted imaging; 
FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; gad, gadolinium; GRE, gradient echo; MRA, magnetic reso­
nance angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging (of the brain); pCASL, pseudo-­continuous arterial 
spin labeling; SWI, susceptibility-­weighted imaging; TOF, time of flight; VWI, vessel wall imaging. (From 
Mirsky DM, Beslow LA, Amlie-­Lefond C, et al. Pathways for neuroimaging of childhood stroke. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2017;69:11–23, Fig. 5.)
TABLE 37.10  Symptoms Associated with 
Perinatal Arterial Ischemic Strokes (AIS)
Symptom
% of Cases
Neonatal AIS in Term Infants
Seizures (usually focal motor)
69–90
Hemiparesis
∼30
Impaired level of consciousness
39
Abnormal tone
38–46
Respiratory difficulties
26
Feeding difficulties
24
Neonatal AIS in Preterm Infants
Respiratory distress or apnea
83
Seizures
30
Abnormal feeding
26
Abnormal tone
22
Presumed Perinatal AIS
Early hand preference (<2 yr of age)
81–86
Hand fisting
Seizures
14–15
Gaze preference
5
From Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic stroke: 
presentation, risk factors, evaluation, and outcome. Pediatr Neurol. 
2014;51:760–768.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
645
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
genetic epilepsy syndromes. The timing of seizures, as well as associ­
ated findings, can assist in distinguishing etiology: Neonates with sei­
zures secondary to stroke typically have seizure onset after 24 hours of 
life, have focal motor activity, and remain lucid interictally. In contrast, 
neonates with HIE typically have seizures within the first 12 hours of 
life, have an associated antenatal event such as fetal distress or perinatal 
asphyxia, and have encephalopathy of varying degrees. Neonates with 
meningitis or sepsis often have associated temperature and hemody­
namic instability and may have metabolic derangements and acid-­base 
disturbances. Neonates with inborn errors of metabolism often have 
hypoglycemia and acid-­base disturbances, can have hyperammonemia 
depending on the metabolic disorder, and may have progressive 
encephalopathy.
Risk Factors of Neonatal Stroke
For neonatal AIS, the low recurrence rate of <2% suggests the patho­
physiology is related to a process unique to the perinatal state. The 
left hemisphere is the most commonly involved area, with exclusive 
involvement of the middle cerebral artery territory in up to 90% of 
perinatal AIS strokes (Fig. 37.11), though the location of stroke varies 
based on gestational age (Table 37.11). Risk factors for neonatal AIS 
can be broadly categorized as maternal, fetal, and placental (Table 
37.12). Placentally derived emboli may lodge in cerebral vessels. 
Congenital heart defects involving right-­to-­left shunts through sep­
tal defects increase the risk of embolic stroke. Congenital defects 
of coagulation (factor VIII, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III 
deficiency, and others) or sepsis-­induced disseminated intravascular 
coagulation may also result in neonatal embolic stroke. Fetal head 
trauma during labor and delivery that results in endothelial dam­
age to cerebral vessels occasionally leads to thrombosis and resul­
tant focal ischemia of the brain. Polycythemia and hypotension can 
each lead to intravascular stasis and abnormalities in flow, resulting 
in cerebrovascular thrombosis in neonates. Meningitis and enceph­
alitis cause diffuse or localized thrombosis as a result of vascular 
inflammation, leading to hemostasis and thrombosis. Lastly, specific 
neonatal cardiac conditions requiring extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO) may predispose the neonate to AIS. Many have 
an unknown etiology.
Neonatal hemorrhagic stroke or intraparenchymal hemorrhage 
(IPH), in the absence of intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), occurs 
most commonly in full-­term infants. Hemorrhage into the paren­
chyma of the cerebral hemispheres can be caused by head trauma, 
vascular malformation (Fig. 37.12), coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, 
tumor, or infarction. A common cause of prenatal, intrapartum, and 
postnatal hemorrhage is alloimmune thrombocytopenia, caused by 
acquired antiplatelet antibodies when a mother becomes sensitized to 
paternal antigens on fetal platelets. Maternal immune thrombocyto­
penia may also affect the fetus, producing thrombocytopenia in utero; 
however, the incidence of neonatal cerebral hemorrhage is much lower 
in immune thrombocytopenia than in alloimmune thrombocytope­
nia. Vitamin K–deficient bleeding should be considered as a cause 
of intracranial hemorrhage for breast-­fed full-­term neonates or for 
neonates who were not administered parenteral vitamin K shortly after 
birth. In the absence of recognized coagulation or anatomic abnormal­
ities, cerebral hemispheric IPH may also be due to hemorrhagic con­
version of a previous infarction.
In premature infants, IPH most often occurs in conjunction with 
severe IVH (Fig. 37.13). Hemorrhage from the friable, unsupported 
germinal matrix leads to accumulation of intraventricular blood, and 
A
B
C
Fig. 37.11  Neonatal arterial ischemic stroke. Ultrasound (US) and MRI of neonatal arterial ischemic stroke 
in a 1-­day-­old term infant who presented with a right focal seizure. A, US reveals hyperechogenicity in the 
left cerebral hemisphere (indicated by white arrow), concerning for ischemic injury. B, Axial MRI diffusion-­
weighted trace image of the same patient reveals well-­defined hyperintensity (indicated by white arrow) in 
the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory. C, Apparent diffusion coefficient map of the matching slice 
observed in (B) reveals corresponding hypointensity (indicated by white arrow) in the left MCA territory. (From 
Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic stroke: presentation, risk factors, evaluation, and outcome. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2014;51:760–768, Fig. 1.)
TABLE 37.11  Location of Arterial Strokes 
in Perinatal Arterial Ischemic Stroke Based on 
Gestational Age
Gestational Age
Location of 
Arterial Stroke
% of Cases
Full-­term neonate
Cortical branch strokes
59
Preterm neonate (overall)
Lenticulostriate (overall)
39
<28–32 wk of gestation
Lenticulostriate
32–36 wk of gestation
Cortical branch infarcts
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
646
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
often ventricular distention. These events, in turn, cause impairment 
of blood flow in the medullary veins located in the periventricular 
white matter, preventing blood drainage into the greater cerebral 
venous system. Eventually, the periventricular venous congestion 
leads to ischemia and a resultant venous infarction. If there continues 
to be difficulty with cerebrospinal fluid production and reabsorption 
dynamics, the infant may develop posthemorrhagic hydrocepha­
lus and in some instances may need cerebrospinal fluid diversion 
procedures.
Risk factors for neonatal CSVT include thrombophilia, infection, 
dehydration, polycythemia, congenital heart disease, and ECMO 
(Table 37.13). The lesions associated with cerebral venous thrombosis 
include thrombosis in the deep or superficial veins, venous infarction, 
and hemorrhage (Fig. 37.14). The hemorrhage that typically accompa­
nies CSVT is a result of the increased venous and capillary hydrostatic 
pressure due to the presence of the clot causing extravasation of fluid 
and red blood cells.
Evaluation and Management
Imaging. The evaluation of the neonate with suspected stroke 
requires neuroimaging. Head ultrasonography is typically readily 
available and is a reliable bedside tool that is often performed initially, 
as ultrasonography can rapidly detect areas of increased echogenicity 
in the cerebral cortex that correspond with hemorrhage. In especially 
severe cases of ischemia, increased echogenicity of injured subcortical 
structures such as the thalamus and basal ganglia can also be appreciated. 
Ischemic cortical injury involving the territory of the middle cerebral 
artery (frontal and parietal lobe regions surrounding the central 
sulcus) is better revealed by ultrasonography than are other vascular 
territories. The principal advantages of cranial ultrasonography are its 
easy portability to the patient’s bedside and lack of radiation exposure 
to the infant; however, reliability is highly operator dependent. CT 
is usually not recommended due to the radiation exposure as well as 
the low sensitivity for neonatal AIS in the acute phase. However, CT 
is sensitive for detecting hemorrhagic stroke and other forms of extra-­
axial hemorrhagic processes.
MRI is the imaging modality of choice to confirm the diagnosis of 
neonatal stroke. DWI sequences on MRI can identify areas of recent 
infarct within hours of onset, earlier than conventional T1-­ and T2-­
weighted images. Subsequent images can show chronic changes such 
as cerebral atrophy, paucity of white matter, delayed myelination, 
and ventriculomegaly. MRI can be complemented with MRA of the 
cerebral and neck arteries to assess for arterial occlusion, dissec­
tion, anatomic abnormalities, or other lesions. If there is concern 
for neonatal CSVT, magnetic resonance venography (MRV) should 
be performed to detect a thrombus or absent flow in the intracranial 
venous system.
Laboratory Testing. Laboratory testing for the wide variety 
of etiologic factors underlying stroke should be conducted 
according to the presentation and symptoms. Investigations should 
include screening for infection, liver dysfunction, coagulopathy, 
prothrombotic states, inborn errors of metabolism, urea cycle 
disorders, and mitochondrial abnormalities. Placenta may be 
submitted for pathologic examination.
Management
Treatment for neonatal stroke is largely supportive. Neuroprotective 
approaches are employed to maintain homeostasis in oxygen, tem­
perature, hydration, glucose, and hemodynamics. Electroencephalo­
gram should be performed to screen for interictal abnormalities and 
subclinical seizures. Seizures are often self-­limited though if per­
sistent may be controlled with antiseizure medicines. With recur­
rence rates of neonatal AIS being low, the use of antithrombotic 
medications is not recommended unless there is a persistent source 
of embolism or a severe thrombophilia is documented. In neonatal 
CSVT, anticoagulation may be considered on a case-­by-­case basis, 
especially if there is thrombus propagation on serial imaging. For 
neonates with hemorrhagic stroke, investigation and correction 
TABLE 37.12  Risk Factors for Perinatal 
Arterial Ischemic Stroke (AIS)
Type of Risk Factor
Risk Factors
Term Infants with Neonatal AIS
Maternal
Thrombophilia
Infertility
Prolonged rupture of membranes
Preeclampsia or gestational hypertension
Smoking
Intrauterine growth restriction
Infection
Maternal fever during delivery
Smoking
Fetal
Thrombophilia (MTHFR variant, FVL, prothrombin 
gene variant, protein C/S deficiency)
Congenital heart disease
Arteriopathy
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome
Hypoglycemia
Perinatal asphyxia
Infection (sepsis/meningitis)
Need for resuscitation
Apgar score of <7 at 5 min
Placental
Chorioamnionitis
Placental infarcts
Distal villous immaturity
Placenta weighing <10th percentile
Preterm Infants with Neonatal AIS
Maternal
Infection
Gestational bleeding
Maternal smoking
Maternal drug use
Fetal
Twin-­twin transfusion syndrome
Twin demise
Abnormal fetal heart rate
Hypoglycemia
Thrombophilia (MTHFR variant, FVL)
Presumed Perinatal AIS
Maternal
Preeclampsia
Infection
Gestational bleeding
Gestational diabetes
Thrombophilia
Fetal
Congenital heart disease
MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency; FVL, factor V 
Leiden deficiency.
Modified from Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic 
stroke: presentation, risk factors, evaluation, and outcome. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2014;51:760–768.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
647
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
of bleeding diatheses are crucial. Ruptured vascular lesions may 
require prompt surgical correction. Acute decompressive craniec­
tomy or hematoma evacuation is rarely performed though may be 
required. Regardless of the type of stroke or timing, neonates should 
be referred to rehabilitation therapies and be screened routinely 
for developmental delays and learning disabilities, especially in the 
school-­age years.
Outcomes
The mortality rate for neonatal AIS is low at 0.16 per 100,000 live births. 
Stroke recurrence occurs in about 2% of neonates, most of whom have 
thrombophilia, congenital heart disease, or an arteriopathy. Chronic 
motor deficits occur in up to 60% of neonates with AIS; infarction in 
the basal ganglia or posterior limb of the internal capsule in term neo­
nates correlates with long-­term hemiparesis. Other long-­term sequelae 
in neonatal AIS include language delays and behavioral disorders such 
as attention deficit or hyperactivity. Almost half of neonates with AIS 
develop epilepsy as a result of their stroke.
Developmental outcome in full-­term infants with hemor­
rhagic stroke depends on the location, extent, and underlying cause. 
Fig. 37.12  Neonatal vein of Galen malformation and intraventricular hemorrhage. A 5-­day-­old female born at 
38 weeks was noted to be drowsy with poor feeding. She had signs of cardiac failure. A CT scan (top left) 
demonstrates vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, which was partly treated by transarterial glue embo­
lization without complication but with significant residual arteriovenous shunting (MR images, top row). Fol­
lowing a second embolization procedure, there was acute clinical deterioration with signs of raised intracranial 
pressure (middle row). CT shows acute intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus, and a left parieto-­
occipital lobe low-­density lesion (middle, images 1–3) with adjacent subarachnoid and subdural hematoma 
(middle, images 4 and 5). Some linear hyperdensity was believed to be due to thrombus within the persistent 
falcine sinus (middle, images 4 and 5). Follow-­up imaging shows maturation of the focal left parieto-­occipital 
lesion in keeping with an infarct (bottom row), which is probably venous in origin. (From Gunny RS, Lin D. 
Imaging of pediatric stroke. Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am. 2012;20:1–33, Fig. 18.)
A
B
Fig. 37.13  Neonatal intraventricular and intraparenchymal hemor­
rhages. A term baby delivered by cesarean section for thick meconium 
and late decelerations, Apgar scores of 1, 6, and 8 (at 1, 5, and 10 min­
utes), presented with neonatal seizures on the first day of life. A and 
B, Axial head CT images show bilateral frontal, parietal, and scattered 
occipital hemorrhages in the periventricular and subcortical white mat­
ter, the largest in the frontal centrum semiovale. (From Gunny RS, Lin 
D. Imaging of perinatal stroke. Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am. 
2012;20:1–33, Fig. 22.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
648
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus is predictive of abnormal outcomes, 
including motor impairment and cognitive delay. Epilepsy develops in 
up to 15% of affected patients. In premature infants, the simultaneous 
occurrence of IVH with IPH carries high risk for major motor deficits 
and marked cognitive impairment.
Outcomes of CSVT are difficult to discern due to the high inci­
dence of hemorrhagic complications and their attendant mortality 
rate, which approaches 20%. Factors associated with a higher risk of 
adverse outcome include the presence of infarcts, bilateral cerebral 
involvement, and neurologic comorbidities. Neonates with cerebral 
venous thrombosis and thalamic hemorrhage are at risk for develop­
ment of late-­onset epilepsy with electrographic status epilepticus of 
slow wave sleep, which may be associated with cognitive and behav­
ioral sequelae.
Presumed Perinatal Stroke
The prevalence of presumed perinatal stroke is difficult to establish given 
the large number of minimally symptomatic children or those with 
delayed presentations, but it is estimated to be around 40 per 100,000. 
TABLE 37.13  Risk Factors for Neonatal 
Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis
Type of Risk Factor
Risk Factors (Estimated % of Cases)
Maternal
Preeclampsia
Diabetes
Fetal/neonatal
Acute neonatal illness (61–84%)
Dehydration
Infection
Meningitis
Congenital heart disease
Thrombophilia (same as in arterial; 15–20%)
ECMO
Complicated delivery
Polycythemia
Dehydration
ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Fig. 37.14  Neonatal cerebral sinovenous thrombosis. A term male neonate was hypotonic at birth with poor 
respiratory effort requiring resuscitation. Initial CT (top row) on day 2 of life shows diffuse brain edema with 
expanded and hyperdense transverse and sagittal sinuses, torcula, and internal cerebral veins as well as 
the cerebral cortical veins. CT performed on day 9 (middle row) shows resolution of the cerebral edema 
and increased density of the thrombus within the transverse sinus, torcula, and superior sagittal sinus. MRI 
on day 9 (bottom left, images 1–4) shows mild diffuse cerebral atrophy but no focal venous infarcts, with a 
persistent thrombus and no flow on the magnetic resonance venography (stars). Follow-­up MRI on day 15 
(bottom right, images 5 and 6) shows the evolution of thrombus signal intensity to methemoglobin. Note the 
effect of T1 shortening within the thrombosed sagittal and transverse sinuses and torcula, mimicking flow 
within the sinuses (arrow). (From Gunny RS, Lin D. Imaging of perinatal stroke. Magn Reson Imaging Clin 
North Am. 2012;20:1–33, Fig. 10.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
649
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
The risk factors for presumed perinatal stroke are similar to those for 
neonatal stroke.
Clinical Presentation and Mimics
One of the most frequent presentations of presumed perinatal stroke is 
early hand preference with asymmetric reaching. In patients with early 
hand preference, neurologic examination may reveal a varied spectrum 
of impairment, from subtle decrease in hand dexterity to clear paresis 
with spasticity in the affected limb. Periventricular venous infarctions 
are more likely associated with lower extremity impairment, whereas 
presumed perinatal AIS is more likely associated with upper extremity 
weakness. Mimics of stroke-­related early hand preference include brain 
malformations and brachial plexus injury.
Presumed perinatal stroke frequently presents as symptomatic 
localization-­related epilepsy. Seizure semiology is variable, ranging 
from focal seizures without alterations in consciousness to generalized 
seizures with or without focal onset. Seizures may be subtle and in 
some instances may consist only of electrographic status epilepticus 
of slow wave sleep, which may present with developmental delays or 
regression. On some occasions, patients may present with infantile 
spasms.
Evaluation, Management, and Outcome
MRI of the brain is the imaging modality of choice for presumed peri­
natal stroke, as MRI establishes the location, extent, and severity of the 
stroke and can identify other lesions, such as gray matter heterotopia 
or other brain malformations that may produce similar symptoms. 
Patients with presumed perinatal AIS may have a porencephalic cyst, 
an area of cystic encephalomalacia in the location of a brain insult that 
usually involves the cortex and subcortical structures. In cases of peri­
natal periventricular infarction, MRI may demonstrate periventricu­
lar tissue loss, gliosis, and hemosiderin deposition, which may lead to 
variable degrees of ventricle deformation and corpus callosum tissue 
loss (Fig. 37.15).
Given the high rate of symptomatic epilepsy in presumed peri­
natal stroke, especially in presumed perinatal AIS, assessing for the 
possibility of seizures, including obtaining an EEG when the history 
is concerning, is essential. Interictal abnormalities such as spikes or 
sharp waves may be seen and represent a sign of hyperexcitability and 
consequent risk for seizures. There may be areas of focal slowing or 
lower-­amplitude waveforms that correspond to areas of focal cere­
bral dysfunction. These focal abnormalities typically correspond to 
the location of the stroke; however, there may be additional diffuse 
findings such as generalized slowing of the background brain wave 
rhythm, which represents an encephalopathic state. There may also be 
generalized, multifocal spikes or sharp waves, which may signify the 
development of an epileptic encephalopathy. If present, seizures may 
be controlled with antiepileptic medications.
Once the diagnosis of presumed perinatal stroke has been made, 
early-­intervention rehabilitation therapies must be initiated. Patients 
should be screened for cognitive impairment and learning disabil­
ities even if not manifesting these complaints; deficits may include 
Fig. 37.15  Presumed perinatal arterial ischemic stroke (AIS). MRI of a 5-­year-­old girl with long-­standing right 
hemiplegia and intractable epilepsy secondary to a left-­sided infarct. Note the large area of cystic cavitation 
in the left temporal (top left and middle images), frontal (top right image), and parietal lobes (top right and 
bottom left images) in the extended left middle cerebral artery territory (with some additional anterior choroi­
dal involvement, and atrophy of the left thalamus; bottom left image). The left hemicranium is smaller, and 
there is some expansion of the left calvarial diploic space. There is three-­site involvement of the basal ganglia, 
superficial cortex, and posterior limb of the internal capsule (bottom row images). There is imaging evidence 
of Wallerian degeneration with atrophy, and signal hyperintensity suggestive of gliosis in the ventral midbrain 
and pons (bottom middle and right images). (From Gunny RS, Lin D. Imaging of perinatal stroke. Magn Reson 
Imaging Clin North Am. 2012;20:1–33, Fig. 5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
650
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
visuospatial, executive, and attention difficulties and may require com­
prehensive neuropsychological evaluation to identify.
STROKE IN CHILDREN
Stroke in older infants and children is best categorized in three different 
groups: AIS, intracranial hemorrhage, and venous stroke. For all three 
groups the clinical presentation is similar, but the risk factors, evaluation, 
management, and outcomes vary significantly. The incidence of stroke 
in children declines after the neonatal stage and remains low until mid-­
adolescence. Biological males have a 1.25 times higher relative risk of 
stroke when compared to biological females, even adjusting for trauma.
Children with stroke are more likely to present similarly to adults, 
with focal neurologic deficits; children are more likely to experience 
delays in recognition and diagnostic evaluation. Diagnostic delays 
are multifactorial in etiology, though contributing factors include low 
index of suspicion for pediatric stroke as well as the higher prevalence 
of stroke mimics in children. Prompt recognition is essential, as chil­
dren may be candidates for hyperacute therapies such as thrombolysis 
or thrombectomy in cases of AIS, anticoagulation in cases of venous 
stroke, or neuroprotective care protocols regardless of etiology.
Presenting symptoms are largely dependent on the type of stroke 
and the brain region affected (Table 37.14). Possible mimics also vary 
depending on the nature of the stroke; for patients who present with 
acute unilateral weakness, common differential diagnoses include post­
ictal hemiparesis (Todd paralysis), brain tumor, hemiplegic migraine, 
trauma, CNS infection, and conversion disorder. Postictal hemiparesis 
is typically preceded by clinical seizure activity, though occasionally 
the seizure activity may be clinically inapparent or the hemiparesis may 
have onset during the seizure itself. As opposed to the persistent unilat­
eral weakness associated with stroke, postictal hemiparesis is typically 
transient. Patients who present with hemiplegic migraine generally 
have associated headache and oftentimes a family history of migraine. 
Acute hemiparesis with migraine is believed to reflect the involvement 
of the cerebral circulation derived from the carotid artery. When the 
vertebrobasilar circulation is involved in migraine, symptoms such as 
ataxia, cortical blindness, and cranial nerve dysfunction may occur as 
well.
Rarer mimics include CNS inflammatory conditions such as acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis, which is characterized by a coincident 
encephalopathy, acute flaccid myelitis, alternating hemiplegia of child­
hood, hypertensive encephalopathy, and strokelike migraine attacks 
after radiation therapy (SMART) syndrome. Thorough clinical exam­
ination, history taking, and neuroimaging can discriminate between 
these conditions and stroke (see Table 37.5). For patients who present 
with other focal neurologic deficits or alteration in awareness, appro­
priate differential diagnoses must be considered according to clinical 
context.
TABLE 37.14  Symptoms of Strokes in Children Based on Etiology
ARTERIAL ISCHEMIC STROKES
HEMORRHAGIC STROKES
CEREBRAL VENOUS THROMBOSIS*
Symptoms/Signs
%
%
Symptoms/Signs
%
Hemiparesis
70–80
35
Headache
75
Facial weakness
40–60
35
Altered consciousness
55
Speech disturbance
30–40
10
Focal deficits
40–50
Visual changes
5–15
20
Seizures
25
Limb ataxia
20–25
5
Focal numbness
20
<5
Vomiting
10–20
55
Headache
25–45
75
Decreased level of 
consciousness
20–40
50
Seizures
15–30
20
Vertigo
10
NDA
Diplopia
3
NDA
Papilledema
1
NDA
No lateralizing symptoms
35
65
No neurologic signs
10
60
GCS ≥14
85
60
GCS 9–13
15
20
GCS ≤8
0
20
*Ichord RN, Benedict SL, Chan AK, et al. Paediatric cerebral sinovenous thrombosis: findings of the International Paediatric Stroke Study. Arch Dis 
Child. 2015;100:174–179.
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; NDA, no data available.
Data pooled from Mallick AA, Ganesan V, Kirkham FJ, et al. Childhood arterial ischaemic stroke incidence, presenting features, and risk factors: 
a prospective population-­based study. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:35–43; Yock-­Corrales A, Mackay MT, Mosley I, et al. Acute childhood arterial 
ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;58:156–163; Wintermark M, Hills NK, deVeber GA, 
et al. Arteriopathy diagnosis in childhood arterial ischemic stroke: results of the vascular effects of infection in pediatric stroke study. Stroke. 
2014;45:3597–3605; Lynch J, Hirtz DG, DeVeber G, et al. Report of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Workshop on 
Perinatal and Childhood Stroke. Pediatrics. 2002;109:116–123.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
651
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
Ischemic Stroke in Children
Risk Factors and Etiology
Ischemic stroke in children is associated with diverse risk factors 
(Table 37.15); however, despite thorough evaluation, up to one third 
of childhood AIS is classified as idiopathic. The Childhood AIS Stan­
dardized Classification and Diagnostic Evaluation (CASCADE) crite­
ria are used to classify stroke presentation and distribution, offering 
excellent interrater reliability and consistency when describing pedi­
atric stroke (Fig. 37.16).
Arteriopathies. Arteriopathies are cerebrovascular conditions 
associated with vessel wall abnormalities and may be unilateral or 
bilateral, be focal or diffuse, affect small vessels or large, be transient 
or progressive, and affect different areas within the cerebral vessels. 
Arteriopathies may be isolated conditions or part of a systemic 
illness.
Moyamoya arteriopathy is characterized by endothelial prolifera­
tion, fibrosis, and intimal thickening within the terminal portion of the 
internal carotid arteries, leading to progressive narrowing and occlu­
sion. Resultant proliferation of collateral vessels from the basilar skull 
circulation creates an intricate latticework of compensatory blood flow 
that has a characteristic appearance: moyamoya means “hazy” or “puff 
of smoke” and reflects findings seen on conventional angiography (Fig. 
37.17). Children usually present with acute hemiplegia as a result of 
uncompensated occlusion of the internal carotid artery. Because the 
anatomic abnormality is often bilateral, the hemiplegia may alternate. 
Primary or idiopathic moyamoya demonstrates a genetic predisposi­
tion (ACTA2, GUCY1A3, RNF213 genes) and occurs in the absence 
of associated conditions, whereas the designation moyamoya syndrome 
is given when the progressive distal internal carotid artery occlusion 
is secondary to a primary disorder such as sickle cell disease, neuro­
fibromatosis, trisomy 21, tuberculous meningitis, or fibromuscular 
dysplasia.
Sickle cell disease arteriopathy is a significant source of mor­
bidity in patients with sickle cell disease. By the age of 20 years, 
approximately 11% of children with sickle cell disease will have had a 
symptomatic stroke; up to 40% have silent cerebral infarcts in which 
no overt symptoms occur but changes are seen on brain imaging. 
Children with sickle cell disease who have silent infarctions may 
demonstrate school dysfunction or headache as the only manifesta­
tion of neurologic involvement of the disease. Stroke recurrences are 
common.
The arteriopathy often involves the internal carotid or middle cere­
bral arteries, and in some cases moyamoya syndrome or intracranial 
hemorrhage can develop. Stroke may occur within the context of a 
sickle cell vaso-­occlusive crisis or may be an isolated event, and typ­
ically occurs in watershed distributions between two cerebrovascu­
lar territories, affecting both the gray and white matter of the cortex. 
The proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms consist of both sickling-­
related occlusion and progressive stenosis in cerebral vessels. Sickled 
red blood cells (RBCs) flowing through arteries and capillaries activate 
endothelial proliferation in large vessels, ultimately leading to stenosis. 
Angiography demonstrates large-­vessel vasculopathy in the internal 
carotid arteries and middle cerebral arteries; microscopic examination 
reveals endothelial proliferation, disruption of the elastic lamina, and 
microthrombi. Additional contributing factors include increased RBC 
adhesion, endothelial activation, inflammation, and coagulation dis­
regulation. Children with sickle cell disease may also have SAH, though 
the risk is less than that of infarction, occurring in fewer than 2%. The 
clinical findings of SAH differ from those of infarction in patients with 
sickle cell disease. Severe headache, vomiting, and alteration in mental 
state characterize SAH in children with sickle cell disease. Meningeal 
signs and focal neurologic deficits may be found on examination.
Transient cerebral arteriopathy consists of focal stenosis or seg­
mental narrowing of the vessel wall that typically affects large vessels 
in the anterior circulation and fluctuates on serial angiographic stud­
ies. Strokes in transient cerebral arteriopathy usually involve the basal 
ganglia. Pathophysiology is undetermined; association with certain 
viral infections such as varicella and herpes has been proposed. Con­
nective tissue disorders such as Marfan, Ehlers-­Danlos, and Loeys-­
Dietz syndromes may have associated arteriopathies that can result in 
ischemic stroke; patients with these disorders are also at risk of stroke 
via arterial dissection. Arterial dissections may also occur in other­
wise healthy children in the setting of major mechanical injuries such 
as whiplash and penetrating injuries, or even with minor trauma like 
neck manipulation, physical effort, or contact sports. Arteriopathies 
are also seen in rarer genetic disorders such as adenosine deaminase 
2 deficiency; pathogenic variants in NOTCH3 and ACTA2 have been 
implicated in pediatric stroke.
Cardiac Disease. Congenital heart disease is a significant 
risk factor for childhood stroke. The strokes are typically embolic; 
children with single-­ventricle physiology face the greatest risk, but 
other cardiac conditions such as arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, or 
endocarditis are also associated with stroke. Cardiac defects involving 
right-­to-­left shunts allow emboli originating in peripheral venous 
circulation to bypass their filtration and removal by the pulmonary 
vascular bed. Emboli entering the heart via venous return may be 
shunted to the peripheral arterial circulation only to lodge in the 
cerebrovascular tree.
Patent foramen ovale contributes significantly to stroke in chil­
dren. Echocardiographic evaluation of patients who have had stroke 
reveals patent foramen ovale or evidence of right-­to-­left shunting in 
many. Transesophageal echocardiography with agitated saline assess­
ing for evidence of direct right-­to-­left flow is an essential component of 
the evaluation of children with embolic stroke.
Valvular defects can cause stroke as well. Mitral valve prolapse may 
result in small emboli being dislodged from the abnormal valve leaflets 
and has been estimated to underlie up to 30% of strokes in patients 
younger than 30 years. Rheumatic valvular disease of the mitral or 
aortic valves, once a common cause of embolic stroke, has become an 
infrequent cause of childhood stroke due to improved diagnosis and 
treatment of group A streptococcal disease. Infectious vegetations of 
the mitral and aortic valves in bacterial endocarditis pose a consider­
able risk for embolic stroke, regardless of whether the valve is native, 
prosthetic, rheumatic, or congenitally abnormal, as these vegetations 
may dislodge and travel distally to occlude cerebral arteries or seed the 
adventitia of a cerebral vessel and induce thrombosis or the develop­
ment of a mycotic aneurysm. The most common organisms found are 
streptococci and staphylococci. Mycotic aneurysms may lie dormant 
for some time before their rupture leads to SAH or IPH and resultant 
neurologic signs.
Left atrial myxoma, atrial fibrillation, nonbacterial valvular lesions, 
and polycythemia in uncorrected cyanotic heart disease may also be 
associated with stroke.
Another important risk factor of stroke in children with severe 
cardiac disease is the utilization of ventricular assist devices or 
venoarterial ECMO. As blood is circulated with the assistance of 
these devices, fibrin deposits may be introduced into the arterial cir­
culation and may propagate to the cerebrovascular tree. To prevent 
thrombosis, patients using these devices are usually administered 
systemic anticoagulation, which may increase the risk of intracranial 
hemorrhage.
Prothrombotic Conditions. Several disorders of coagulation can 
render patients at risk for embolic or thrombotic stroke (see Table 
37.15). Adverse consequences of antiphospholipid antibodies 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
652
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 37.15  Risk Factors and Causes of Stroke in Children
Arteriopathies
Focal or transient cerebral arteriopathy
Craniocervical arterial dissection
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Moyamoya disease or syndrome
Sickle cell arteriopathy
Primary CNS angiitis
HANAC syndrome
Genetic variants (see text and Table 37.17)
Cardiovascular Disease
Congenital
Aortic stenosis
Mitral stenosis
Ventricular septal defects
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent foramen ovale
PHACE syndrome
Acquired
Endocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Cardiomyopathy
Atrial myxoma
Arrhythmia
Rheumatic heart disease
Prosthetic heart valve
Catheterization/surgery
ECMO
Hematologic Abnormalities
Hemoglobinopathies
Polycythemia
Leukemia/lymphoma
Thrombocytopenia including TTP
Disorders of coagulation
Protein C deficiency
Protein S deficiency
Antithrombin III deficiency
Factor V (Leiden) resistance to activated protein C
Lupus anticoagulant
Oral hormonal contraception
Pregnancy and the postpartum state
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Inflammatory bowel disease
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Nephrotic syndrome
L-­Asparaginase
Prothrombin G20210A variant
MTHFR deficiency
Lipoprotein(a) elevation
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
PNH
Systemic Disorders
Meningitis
Viral
Bacterial
Tuberculous
Systemic infection
Viremia
Bacteremia
Local head and neck infections, including Lemierre syndrome
Postinfectious (including varicella and other viruses)
Drug-­induced inflammation and vasoconstriction
Amphetamine
Cocaine
Ergot alkaloids
Autoimmune disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Takayasu arteritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Polyarteritis nodosa
Primary CNS vasculitis
Trisomy 21
Metabolic Diseases
Hyperhomocysteinemia/homocystinuria/elevated homocysteine levels
Fabry disease
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Sulfite oxidase deficiency
Mitochondrial Disorders
MELAS
Leigh syndrome
Intracerebral Vascular Processes
Ruptured aneurysm
Arteriovenous malformation
Migraine headache
Post–subarachnoid hemorrhage vasospasm
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Carotid or vertebral artery dissection
Neurofibromatosis type 1
CADASIL
CARASIL
Trauma and Other External Causes
Nonaccidental trauma
Head and neck trauma
Oral trauma
Placental embolism
Neck hyperextension (carotid dissection)
Lollipop stroke (pharyngeal trauma)
CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal recessive arte­
riopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CNS, central nervous system; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; HANAC, 
hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy aneurysms, muscle cramps; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, strokelike episodes; 
MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; PHACE, posterior fossa brain malformations, hemangiomas of the face, neck, and scalp, arterial 
anomalies, coarctation of the aorta and cardiac anomalies, and eye defects; PNA, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria; TTP, thrombotic thrombo­
cytopenic purpura.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
653
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
have been identified in all age groups. Antiphospholipid antibodies, 
including lupus anticoagulant, are polyclonal antibodies found 
in serum that bind to both neutral and negatively charged 
phospholipids. Lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies 
were first associated with thrombotic or embolic cerebrovascular 
events in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The 
antibody prolongs the partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in  vitro 
but acts as a procoagulant in  vivo. A common finding associated 
with coagulation testing among children with AIS is the presence 
of anticardiolipin antibody. The presence of these antibodies in a 
patient who concurrently smokes cigarettes, has positive antinuclear 
antibodies, or suffers from hyperlipidemia may impart a higher risk 
for stroke than if the patient carries the antibody alone. The antibody’s 
presence is indicated by a prolonged PTT and a falsely positive serum 
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) result. Although 
cerebral infarction and TIAs constitute the most frequently observed 
neurologic manifestations related to the presence of these antibodies, 
migraine headache, seizures, and monocular visual disturbances are 
also associated.
Absence of specific serum proteins that act as inhibitors of coag­
ulation may lead to stroke. Two of these proteins, protein S and 
protein C, have been associated with thrombotic or embolic cere­
brovascular disease. Protein C and its cofactor protein S act as anti­
coagulants and synergistically attenuate coagulation by deactivating 
the activated forms of factors V and VIII. Absence of (or resistance 
to) either of these proteins disrupts the balance of coagulation 
toward increased spontaneous clotting and can result in stroke. 
In addition, antithrombin III opposes the action of the activated 
forms of factors II, IX, X, XI, and XII through the irreversible for­
mation of inactivating complexes with these factors. Deficiencies of 
proteins S and C as well as of antithrombin III may cause arterial 
thrombotic or embolic stroke or venous infarction. Although their 
deficiencies are often congenital, they may be acquired through 
liver disease or nephrotic syndrome. Factor V Leiden, prothrombin 
20210A, and lipoprotein A are also important factors that may con­
tribute to the pathogenesis of AIS. A screening hematologic battery 
of tests, including prothrombin time, PTT, and specific immuno­
logic and functional testing for the proteins suspected of being defi­
cient, is essential for diagnosis.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) predispose to stroke.
Primary classification:
Acute
(choose 1 only)
Primary classification:
Chronic
(choose 1 only)
Progressive
Arteriopathy
Stable
Arteriopathy
Reversible
Arteriopathy
Indeterminate
Arteriopathy
1. Small vessel
arteriopathy of
childhood
(SVA)
2. Unilateral focal
cerebral arteriopathy
of childhood
(FCA)
3. Bilateral cerebral
arteriopathy of
childhood
4. Aortic/cervical
arteriopathy
5. Cardioembolic
6. Other
7. Multifactorial
(record multiple)
Fig. 37.16  Childhood AIS Standardized Classification and Diagnostic 
Evaluation (CASCADE) system for classification of childhood arterial 
ischemic stroke. (From Bernard TJ, Manco-­Johnson MJ, Lo W, et al. 
Towards a consensus-­based classification of childhood arterial ischemic 
stroke. Stroke. 2012;43[2]:371–377.)
A
B
Fig. 37.17  Sudden onset of right hemiparesis in a 6-­year-­old boy. A, Cerebral angiogram shows the left 
internal carotid artery (arrow) leading to a highly arborized, telangiectatic network of vessels (arrowheads) 
characteristic for moyamoya disease. The typical middle cerebral artery vascular tree is absent. B, Cranial 
coronal MRI scan shows region of low signal in the middle cerebral artery territory and denotes infarction 
(curved arrows). Flow voids in the basal ganglia (straight arrows) are radiographic manifestations of the basilar 
collateral circulation typical of this vascular anomaly.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
654
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Autoimmune Conditions. Autoimmune disorders are uncommon 
causes of stroke in children (Table 37.16). Symptoms of abrupt onset 
with accompanying deficits referable to the CNS have long been 
associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. A CNS vasculitis had 
been presumed to underlie the CNS manifestations of SLE; however, 
an autopsy study of patients who suffered from SLE revealed a virtual 
absence of cerebrovascular inflammation. Rather, small areas of 
infarction relate to proliferative changes in cerebral arterioles that lead 
to luminal occlusion. Large areas of infarction are more probably related 
to lupus anticoagulant–derived thromboembolism or to embolism 
from the sterile cardiac valve leaflet vegetations associated with SLE 
(Libman-­Sacks endocarditis). Additional causes of CNS illness include 
thrombocytopenic hemorrhage, steroid-­induced pseudotumor or 
psychosis, and CNS infection.
True cerebral arterial vasculitis may be an isolated disease or 
seen in association with recognizable systemic autoimmune disor­
ders. Isolated angiitis of the CNS may affect small, medium-­sized, or 
large vessels. Multiple regions of infarction are often found on MRI. 
Neuropathologic evidence of polymorphonuclear leukocyte or mono­
cyte infiltration leading to intimal proliferation and vessel wall necro­
sis is found. The inflammation affects blood flow and predisposes to 
thrombosis.
Stroke may occur in the course of polyarteritis nodosa. Involve­
ment of the CNS is found in up to 40% of such patients. Granulomato­
sis with polyangiitis, a necrotizing vasculitis of the upper pulmonary 
system, rarely affects the CNS; stroke is uncommon. When the CNS 
is affected, extension of sinus or nasal inflammation into the basilar 
skull frequently has occurred. Takayasu arteritis, involving the aorta 
and its principal branches, has been associated with thrombotic stroke. 
Inflammation-­induced luminal constriction leading to thrombosis is 
thought to cause cerebral ischemia in children. Necrotizing arteritis 
with inflammatory infiltrate has been found in both meningeal and 
cerebral vessels of children suffering from Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. 
Both fixed and transient deficits may occur in this disorder.
Metabolic and Genetic Disorders. There are rare metabolic 
and genetic conditions associated with stroke (Table 37.17). 
Homocystinuria, a disorder of homocysteine metabolism, can 
cause thrombotic stroke in children. Abnormal homocysteine 
metabolism results from one of three inheritable enzymatic defects. 
The most striking phenotype results from deficiency of cystathionine 
synthetase, the enzyme that facilitates the catabolism of homocysteine 
to cystathionine leading to accumulation of homocysteine. Children 
affected by this autosomal recessive disorder have marfanoid habitus, 
global developmental delay, lens dislocation, and thromboembolism. 
Thromboemboli may travel to cerebrovascular beds, causing stroke. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia injures the vascular endothelium. The 
denuded vessel wall then becomes a site for thrombosis. The resulting 
thrombus may remain at its site of origin or it may embolize to a distal 
locus. Therefore, stroke may have thrombotic or embolic characteristics. 
Both arterial and venous infarctions may result. Some patients without 
homocystinuria but with elevated serum homocysteine levels may be 
at risk for stroke.
Sulfite oxidase deficiency, another autosomal recessive disorder, 
results in the accumulation of serum sulfite. The associated phenotype 
may result from deficiency of either the enzyme or its associated and 
essential pterin-­containing molybdenum cofactor. Intellectual dis­
ability, seizures, lens displacement, and acute hemiplegia result. The 
mechanism of the strokelike episodes has not been fully elucidated. It 
is possible that ischemic mechanisms are not involved and that direct 
metabolic neurotoxicity accounts for the sudden onset of deficits 
resembling those of stroke. Sulfites and S-­sulfocysteine accumulate in 
urine.
Fabry disease, a rare X-­linked lipid storage disease attributable 
to ceramide trihexosidase deficiency, results in accumulation of the 
sphingolipid trihexoside in the kidneys, vascular endothelium, and 
corneas. Symptoms become apparent in childhood or adolescence. 
Angiokeratomas and painful paresthesia often constitute the first 
symptoms. Renal failure follows. Endothelial accumulation of sphin­
golipid in vessel walls leads to cerebrovascular occlusion that results in 
stroke. Recurrent stroke is common.
The manifestations of mitochondrial disorders include recur­
rent and sometimes catastrophic stroke. The syndrome of mitochon­
drial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes 
(MELAS) manifests in childhood and results from a pathogenic vari­
ant in mitochondrial DNA. The most common biochemical finding is 
a deficiency of complex I of the electron transport chain. An elevated 
serum or cerebrospinal fluid lactate level serves as its biochemical sig­
nature, and molecular confirmation of the diagnosis can be secured 
from blood. Although some features of MELAS are shared with other 
mitochondrial syndromes, hemiparesis of abrupt onset is fairly specific 
for this syndrome. An excruciating headache resembling migraine 
may precede the strokelike episodes. Seizures and sensorineural hear­
ing loss are almost always present at some point in the course of the 
illness. Neuropathologic study of brains from patients with MELAS 
has shown cystic cavities and necrosis of cortex with relative sparing 
of white matter.
Other metabolic disorders have been associated with stroke in 
childhood. Urea cycle defects, especially ornithine transcarbamylase 
deficiency manifesting in girls, can cause stroke. Deficiency of argin­
ase, another important enzyme of the urea cycle, has been observed in 
association with hemiparesis and diparesis of subacute onset. Finally, 
familial lipoprotein disorders, especially those featuring a dearth of 
high-­density lipoprotein or an abundance of triglycerides, have been 
associated with stroke in children. In most cases, a family history of 
hyperlipidemia is found.
Evaluation and Management
Table 37.18 describes the paraclinical assessment of stroke in children. 
The evaluation of stroke should be focused on determining the etiol­
ogy as management depends largely on it. Stroke evaluation urgency 
depends on the acuteness of the presentation. For any patient with 
TABLE 37.16  Autoimmune Disorders 
Associated with Central Nervous System 
(CNS) Involvement
Disorder
CNS Manifestations
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Migraine headache, seizures, stroke, 
cerebellar dysfunction, transverse 
myelopathy, aseptic meningitis, 
psychosis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Seizures, stroke, cerebellar dysfunction, 
trigeminal neuropathy
Polyarteritis nodosa
Migraine headache, stroke, 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, seizures
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Migraine headache, subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, stroke
Takayasu arteritis
Seizure, stroke
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Headache, stroke, seizures, chorea
Primary CNS vasculitis
Headache, stroke, seizure
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
655
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
Lipid and Other Disorders with Atherosclerosis
Hereditary dyslipoproteinemias
Familial hypercholesterolemia
Familial hypertriglyceridemia
Hyperlipoproteinemia (types III and IV)
Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Tangier disease
Progeria (de Lange, Deckel, Bloom, Cockayne syndromes)
Arteriopathy, Angiopathy, Vasculitis
Ehlers-­Danlos (type IV) syndrome
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Menkes syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Rendu-­Osler-­Weber syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia)
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Neurofibromatosis 1
Tuberous sclerosis complex
Polycystic kidney disease (autosomal dominant type 1, 2)
Fibromuscular dysplasia
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome
Bannayan-­Zonana syndrome
Moyamoya disease (ACTA2, GUCY1A3, RNF2B, unknown)
Fabry disease
CARASIL (HTRA1)
CADASIL (NOTCH3)
RVCL (TREX-­1)
DADA2 (CECR1)
COL4A1/A2 angiopathies including:
Hereditary angiopathy nephropathy and cramps (HANAC), and
Autosomal dominant porencephaly with infantile hemiplegia (POREN1)
FOXC1/PITX2: Digenetic inheritance
CARASAL (CTSA)
HCHWA-­Dutch type
HCHWA-­Icelandic type
FAP
ADA2 deficiency
ACTA2 gene variant
Hematologic Disorders
Antithrombin deficiency
Protein C and S deficiency
Thrombomodulin deficiency
Activated protein C resistance
Factor V Leiden variant
Prothrombin G20210A variant
Sickle cell disease
Hematologic Disorders—cont’d
Factor V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII deficiency
Hemoglobinopathies (hemoglobin C or S disorders)
Prekallikrein deficiency
C2 deficiency
β-­thalassemia
Disorders of fibrinogen
Afibrinogenemia
Hypofibrinogenemia
Dysfibrinogenemia
Elevated thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor
Elevated factor VIII
Elevated factor IX
Elevated factor XI
Disorders of the fibrinolytic system
Hypoplasminogenemia
Tissue plasminogen activator defects
MTHFR gene variant
Heparin cofactor II deficiency
Hereditary platelet defects
Cardiac Disorders
Familial atrial myxomas
Rhabdomyomas (tuberous sclerosis)
Mitral valve prolapse
Cardiac papillary fibroelastoma
Hereditary cardiac conduction disorders
Hereditary cardiomyopathies
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Mitochondrial abnormalities
MELAS
Leigh disease
Organic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Propionic acidemia
Isovaleric acidemia
Homocystinuria
Glutaric aciduria type II
Sulfite oxidase deficiency
11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, 11β-­ketoreductase deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase 
deficiency
3-­Methylcrotonyl-­CoA carboxylase 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­CoA lyase deficiency
Other Disorders
CCM1 (KRIT1)
CCM2 (CCM2)
CCM3 (PDCD10)
ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoen­
cephalopathy; CARASAL, cathepsin A–related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal recessive arteriop­
athy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CCM, cerebral cavernous malformation; DADA2, deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2; FAP, 
familial amyloid polyneuropathy; HCHWA, hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, 
and strokelike episodes; RVCL, retinal vasculopathy with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2.
TABLE 37.17  Genetic Associations with Thrombotic, Hemorrhagic, or Vascular Stroke
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
656
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
acute neurologic deficit in which stroke is suspected, urgent neuro­
imaging must follow, as well as laboratory data, pertinent history, and 
directed examination. Patients should be screened for complications of 
stroke, which include seizures, cerebral edema, hemorrhagic conver­
sion, and stroke recurrence. Neuropsychological testing and rehabilita­
tion strategies must be instituted.
Hyperacute therapies like thrombolysis and thrombectomy, 
which are directed at revascularizing the brain and preserving the 
ischemic penumbra, or area of viable tissue around the periphery 
of an infarct, have revolutionized the care of adolescents and adults 
with stroke. The evidentiary support for the use of these therapies in 
pediatrics is insufficient, largely because of the difficulty of studying 
hyperacute therapies in pediatric stroke. Neuroprotective measures, 
which include permissive hypertension and reduction of metabolic 
demand, remain the mainstay of treatment in most pediatric stroke 
cases.
Strategies to prevent primary stroke or stroke recurrence vary 
depending on the specific etiology. Patients with sickle cell disease 
related to hemoglobin SS or hemoglobin S-­β0-­thalassemia genotypes 
are at the highest risk for stroke, compared to other sickle cell disease 
genotypes, and should be screened on a recurring basis for stroke risk 
beginning in early childhood. These assessments consist of determin­
ing the mean flow velocity in the large intracranial vessels via trans­
cranial Doppler ultrasonography; higher velocities are suggestive of 
vasculopathy and may portend a higher stroke risk. Those at increased 
risk should be considered for chronic transfusion therapy to maintain 
a lower percentage of hemoglobin S; those unable to tolerate chronic 
transfusion may be considered for hydroxyurea therapy. These patients 
should also have at least one MRI during the school-­aged years to 
screen for silent cerebral infarcts. Those who have sustained strokes 
should also be offered chronic transfusion therapy; alternative thera­
pies include hydroxyurea or even hematopoietic stem cell transplan­
tation, depending on disease severity, recurrence risk, and tolerance of 
chronic transfusion.
Anticoagulation is commonly used in cardioembolic stroke when 
the risk for further embolism propagation is present; if due to an 
abnormal heart rhythm, rate control is established either medically 
or via ablation procedures. Strokes due to moyamoya disease and 
syndrome may be prevented by revascularization through indirect 
and/or direct bypass surgery. In some cases of arteriopathy, anti­
thrombotic therapies may be considered. Treatment of infectious 
endocarditis consists of parenteral anti-­infectives and, if needed, 
valve replacement or repair. Lastly, in select cases, closure of a patent 
foramen ovale may be performed to decrease the risk of subsequent 
stroke.
Outcome
In-­hospital mortality from pediatric stroke is approximately 3%. 
Almost half of children with AIS have neurologic deficits, with the 
majority having hemiparesis. Cognitive impairments, as well as impair­
ments of higher cortical and executive functioning, such as working 
memory, processing speed, visual-­spatial and visual-­constructional 
TABLE 37.18  Radiologic, Laboratory, and Cardiovascular Assessment of Stroke in Children
Radiologic Assessment
Rapid Detection of Intracranial Blood
Cranial CT
Cranial MRI (also detects extravascular blood but is not as rapidly obtained as 
cranial CT images)
Detection of Brain Parenchymal Changes Related to Stroke
Cranial MRI, including diffusion-­weighted imaging
Cranial CT (reveals changes later in course than MRI)
Detection of Abnormal Vascular Structure
Percutaneous cerebral angiogram (provides the most complete and accurate 
demonstration of extracranial and intracranial vasculature)
Cranial MRA
Laboratory Assessment
Disturbance of RBC, WBC, or Platelet Number
Hematocrit
Platelet count
WBC count with differential
Disturbance of Coagulation
PT, PTT
Antithrombin III level
Protein C level, protein S level; resistance to protein C assay
Lupus anticoagulant detection, anticardiolipin antibody, antiphospholipid antibody
MTHFR gene variant, prothrombin 20210A gene variant analysis
Metabolic Disturbances
Serum electrolytes, glucose
Serum and urine toxicology screen
Serum amino acids*
Urine organic acids*
Acylcarnitine profile*
GDF-­15*
Serum/CSF lactate and pyruvate*
Disturbance of Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin concentration
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
Inflammatory Disturbances
ESR
ANA
CSF studies: glucose, protein, cell counts, special stains, cultures
Serum triglycerides
Serum cholesterol; if high, obtain fasting HDL
Gene panel or whole exome
Cardiovascular Assessment
ECG
Standard and transesophageal echocardiogram
*Consider if marked or persistent abnormalities in glucose homeostasis or acid-­base balance.
ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GDF-­15, growth differentiation factor-­15; HDL, high-­density lipoproteins; MRA, magnetic 
resonance angiography; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; PT, prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; RBC, red blood cell; 
WBC, white blood cell.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
657
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
skills, inhibitory control, and problem solving, may also occur and 
should be evaluated by neuropsychological testing, so as to allow for 
identification of specific deficits and the formulation of customized 
rehabilitation and school accommodation plans. Up to 30% of patients 
with childhood AIS receive some form of special education in the class­
room, and up to 60% have emotional or behavioral difficulties.
Hemorrhagic Stroke in Children
Hemorrhagic stroke may occur from disordered coagulation, throm­
bocytopenia, vascular lesions, or conversion of ischemic or venous 
stroke (Table 37.19). Symptoms are similar to ischemic stroke though 
may also include signs of increased intracranial pressure or even 
impending cerebral herniation. Evaluation and management depend 
on etiology. If hemorrhagic stroke is suspected, emergent noncontrast 
CTOH should be obtained. Any coagulopathy or thrombocytope­
nia should be promptly corrected. If there is concern for a vascular 
lesion, such as arterial dissection or an aneurysm, CTA or conventional 
angiography should be performed; if such a lesion is present, consul­
tation with neurovascular specialists can determine the need for and 
urgency of intervention. Occasionally patients with large intracranial 
bleeding must undergo surgical evacuation of a hematoma to control 
intracranial hypertension and prevent mass effect from damaging adja­
cent brain structures. In the case of hemorrhagic transformation of an 
ischemic or venous stroke, neuroprotection must be maximized with 
normalization of physiologic parameters, control of hypertension, and 
reduction of brain metabolism. Outcome largely depends on the vol­
ume of hemorrhage and the degree of brain injury.
Coagulopathies
Coagulopathies like hemophilia (A and B) are X-­linked disorders 
that may result in intracranial bleeding. Bleeding may occur in either 
intraparenchymal or subarachnoid locations. Hemophilia A arises 
from factor VIII deficiency. Patients with this disorder may experience 
intracranial bleeding in association with head trauma. Spontaneous 
intracranial bleeding not associated with head trauma also occurs. 
The risk of spontaneous bleeding rises with the severity of factor 
VIII deficiency. Hemophilia B derives from a deficiency of factor IX. 
Intracranial bleeding is seen less frequently among these patients than 
among patients with hemophilia A, though hemophilia B is encoun­
tered much less frequently than hemophilia A, and this difference may 
account for the less frequent observation of intracranial bleeding. Clin­
ical symptoms depend on the intracranial location of the hemorrhage. 
If the bleeding occurs in the subarachnoid space, symptoms of severe 
headache, nuchal rigidity, and meningismus are found. Mental status 
is frequently altered. If bleeding occurs within brain parenchyma, focal 
features, including hemiparesis, may be found.
Thrombocytopenia
Severe thrombocytopenia rarely leads to cerebral hemorrhage, espe­
cially if the cause is idiopathic (immune) thrombocytopenic purpura. 
Thrombocytopenia caused by bone marrow failure (e.g., drug-­induced 
suppression, aplastic anemia, malignancy) and TTP pose a greater risk. 
Significant risk of intracranial hemorrhage is thought not to occur until 
the platelet count is <20,000/mm3. Small petechial hemorrhages into 
white matter are thought to be more common than are large paren­
chymal hemorrhages. Causes of thrombocytopenia include idiopathic 
immune thrombocytopenic purpura, TTP, hemolytic uremic syn­
drome, infection, and malignancy (replacement of bone marrow or 
drug-­induced suppression). The features of these underlying disorders 
tend to determine the symptomatic presentation beyond intracranial 
hemorrhage and can assist in establishing the cause (see Chapter 51).
Vascular Malformations
Vascular malformations may predispose children to hemorrhagic 
stroke. Arteriovenous malformation (AVM) of the brain is the most 
common cause of intracranial hemorrhage in preadolescent children. 
The malformation represents a developmental anomaly that manifests 
with hemorrhage much more frequently in children than in adults; bio­
logical males are affected more frequently than biological females. The 
AVM consists of dilated vascular channels, some of which reveal the 
highly muscularized walls of arterioles. Gliotic neural tissue resides in 
and among the vascular branches of the malformation. The most fre­
quent presenting events associated with AVM in children are seizures 
and hemorrhage. Most AVMs reside in the cerebral hemispheres; 10% 
arise in the posterior fossa.
The clinical features of AVM hemorrhage consist of those found in 
IPH. Focal features depend on the area of the brain in which the bleed­
ing has occurred. A higher mortality rate has been observed in children 
than in adults harboring hemorrhagic AVMs. The risk of hemorrhage 
from an unruptured AVM is approximately 3% per year. MRI allows for 
better identification and localization of the malformation (Fig. 37.18).
Intracranial aneurysms constitute the most common cause of 
intracranial bleeding in all patients younger than 20 years and are 
more frequent in biological males. The most common site of aneurys­
mal bleeding in children is along the intracranial portion of the inter­
nal carotid artery. The vertebral and basilar arteries are other common 
sites of intracranial aneurysm in children. In addition, intracranial 
aneurysms discovered in children tend to be larger than those found 
in adults. Although most aneurysms constitute vascular developmental 
anomalies, other causes exist, including mycotic aneurysms associated 
with bacterial endocarditis (Fig. 37.19), as well as acquired cerebral 
artery aneurysms in children infected with HIV. Intracranial aneu­
rysms are found with increased frequency among patients suffering 
from polycystic renal disease, those with aortic coarctation, and those 
with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.
Affected patients are usually studied with angiography after aneu­
rysmal bleeding. Patients should be closely observed for development 
of hydrocephalus and increased intracranial pressure. Aneurysmal 
bleeding resulting in significant SAH can precipitate cerebral vaso­
spasm. Vasospasm, in turn, can cause a secondary cerebral infarction. 
Vasospasm occurs most commonly 7–10 days after the aneurysmal 
bleeding.
The syndrome of posterior fossa brain malformations; heman­
giomas of the face, neck, and scalp; arterial anomalies; coarctation 
of the aorta and cardiac anomalies; and eye defects (PHACE) is a 
TABLE 37.19  Prevalence of the Causes of 
Hemorrhagic Stroke in Children
Etiology
% of Cases
Vascular malformations
54
  AVM
30
  Cavernous hemangioma
12
  Aneurysm
10
  Venous malformation
0.5
SAH
2
Medical etiologies
9
Brain tumors
2.5
Trauma/dissection
1
Undetermined
33
AVM, arteriovenous malformations; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
658
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
constellation of disorders. CNS malformations affect the posterior 
fossa and include Dandy-­Walker malformation, arachnoid cysts, cer­
ebellar hypoplasia, and enlarged cisterna magna. Vascular anomalies 
include brachiocephalic artery and aortic arch anomalies (e.g., coarcta­
tion of aorta), cerebrovascular arterial hypoplasia, aneurysms, stenosis 
and aberrancies, and progressive occlusive arterial disease leading to 
stroke.
Venous Stroke in Children
Venous stroke occurs when a thrombus obstructs the cerebral venous 
circulation and leads to an increase in the hydrostatic pressure of the 
veins and capillaries proximal to the thrombus. Redistribution of blood 
flow through the venous system allows for some degree of compensation, 
but if the hydrostatic pressure overcomes this compensatory capacity, 
venous stroke may occur. The annual incidence of CSVT in children 
is estimated at seven cases per million and more often the superficial 
sinuses are involved. The clinical manifestations depend on the area of 
the brain that has been injured; prior to stroke, antecedent symptoms 
include headache or blurry vision from papilledema. Due to changes 
in pressure dissipation and the blood-­brain barrier, venous strokes may 
turn into hemorrhagic strokes. Venous system thrombi may also obstruct 
cerebrospinal flow and thus cause intracranial hypertension.
Risk Factors
The etiology for CSVT in children is often multifactorial. The most 
common risk factor for CSVT is head and neck infections such as oti­
tis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, or Lemierre syndrome (see Chapter 
48). Other risk factors include systemic illnesses such as liver disease, 
Fig. 37.18  Cranial MRI scan of a 6-­year-­old girl with recurrent headache. A, Axial view demonstrates flow 
voids deep in the left hemisphere near the lateral ventricle (arrowheads), consistent with arteriovenous mal­
formation. B, Coronal view through parietal lobes also demonstrates numerous flow voids (arrowheads) indic­
ative of arteriovenous malformation.
A
B
C
Fig. 37.19  Mycotic cerebral aneurysm hemorrhage. A, A cranial CT scan reveals a hyperdense area in the left 
temporal lobe (arrowheads) representing intraparenchymal hemorrhage. B, Cerebral angiography in a lateral 
view shows a lobulated structural abnormality representing the mycotic aneurysm, most probably residing 
in the middle cerebral artery tree (arrows). C, An anteroposterior angiographic view confirms the location of 
the aneurysm in the middle cerebral artery (straight arrows) located laterally rather than in the more medial 
anterior cerebral artery (curved arrows). The internal carotid artery (open arrows) gives rise to both the anterior 
and the middle cerebral arteries.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
659
CHAPTER 37  Stroke
nephrotic syndrome, SLE, malignancy, head trauma, or neurosurgery. 
Rarely, CSVT occurs as a complication of iron-­deficiency anemia, β-­
thalassemia, and sickle cell disease. Thrombophilia plays an unclear 
role in pediatric CSVT. The association of factor V Leiden and pro­
thrombin G20210A polymorphisms appear to have a weaker role in 
pediatric CSVT than in adult CSVT. Conversely, dehydration is a big­
ger risk factor for CSVT in children than it is in adults. Often several 
risk factors are present.
Evaluation and Management
Emergent neuroimaging with a CT scan and corresponding CT 
venogram or a brain MRI with a corresponding magnetic resonance 
venogram should be obtained in instances of suspected CSVT. Once 
venous stroke has been diagnosed, concomitant abnormalities, such 
as dehydration or infection, must be corrected. High-­quality evi­
dence for the role of anticoagulation in children with CSVT is lack­
ing though may be considered, as may endovascular treatment for 
patients with severe presentations and rapidly deteriorating neuro­
logic function despite anticoagulation. Children should undergo 
evaluation for CSVT etiology, which should include prothrombotic 
assessment. If initiated, the duration of anticoagulation is usually 3–6 
months for children, but if there is an inherent prothrombotic risk it 
may be continued for longer.
Outcome
Mortality for children with CSVT is as high as 10%; recanalization 
rates approach 70%. Recurrence rate in children is as high as 20%. 
Functional outcomes vary depending on the region of the brain that 
has suffered infarction. A peculiar characteristic of venous stroke is 
that vasogenic edema may occur to a different magnitude than does 
cytotoxic edema; as such, brain tissue damage may be less severe and 
deficits may be reversible at higher rates than in arterial stroke. Suc­
cessful recanalization decreases the risk of chronic headache and intra­
cranial hypertension.
STROKE IN ADOLESCENTS
The causes of adolescent stroke include those discussed for preadoles­
cent children though also include causes typically seen in adults as well 
as other entities not commonly encountered in neonates or preadoles­
cent children. Determination of stroke mechanism—embolic, throm­
botic, or hemorrhagic—and whether it is arterial or venous remains 
important. The management of adolescent stroke depends on etiol­
ogy; for example, adolescents with cardioembolic strokes may benefit 
from hyperacute therapies like tissue plasminogen activator and/or 
thrombectomy.
Fibromuscular Dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia involves arteries throughout the body. First 
described in renal arteries, the pathologic features of fibromuscular 
dysplasia have been found in carotid, vertebral, and intracranial arter­
ies. Fibromuscular dysplasia involves irregularly spaced focal zones of 
fibrous and muscular hyperplasia of the media, disruption of the elastic 
lamina, and eventration of the media. The constricted regions of vascu­
lar fibrosis alternate with regions of luminal dilation to create the char­
acteristic beaded appearance on angiography. Fibromuscular dysplasia 
is more common in primary school-­aged biological females and has 
been found in adolescents. Findings vary by the site of dysplasia: If the 
carotid arteries are involved, a bruit may be heard on auscultation; if 
the renal arteries are affected, hypertension may be present. Neurologic 
symptoms signifying cerebrovascular involvement most commonly 
consist of TIAs and mild strokes.
Oral Contraception, Pregnancy, and the Puerperium
Oral hormonal contraceptives have been associated with a slight 
increase in stroke risk in young women; comorbid procoagulant dis­
orders, migraine headache history, and tobacco use increase this risk 
further. Pregnancy and the postpartum period are states of hypercoag­
ulability and increased venous stasis, both of which can result in CSVT 
and subsequent venous stroke. Excessive maternal blood loss during 
or shortly after delivery can result in hypoperfusion of the pituitary 
gland with resultant hypopituitarism, a condition termed Sheehan 
syndrome. Finally, though rare, peripartum cardiomyopathy, postpar­
tum cerebral angiopathy, amniotic fluid embolism, and hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy may place patients at risk for strokes.
Illicit Substance Use
Several illicit substances such as cocaine, ecstasy, and lysergic acid 
diethylamide have been associated with stroke. Cocaine has been asso­
ciated with both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. The probability of 
hemorrhagic stroke is higher in cocaine users with occult intracranial 
aneurysms or AVMs. Irrespective of the method of cocaine adminis­
tration, SAH may occur, as cocaine produces tachycardia, hyperten­
sion, and vasoconstriction. The resultant sudden rise in systemic blood 
pressure is thought to precipitate SAH. Ischemic lesions have also 
been found, though intracranial hemorrhage appears to occur more 
commonly than ischemic infarction. Amphetamines can also induce 
vasospasm, cardiac arrhythmias, and cardiomyopathy and accelerate 
atherosclerosis. Drugs injected intravenously place adolescents at risk 
for embolism or endocarditis.
Modifiable Risk Factors
Adolescents and young adults with traditional cerebrovascular disease 
risk factors (hypertension, diabetes, smoking, obesity, hyperlipidemia) 
are at risk for stroke.
CAUSES OF STROKE UNRELATED TO AGE
Pharyngeal Infection
Pharyngeal infections have been associated with stroke caused by 
thrombotic occlusion of the carotid arteries in their cervical course. 
In childhood, stroke resulting from carotid occlusion more commonly 
occurs in the intracranial segment of the carotid artery. Infections of 
the cervical region such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, cervical lympha­
denitis, necrotizing fasciitis, and Lemierre syndrome (see Chapter 48) 
have been found in children experiencing acute hemiplegia. In these 
instances, angiography has shown occlusion of the internal carotid 
artery located in its cervical segment. Neuroimaging has demonstrated 
ischemic infarction of the cortical region served by the middle cerebral 
artery, which arises from the carotid circulation. It is speculated that 
the soft tissue infection leads to an inflammatory arteritis. Vessel wall 
inflammation and direct pressure on the artery then lead to intravas­
cular thrombosis and occlusion. Neurologic symptoms are noted in a 
patient with evidence of infection: fever, lethargy, sore throat or neck, 
difficulty swallowing, or cervical lymphadenopathy.
Head and Neck Trauma
Head and neck trauma is an important cause of stroke in children. 
Neurologic symptoms may be delayed more than 24 hours in their 
appearance in relation to the time of the inciting trauma. Stroke caused 
by carotid artery injury has been well documented. Most often, these 
cerebrovascular events occur after head and neck trauma sustained in 
motor vehicle accidents, bicycle accidents, fights, or falls. Hemiparesis 
is a common symptom at presentation if the cause resides in the carotid 
artery. Carotid angiography reveals internal carotid artery occlusion. 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
660
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
The site of occlusion most often exists at the level of the carotid bifurca­
tion. Pathologically, an intimal tear is found with attendant thrombus 
blocking the arterial lumen. In some cases, arterial dissection is found.
Vertebral artery injury from trauma may cause stroke in children. 
Traction injuries of the neck appear to cause vertebral artery injury. The 
vertebral artery is most vulnerable to traumatic injury at its atlantoax­
ial portion. The resultant strokes occur in the vertebrobasilar portion 
of the cerebral circulation. Symptoms are referrable to the structures 
receiving blood from this system: brainstem, cerebellum, occipital 
lobes, and temporal lobes. Clinical symptoms of vertebrobasilar stroke 
include difficulty swallowing, ataxia, facial weakness, tinnitus, vertigo, 
anisocoria, extraocular movement palsies, dysmetria, cortical blind­
ness, and mental status changes. Because both the long sensory and 
the motor tracts course through the brainstem, symptoms of general 
sensorimotor impairment may be found. Vertebral artery injury in 
children has been reported in the setting of athletic endeavor or auto­
mobile accidents. The resultant vertebrobasilar strokes are caused by 
thrombosis or vertebral artery dissection.
Migraine Headache
Stroke may occur in the setting of migraine headache. The occurrence 
of focal motor deficits during a migraine headache denotes complicated 
migraine (see Chapter 34). Acute hemiparesis has been documented 
during these episodes and is believed to reflect the involvement of the 
cerebral circulation derived from the carotid artery. Symptoms such as 
ataxia, cortical blindness, and cranial nerve dysfunction are correlated 
with vertebrobasilar circulation involvement. Focal symptoms may be 
fixed or may occur as TIAs.
Angiographic studies on patients with focal deficits consistent with 
stroke in the setting of migraine headache reveal vasoconstriction of 
vessels in either the vertebrobasilar or the carotid circulations. The ana­
tomic position of the constricted vessels correlated with the location of 
the observed deficits. Ischemia provoked by vasoconstriction during 
prolonged migraine has been hypothesized as the mechanism of stroke 
in these patients.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Acute hemiplegia most frequently represents stroke. Mimics of stroke 
should be considered, though if clinical suspicion of stroke remains, 
urgent neuroimaging must be performed to further categorize the 
type of stroke, as acute management largely depends on this catego­
rization. Following stabilization and the initiation of neuroprotective 
strategies, contributing factors should be determined so as to discern 
the risk of recurrence and to initiate any indicated prophylactic mea­
sures. Stroke complications include seizures, hemorrhagic transfor­
mation of ischemic and venous stroke, intracranial hypertension, and 
long-­lasting functional and cognitive deficits. Rehabilitation referrals, 
including neuropsychological evaluation, should be initiated promptly. 
The evaluation of remote stroke is similar though does not necessarily 
require the same degree of urgency: obtaining neuroimaging, assess­
ing the type of stroke, discerning risk factors and etiology when able 
to while aiming to prevent stroke recurrence, preventing and treating 
complications, and optimizing maximal potential for recovery through 
rehabilitation strategies.
Red flags include status epilepticus, signs of increased intracranial 
pressure, coma, severe acute (worst ever) headache, nuchal rigidity, 
extracranial sites of bleeding, fever, and a family or personal history of 
disorders predisposing to stroke.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
660.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Stroke (General)
Bentham JR, Pollard AJ, Milford CA, et al. Cerebral infarct and meningitis 
secondary to Lemierre’s syndrome. Pediatr Neurol. 2004;30(4):281–283.
Bernard TJ, Rivkin MJ, Scholz K, et al. Emergence of the primary pediatric 
stroke center: impact of the Thrombolysis in Pediatric Stroke trial. Stroke. 
2014;45:2018–2023.
Beuker C, Schmidt A, Strunk D, et al. Primary angiitis of the central nervous 
system: diagnosis and treatment. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2018;11:1–16.
Bodey C, Goddard T, Patankar T, et al. Experience of mechanical 
thrombectomy for paediatric arterial ischaemic stroke. Eur J Paediatr 
Neurol. 2014;18:730–735.
Boelman C, Shroff M, Yau I, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for secondary stroke 
prevention in bacterial meningitis in children. J Pediatr. 2014;165:799–806.
Goeggel Simonetti B, Cavelti A, Arnold M, et al. Long-­term outcome after 
ischemic stroke in children and young adults. Neurology. 2015;84:1941–1947.
Gumer LB, Del Vecchio M, Aronoff S. Strokes in children: a systematic review. 
Pediatr Emerg Care. 2014;30:660–664.
Gunny RS, Lin D. Imaging of perinatal stroke. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N 
Am. 2012;20:1–33.
Hand PJ, Kwan J, Lindley RI, et al. Distinguishing between stroke and mimic at 
the bedside: the brain attack study. Stroke. 2006;37:769–775.
Ichord RN, Bastian R, Abraham L, et al. Interrater reliability of the Pediatric 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (PedNIHSS) in a multicenter 
study. Stroke. 2011;42(3):613–617.
Kirton A, deVeber G. Paediatric stroke: pressing issues and promising 
directions. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14:92–102.
Kirton A, Shroff M, Pontigon AM, et al. Risk factors and presentations of 
periventricular venous infarction vs arterial presumed perinatal ischemic 
stroke. Arch Neurol. 2010;67:842–848.
Lanni G, Catalucci A, Conti L, et al. Pediatric stroke: clinical findings and 
radiological approach. Stroke Res Treat. 2011;2011:172168.
Lo W, Gordon A, Hajek C, et al. Social competence following neonatal and 
childhood stroke. Int J Stroke. 2014;9:1037–1044.
Lynch J, Hirtz DG, DeVeber G, et al. Report of the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke workshop on perinatal and childhood 
stroke. Pediatrics. 2002;109:116–123.
Mackay MT, Chua ZK, Lee M, et al. Stroke and non-­stroke brain attacks in 
children. Neurology. 2014;82:1434–1440.
Mallick AA, Ganesan V, Kirkham FJ, et al. Childhood arterial ischaemic stroke 
incidence, presenting features, and risk factors: a prospective population-­
based study. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:35–43.
Meschia JF, Worrall BB, Rich SS. Genetic susceptibility to ischemic stroke. Nat 
Rev Neurol. 2014;7(7):369–378.
Mittal SO, ThatiGanganna S, Kuhns B, et al. Acute ischemic stroke in pediatric 
patients. Stroke. 2015;46:e32–e34.
Moharir M, Deveber G. Pediatric arterial ischemic stroke. Continuum. 
2014;20:370–386.
Monagle P, Chan AK, Goldenberg NA, et al. Antithrombotic therapy 
in neonates and children: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of 
thrombosis. 9th ed. American College of Chest Physicians evidence-­based 
clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141:e737S–e801S.
Moraitis E, Ganesan V. Childhood infections and trauma as risk factors for 
stroke. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2014;16:527.
Razek A, Alvarez H, Bagg S, et al. Imaging spectrum of CNS vasculitis. 
Radiographics. 2014;34:873–894.
Rivkin MJ, deVeber G, Ichord RN, et al. Thrombolysis in pediatric stroke 
study. Stroke. 2015;46:880–885.
Rutten-­Jacobs LCA, Rost NS. Emerging insights from the genetics of cerebral 
small-­vessel disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020;1471:5–17.
Shellhaas RA, Smith SE, O’Tool E, et al. Mimics of childhood stroke: 
characteristics of a prospective cohort. Pediatrics. 2006;118:704–709.
Tibussek D, Sinclair A, Yau I, et al. Late-­onset group B streptococcal meningitis 
has cerebrovascular complications. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1187. e1–1192.e1.
Wintermark M, Hills NK, deVeber GA, et al. Arteriopathy diagnosis in 
childhood arterial ischemic stroke: results of the vascular effects of 
infection in pediatric stroke study. Stroke. 2014;45:3597–3605.
Yock-­Corrales A, Mackay MT, Mosley I, et al. Acute childhood arterial 
ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke in the emergency department. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2011;58:156–163.
Zanaty M, Chalouhi N, Starke RM, et al. Endovascular stroke intervention in 
the very young. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2014;127:15–18.
Stroke (Neonate)
Grunt S, Mazenauer L, Buerki SE, et al. Incidence and outcomes of symptomatic 
neonatal arterial ischemic stroke. Pediatrics. 2015;135:e1220–e1228.
Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic stroke: presentation, risk 
factors, evaluation, and outcome. Pediatr Neurol. 2014;51:760–768.
Neonatal Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
Ichord RN, Benedict SL, Chan AK, et al. Paediatric cerebral sinovenous 
thrombosis: findings of the International Paediatric Stroke Study. Arch Dis 
Child. 2015;100:174–179.
Wu YW, Miller SP, Chin K, et al. Multiple risk factors in neonatal sinovenous 
thrombosis. Neurology. 2002;59:438.
Intracranial Hemorrhage in the Neonate
Bruno CJ, Beslow LA, Witmer CM, et al. Haemorrhagic stroke in term and late 
preterm neonates. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2014;99:F48–F53.
Children Aged 1-­13 Years: Congenital Heart Disease
Fox CK, Sidney S, Fullerton HJ. Community-­based case-­control study of 
childhood stroke risk associated with congenital heart disease. Stroke. 
2015;46:336–340.
Sinclair AJ, Fox CK, Ichord RN, et al. Stroke in children with cardiac disease: 
report from the International Pediatric Stroke Study Group Symposium. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2015;52:5–15.
Children Aged 1-­13 Years: Procoagulopathies
Torres VM, Saddi VA. Systematic review: hereditary thrombophilia associated 
to pediatric strokes and cerebral palsy. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2015;91:22–29.
Children Aged 1-­13 Years: Autoimmune Disorders
Rodrigues M, Amaral D, Barreira JL, et al. Childhood polyarteritis nodosa 
presenting as stroke and arterial hypertension. BMJ Case Rep. 2014;pii: 
bcr2014207866.
Children Aged 1-­13 Years: Metabolic and Genetic Disorders 
Causing Stroke
Doig D, Davagnanam I, Taranath A, et al. Monogenetic stroke syndromes in 
children and young adults. Am J Roentgenol. 2020;215(3):695–705.
Koga Y, Povalko N, Nishioka J, et al. MELAS and L-­arginine therapy: 
pathophysiology of stroke-­like episodes. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1201:104–110.
Tan RYY, Markus HS. Monogenic causes of stroke: now and the future. J 
Neurol. 2015;262(12):2601–2616.
Sickle Cell Disease
DeBaun MR, Gordon M, McKinstry RC, et al. Controlled trial of transfusions 
for silent cerebral infarcts in sickle cell anemia. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371:699–710.
Fasano RM, Meier ER, Hulbert ML. Cerebral vasculopathy in children with 
sickle cell anemia. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015;54:17–25.
Meier ER, Fasano RM, Estrada M, et al. Early reticulocytosis and anemia are 
associated with abnormal and conditional transcranial Doppler velocities 
in children with sickle cell anemia. J Pediatr. 2016;169:227–231.e1.
Meier ER, Wright EC, Miller JL. Reticulocytosis and anemia are associated 
with an increased risk of death and stroke in the newborn cohort of the 
Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease. Am J Hematol. 2014;89:904–906.
Steen RG, Xiong X, Langston JW, et al. Brain injury in children with sickle cell 
disease: prevalence and etiology. Ann Neurol. 2003;54:564.
Adolescents
Akshintala S, Avery RA, Murnick J, et al. Isolated midbrain ischemic infarct 
in association with hyperbetalipoproteinemia (a): a report of 2 adolescent 
patients. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015;37:315–318.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
