54
The main function of the respiratory system is to supply oxygen to 
meet the body’s demands and remove excess carbon dioxide. Many 
processes are involved in ensuring that this occurs, including venti­
lation (gas delivery to and from the lungs), perfusion (blood supply 
to the lungs), and diffusion (the exchange of gases along the alveoli). 
Respiratory distress arises when there is impaired air exchange that 
leads to decreased ventilation and oxygenation, and can be caused by 
problems in any of these pathways. It is essential to identify and treat 
the location and cause of respiratory distress to prevent respiratory 
failure, which ensues if the respiratory effort is inadequate to provide 
appropriate tissue oxygenation and maintenance of blood pH.
Respiratory distress occurs for a variety of reasons and with many 
levels of severity. There are also age-­related etiologies (Table 4.1). It can 
be caused by intrapulmonary pathology (airway, alveolar, interstitium, 
vascular) or a change in respiratory drive, impaired neuromuscular 
reserve, or increased ventilatory demand (Table 4.2).
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
Signs and symptoms of respiratory distress vary, depending on the 
severity and cause. The initial approach to a patient includes determin­
ing the severity of illness and then determining if immediate treatment 
is needed by first ensuring that airway, breathing, and circulation are 
intact. After these steps are completed, further work-­up into the cause 
of respiratory distress may be done. A careful history and physical 
examination are often sufficient to elucidate the cause of respiratory 
distress. Not all causes of respiratory distress arise within the respi­
ratory tract. Heart failure, neuromuscular disorders, toxic ingestion, 
and central nervous system disorders may all manifest with respiratory 
signs and symptoms. In severe respiratory distress or suspicion of air­
way obstruction, a feeding trial should not be done as this may increase 
the risk of aspiration or further respiratory compromise.
HISTORY
An appropriate medical history is important in the child with respira­
tory distress. The chief complaint provides insight into the nature of 
the distress (i.e., cough, wheezing, stridor, cyanosis, dyspnea, and/or 
chest pain). The onset, duration, and chronicity of symptoms should 
also be obtained. It is important to obtain data regarding any pro­
drome, exacerbating or ameliorating factors, history of trauma, pre­
vious occurrence of similar symptoms, and response to any therapy. 
Questions should also be directed toward any change in voice or cry, 
change with positioning, feeding problems, or any choking episodes. 
The possibility of a foreign body should be raised, although this is often 
not observed. Past medical history of neonatal events (prematurity), 
previous endotracheal intubation, recurrent infections, hospitaliza­
tions, noisy breathing, and prior gagging or choking episodes may also 
provide valuable information. A family history of asthma and allergies, 
travel, and environmental exposure (i.e., smoking, pets, or irritants) 
may also uncover etiologic clues. A review of systems with regard to 
systemic signs and symptoms associated with respiratory disease, such 
as fever, weight loss, night sweats, or dysphagia, is useful (Table 4.3). 
Determining whether the respiratory difficulties are acute or chronic 
or an acute worsening of an underlying chronic respiratory condition 
is important to address the child’s condition.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Pulmonary Physical Examination
The physical examination begins with measurement of vital signs, with 
attention paid to respiratory rate, pulse oximetry, heart rate, and blood 
pressure. Tachypnea is often the most prominent manifestation of 
respiratory distress. A respiratory rate of more than 50 breaths/min in 
infants 2–12 months of age, 40 breaths/min in children 1–5 years, and 
30 breaths/min in children older than 5 years is abnormal. The physical 
examination should be performed in a warm, well-­lit room, preferably 
with the child in the parent’s lap and the child’s chest exposed. It is 
essential to observe the child’s general appearance, sense of well-­being, 
degree of dyspnea or cyanosis, and respiratory pattern, including nasal 
flaring, retractions, and accessory muscle use. Central cyanosis (lips, 
tongue, sublingual tissue as well as hands and feet) is related to both 
the degree of oxygen desaturation and the hemoglobin level (Table 
4.4). Cyanosis is detected when the average amount of deoxygenated 
hemoglobin is 5 g/dL. Any posture assumed in an effort to minimize 
the airway difficulties should be determined. The degree and location 
of retractions should be noted. Retractions may be intercostal, subcos­
tal, or suprasternal, and often signify worsening respiratory distress, 
particularly in the older child. Infants have a particularly compliant 
chest wall and are therefore more predisposed to intercostal and ster­
nal retractions; in older children, these features may be less prominent. 
Nasal flaring and accessory muscle use signify significant respiratory 
distress; and, as fatigue sets in, head bobbing and/or grunting can be 
noted, which requires prompt management as this may be a sign of 
impending respiratory failure. Altered mental status (either agitation 
or somnolence) may be indicative of severe respiratory distress, hypox­
emia, hypercapnia, and impending respiratory failure. Palpation of 
the chest wall and cervical region may enable the examiner to detect 
the presence of subcutaneous emphysema indicative of pulmonary air 
leak. On percussion of the chest and back, a hyperresonant note during 
percussion of the chest wall indicates hyperinflation, whereas dullness 
to percussion suggests atelectasis, pulmonary consolidation, or pleural 
effusion.
Auscultation of the chest should focus on identifying the degree 
of air exchange and the presence, timing, and symmetry of adventi­
tious breath sounds. Air entry should be evaluated over all discrete 
Respiratory Distress
Alyssa Stephany
4
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
55
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
TABLE 4.1  Age-­Related Causes of Respiratory Distress
Cause
Full-­Term Neonate
Infant-­Toddler
Child
Adolescent
COMMON
Meconium aspiration pneumonia
Bronchiolitis
Pneumonia∥
Pneumonia#
Congenital heart disease
Viral pneumonia†
Asthma
Asthma
Transient tachypnea
Bacterial pneumonia‡
Cystic fibrosis
Sickle cell acute chest crisis
Persistent fetal circulation
Croup (infectious, spasmodic)
Sickle cell acute chest crisis
Tonsillitis
Congenital pneumonia
Aspiration§
Aspiration§
Peritonsillar abscess
Cystic fibrosis
Tonsillitis
Cystic fibrosis
Laryngomalacia
Panic attack
Asthma
E-­cigarette or vaping associated lung 
injury (EVALI)
UNCOMMON
Pneumothorax
Congenital anomalies
ARDS
ARDS
Congenital anomalies*
Epiglottitis
Anaphylaxis
Spontaneous pneumothorax
Pneumopericardium
Near drowning
Interstitial lung disease¶
Pulmonary embolism
Polycythemia
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Hemoptysis
Drug induced**
Vocal cord paralysis
Pulmonary hemorrhage
Retropharyngeal abscess
Interstitial lung disease¶
Pleural effusions
Retropharyngeal abscess
Near drowning
Collagen vascular disease††
Severe anemia
Trauma
Hydrocarbon aspiration
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis‡‡
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Hydrocarbon aspiration
Trauma
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Surfactant protein deficiency
Smoke inhalation (burn)
Pulmonary fibrosis
Alveolar proteinosis
Pulmonary lymphangiectasia
Airway hemangioma
Desquamating interstitial pneumonia
Trauma
Papilloma of vocal cords
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Anaphylaxis
Bacterial tracheitis
Smoke inhalation (burn)
Smoke inhalation (burn)
Heart failure
HIV associated∥∥
Scoliosis
HIV associated∥∥
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Bronchiectasis
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Mediastinal mass§§
Hemoptysis
HIV associated∥∥
*Congenital anomalies = tracheoesophageal fistula; choanal atresia; tracheal web-­stenosis-­atresia-­cleft; diaphragmatic hernia; eventration of the 
diaphragm; congenital pulmonary airway malformation (previously called cystic adenomatoid malformation); lobar emphysema; cleft palate–macro­
glossia (Pierre Robin syndrome); thyroid goiter; pulmonary hypoplasia, including Potter syndrome (renal agenesis, oligohydramnios, pulmonary hypo­
plasia); lung cysts; chylothorax; pulmonary lymphangiectasia; asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy; vascular rings and slings; arteriovenous malformation; 
subglottic stenosis.
†Viral pneumonia: see Table 4.12 for common causes.
‡Pneumonia (infant–toddler): see Table 4.12 for common causes.
§Aspiration = gastric fluid or formula aspiration in gastroesophageal reflux, foreign body aspiration.
∥Pneumonia (child): see Table 4.12 for common causes.
¶Interstitial lung disease = idiopathic, rheumatoid, infection (Pneumocystis carinii), Langerhans cell histiocytosis, hypereosinophilia syndromes, 
Goodpasture syndrome, LIP, alveolar proteinosis, familial fibrosis, chronic active hepatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, vasculitis (granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis with or without eosinophilia, hypersensitivity), graft-­versus-­host disease, pulmonary venoocclusive disease, sarcoidosis, leuke­
mia, lymphoma, neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, Gaucher disease, Niemann-­Pick disease, Weber-­Christian disease, organic dusts (e.g., 
farmer’s lung, humidifier/air-­conditioner lung, bird feeder, pancreatic extract, rodent handler, cheese worker), inorganic dusts (pneumoconiosis), 
irradiation.
#Pneumonia (adolescent): see Table 4.12 for common causes.
**Drugs = azathioprine, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, nitrosoureas, busulfan, nitrofurantoin, penicillin, sulfonamides, erythromy­
cin, isoniazid, hydralazine, phenytoin, carbamazepine, imipramine, naproxen, penicillamine, cromolyn sodium, mineral oil, paraquat, inhaled drugs 
(cocaine, hydrocarbons), talc, shoe spray.
††Collagen vascular disease = rheumatoid arthritis, progressive systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, mixed connec­
tive tissue disease.
‡‡Hypersensitivity pneumonia (also called extrinsic allergic alveolitis): see¶ above for some specific organic dusts (antigens).
§§Mediastinal masses = anterior (teratoma, T-­cell lymphoma, thymus, thyroid), middle (lymph nodes–infection–tumor–sarcoidosis, cysts), posterior 
(neuroenteric cysts–duplication, meningocele, neural tumors–neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, neurofibroma, pheochromocytoma), and paren­
chymal tumors (hamartoma, arteriovenous malformation, carcinoid, adenoma; metastatic–osteogenic sarcoma, Wilms tumor).
∥∥HIV associated = P. jiroveci, LIP, CMV, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, measles, common bacterial pathogens.
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; BPD, bronchopulmonary dysplasia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; LIP, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia; RDS, 
respiratory distress syndrome; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
56
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
anatomic locations bilaterally. Homologous segments of each lung 
should be examined sequentially to compare similar areas. The pres­
ence of adventitious sounds should be determined next. The most 
encountered sounds are wheezing, stridor, crackles, and rhonchi 
(Table 4.5).
Crackles (previously called “rales”) are intermittent, nonmusical 
low-­ or higher-­pitched, largely inspiratory noises that are produced by 
the opening (reinflation) of groups of alveoli closed during the previ­
ous expiration.
Wheezing is a continuous, high-­pitched musical noise, similar to 
a hiss or whistle.
Rhonchi are continuous sounds that are lower pitched and more 
rumbling or sonorous, heard more during expiration, and primarily 
heard over the trachea and bronchi; however, if loud enough they can 
be heard throughout all lung fields.
Stridor is a high-­pitched musical noise generated by turbulent flow 
of air through the large upper airways.
Other adventitious breath sounds that are described include 
pleural rub, which has a grating quality heard best during inspira­
tion, and stertor, a low-­pitched, nonmusical noise generated by the 
vibration of the pharyngeal tissues (nasopharynx, oropharynx, soft 
palate) due to significant upper respiratory obstruction and sub­
sequent turbulent airflow downstream in the upper airway heard 
only during inspiration. Determination of the timing (inspiration, 
expiration, or biphasic) and distribution of the adventitious sounds 
offers clues as to the site of airway and lung involvement. Wheez­
ing that is continuous and heard equally over both lung fields is 
associated with diffuse airway narrowing and limitation of air­
flow, whereas unilateral or very localized wheezing or decreased 
breath sounds suggest segmental airway obstruction, such as that 
found with retained foreign body aspiration, mucus plugging, or 
atelectasis. Additionally, inspiratory stridor is characteristic of par­
tial airway obstruction at or above the vocal cords, whereas biphasic 
or expiratory stridor is characteristic of airway obstruction in the 
subglottic space or trachea (Fig. 4.1).
Other Parts of the Physical Examination
Other elements of the physical examination may have direct bearing 
on the respiratory system. Pulsus paradoxus, the difference between 
the systolic blood pressure obtained during inspiration and during 
exhalation, is exaggerated by airway obstruction and pulmonary 
hyperinflation. As pulmonary overinflation gets worse, pulsus par­
adoxus values increase and correlate well with the degree of airway 
obstruction. It is difficult to measure pulsus paradoxus in young 
children with rapid heart rates. A method that allows a reasonable 
approximation of the pulsus paradoxus can be obtained by using a 
sphygmomanometer and noting the difference between the pressure 
at which the first sporadic faint pulse sounds and the pressure at which 
all sounds are heard. Values >10 mm Hg are abnormal, and values 
>20 mm Hg are consistent with severe airway obstruction. Although 
digital clubbing is very rarely seen as a normal and familial variant, 
its presence in a child with respiratory distress suggests an acute ill­
ness superimposed on an underlying chronic respiratory condition. 
The most common pulmonary causes of digital clubbing in pediat­
ric patients are cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis, and other destructive 
pulmonary diseases. Digital clubbing is rarely seen in children with 
asthma. Other physical findings to observe include mouth breath­
ing and morphologic features suggestive of craniofacial anomalies, 
such as maxillary hypoplasia, nasal septal deflection, micrognathia, 
retrognathia, absent nasal airflow (choanal obstructions), platybasia, 
or macroglossia.
LABORATORY TESTS
The arterial blood gas analysis, obtained while the patient is breathing 
a known fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2), is the “gold standard” for 
assessing oxygenation, ventilation, and acid-­base status. In lieu of an 
arterial blood gas determination, capillary or venous blood gases may 
be utilized, but these are less helpful for evaluating oxygenation. Non­
invasive measurement of oxygenation by pulse oximetry can provide 
valuable information. Oximetry measures the degree of hemoglobin 
saturation with oxygen and should not be confused with partial pres­
sure of oxygen in the blood, as measured by blood gas analysis or esti­
mated by transcutaneous measures. At or near sea level, hemoglobin 
oxygen saturation lower than 93% indicates that significant hypoxemia 
may be present, and saturations of 90% or lower are clearly abnormal. 
A blood gas analysis may be necessary to confirm the presence and 
degree of hypoxemia, as well as information on acid-­base status (pH) 
and ventilation (Paco2). Hemoglobin oxygen saturation, measured by 
pulse oximetry, cannot detect significant hypoxia, but it is relatively 
accurate at oxygen saturations of 70% or more. Various conditions, 
such as poor circulation, presence of carboxyhemoglobin or methe­
moglobin, nail polish, and improper sensor alignment and motion, can 
result in inaccurate oximetry measures.
IMAGING
Radiography
A plain x-­ray of the chest, taken in the posterior-­anterior and lateral projec­
tions, should be obtained in any patient with respiratory distress in which 
an etiology has not been determined from the history and physical exam­
ination. Important information regarding the presence of parenchymal 
TABLE 4.2  Causes of Respiratory Distress
Extrathoracic
Intrathoracic
Nervous System–Metabolic
Intracranial hemorrhage
Acidosis
Ingestion (aspirin)
Ketoacidosis (diabetes)
Meningitis
Shock/sepsis
Neuromuscular disease
Diaphragmatic paralysis, paresis
Psychologic (anxiety)
Vocal cord dysfunction
Panic attack
Lesions of Upper Airway
Malacia
Web
Cyst
Hemangioma
Stenosis (glottic or choanal)
Papillomatosis
Miscellaneous
Abdominal masses, distention
Ascites
Anemia
Pulmonary
Airway obstruction
Parenchymal lesions: pneumonia, 
hemorrhage, malformation
Air leaks: pneumomediastinum, 
pneumothorax
Pleural effusion, empyema
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Chest wall trauma
Pulmonary embolus
Foreign body (airway or esophagus)
Tumor (cyst, adenoma)
Cystic fibrosis
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Cardiac
Myocarditis
Cardiomyopathy
Shunt (left to right)
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary edema
Pericardial effusion
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
57
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
TABLE 4.3  Focused History for a Patient with Respiratory Distress
Component
Comments and Examples
Onset, duration, and 
chronicity
Abrupt onset: suggests upper airway conditions such as foreign body, allergy, anaphylaxis, irritant exposure, or pulmonary embolism
Gradual onset: more consistent with process such as infection or heart failure
Alleviating and provoking 
factors
A child with respiratory distress caused by upper airway obstruction may have some degree of relief by assuming the “sniffing 
position” to maximize airway patency
Treatment attempted
A child with wheezing secondary to asthma may respond readily to inhaled bronchodilators, but a child with wheezing caused by 
foreign body aspiration may continue to show symptoms after treatment
Respiratory symptoms
Cold symptoms: may indicate viral upper respiratory infection
Cough: “seal-­like” or “barky” cough is commonly heard in patients with croup
Eliciting descriptions of the difficulty breathing may provide clues to the underlying cause (e.g., supraclavicular or suprasternal 
retractions point to upper airway obstruction)
Color change: Pallor may indicate anemia; cyanosis is indicative of decreased oxygen content in the blood, as seen in some forms of 
congenital heart disease and in methemoglobinemia
Respiratory effort: Poor effort may be seen in patients with underlying muscular dystrophies
Change in voice: Whereas muffled or hoarse voice points to upper airway pathology, lower airway disease does not typically change 
the character of the voice
Systemic or associated 
symptoms
Fever: Presence suggests an infectious cause
Hydration status, including intake and output (urine, emesis, diarrhea, excessive perspiration, or high respiratory rate)
Weight loss or failure to gain weight: may indicate systemic process (e.g., inborn error of metabolism) or the severity of respiratory 
distress is impairing growth (as seen in congestive heart failure)
Abdominal pain: may suggest abdominal pathology such as obstruction or appendicitis or may represent referred pain from diaphrag­
matic irritation (as in basilar pneumonia)
Other organ involvement: AKI, myocarditis, rash, cytopenias, thrombosis, shock, emesis, diarrhea, jaundice
Past medical history
Underlying disorders may predispose patients to certain conditions: For example, a patient with sickle cell disease and respiratory 
distress may be exhibiting signs of acute chest syndrome; a patient with known gastroesophageal reflux and coarse lung findings 
on examination could have an aspiration pneumonia. History of vaping or smoking
Exposures or environmental 
factors
For example, a patient involved in a fire may be affected by not only thermal injury to the airways but also systemic toxins such as 
carbon monoxide and cyanide
A patient with allergy and a potential exposure to the allergen could be showing signs of anaphylaxis
Exposure to sick contacts
Trauma
History of trauma suggests diagnoses such as pneumothorax, flail chest, cardiac tamponade, or abdominal injury
Immunization status
Children with incomplete or lack of immunization against Haemophilus influenzae type B are at increased risk for epiglottitis
Last oral intake
If advanced airway management becomes necessary (e.g., positive-­pressure ventilation), the presence of stomach contents may 
increase the risk of pulmonary aspiration
AKI, acute kidney injury.
From Viteri SD, Sampayo EM. Respiratory distress. In: Florin TA, Ludwig S, eds. Netter’s Pediatrics. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011:17–23.
TABLE 4.4  Cyanosis and Hemoglobin Concentration
CYANOSIS APPEARS AT*
Hemoglobin Concentration (g/dL)
Oxygen Saturation (%) Below:
Arterial Po2 (mm Hg) Below:
6
60
31
8
70
36
10
76
40
12
80
45
14
83
47
16
85
50
18
87
54
20
88
56
*These figures assume that central cyanosis begins to appear when 2.38 g/dL of deoxygenated hemoglobin accumulates in arterial blood. The cor­
responding Po2 was obtained from standard hemoglobin dissociation curves for oxygen.
From McGee S. Cyanosis. In: Evidence-­Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012:71.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
58
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
infiltrates, pleural effusions, airway obstruction, cardiac size, pulmonary 
vascular markings, extrapulmonary air leaks, and the presence of radi­
opaque foreign bodies may be obtained from this test. Radiopaque foreign 
bodies are generally seen easily on a radiograph. If there is a possibility of 
a radiolucent foreign body, inspiratory and expiratory chest radiographic 
studies must be performed. Demonstration of unilateral hyperinflation or 
a mediastinal shift during expiration suggests localized bronchial obstruc­
tion, such as a retained foreign body. Lateral decubitus positioning of the 
patient during the radiographic procedure can reveal a pleural effusion in 
the lower dependent lung. Ultrasonography of the chest is also useful in 
detecting pleural fluid and loculations within pleural effusions.
In patients with stridor, anteroposterior and lateral soft tissue radio­
graphic studies of the neck and chest are frequently needed. These 
should be obtained during inspiration, because the soft tissues of the 
pharynx may bulge with expiration, causing a false-­positive finding of 
a soft tissue mass that may mimic a retropharyngeal infection.
Computed Tomography
CT of the upper airway and chest can help detect the relationship of 
the vasculature to the airways (trachea and large central airways); pul­
monary parenchymal lesions (infiltrates, abscesses, cysts) or lesions 
(abscesses, inflammation) in the airway; and central airway caliber. 
Rapid, fine-­cut CT is a technique of high resolution and short duration, 
which increases its acceptability for pediatric patients. It is the method 
of choice for noninvasive detection and evaluation of bronchiectasis 
and interstitial lung disease. In some patients with a normal chest x-­ray, 
the CT will be abnormal. Helical CT is a valuable method of detecting 
pulmonary embolism. A PET scan may be used in combination with a 
CT scan to evaluate for malignancy or other etiologies.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI of the pulmonary system may also be useful in elucidating the 
relationship of the great vessels to the airways and may be superior 
to CT for this purpose. MRI is less useful for imaging the lung paren­
chyma. The need for long imaging times often means sedation for 
young children, and this limits the utility of MRI of the chest for some 
pediatric patients. Sedatives must be used very carefully, particularly 
in patients with respiratory distress, and only in monitored situations 
with the availability of experienced personnel and equipment to pro­
vide possible resuscitation.
Fluoroscopy
Fluoroscopic examination of the chest may be useful in determining 
the cause of respiratory distress. Real-­time visualization of the dia­
phragm can determine whether paralysis or paresis of this major mus­
cle of respiration is contributing to respiratory distress. Asymmetric 
chest wall motion or unilateral hyperinflation during the respiratory 
cycle suggests bronchial obstruction, such as that seen with a retained 
foreign body in the airways. An upper gastrointestinal series is useful 
to assess for abnormalities of swallowing causing aspiration, presence 
of tracheoesophageal fistula, or presence of a vascular ring.
TABLE 4.5  Classification of Common Lung Sounds
Acoustic Characteristics
American Thoracic 
Society Nomenclature
Common 
Synonyms
Normal
200–600 Hz
Decreasing power with increasing Hz
Normal
Vesicular
75–1,600 Hz
Flat until sharp decrease in power (900 Hz)
Bronchial
Bronchial
Tracheal
Adventitious
Adventitious
Abnormal
Discontinuous, interrupted explosive sounds (loud, low in pitch), early inspiratory 
or expiratory
Coarse crackles
Coarse crackles
Discontinuous, interrupted explosive sounds (less loud than above and of shorter 
duration; higher in pitch than coarse crackles or crackles), mid-­ to late inspiratory
Fine crackles
Fine crackles, crepitation
Continuous sounds (>250 msec, high pitched; dominant frequency of 400 Hz or more, 
a hissing sound)
Wheezes
Sibilant rhonchus, high-­
pitched wheeze
Continuous sounds (>250 msec, low pitched; dominant frequency <200 Hz, a snoring 
sound)
Rhonchi
Sonorous rhonchus, low-­
pitched wheeze
From Davis JL, Murray JF. History and physical examination. In: Broaddus VC, Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al., eds. Murray and Nadel’s Textbook of 
Respiratory Medicine. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders-­Elsevier; 2016:263–277.e2.
Stridor
•  Inspiratory
 – Supraglottic/epiglottic
 – Vocal cords/glottic
•  Biphasic
 – Glottic
 – Subglottic
•  Expiratory
 – Tracheal
 – Bronchial
Fig. 4.1  Stridor. Inspiratory stridor is characteristic of partial airway 
obstruction at or above the vocal cords (supraglottic/epiglottic and glot­
tis areas). Biphasic stridor is characteristic at the glottis or subglottic 
areas, and is typically caused by a fixed obstruction. Expiratory stridor is 
characteristic of a high tracheal lesion as there is a decrease in airway 
diameter with expiration. (From Ida JB, Thompson DM. Pediatric stridor. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2014;47:795–819.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
59
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
Endoscopy
Endoscopy can provide direct visualization of the cause of the airway 
obstruction and lung lesions; its use involves manipulation of the air­
way, which should not be undertaken unless the personnel and equip­
ment are present to manage possible worsening airway compromise. 
Flexible, direct laryngoscopy is widely used to visualize the upper 
airway without the need for sedation. Rigid bronchoscopy provides 
visualization of both the upper and lower airways; cardiopulmonary 
monitoring and intravenous access for sedative administration are 
required. In cases of significant upper airway obstruction necessitat­
ing intervention, or if there is any likelihood of a foreign body, direct 
laryngoscopy and rigid bronchoscopy in the operating room are the 
safest procedures that can secure the airway, provide a diagnosis, and 
accomplish treatment.
CAUSES OF RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
Wheezing
Wheezing is best characterized as a continuous musical sound most 
often heard on expiration, but it may occur in both phases of respi­
ration. The most common causes of acute wheezing in children are 
bronchiolitis and asthma. However, it is critical to rule out other 
causes of wheezing that necessitate different therapy (Table 4.6). Ana­
tomic abnormalities of the airway, such as vascular ring, tracheobron­
chomalacia, primary ciliary dyskinesia, and foreign body aspiration, 
may cause airway obstruction and wheezing, especially in infants and 
young children. Viral infections, notably those of respiratory syncy­
tial virus (RSV), human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza, 
and influenza, are also common causes of wheezing (bronchiolitis) in 
TABLE 4.6  Causes of Wheezing in Childhood
ACUTE
Reactive Airways Disease
Asthma*
Exercise-­induced asthma*
Hypersensitivity reactions
Anaphylaxis
Bronchial Edema
Infection* (bronchiolitis, ILD, pneumonia)
Inhalation of irritant gases or particulates
Increased pulmonary venous pressure
Bronchial Hypersecretion
Infection
Inhalation of irritant gases or particulates
Cholinergic drugs
Aspiration
Foreign body*
Aspiration of gastric contents (reflux, H-­type TEF)
E-­cigarette-­ or Vaping-­Associated Lung Injury
CHRONIC OR RECURRENT
Reactive Airways Disease (Same as in Acute)
Hypersensitivity Reactions, Allergic Bronchopulmonary
Aspergillosis
Dynamic Airways Collapse
Bronchomalacia
Tracheomalacia*
Vocal cord adduction*
Airway Compression by Mass or Blood Vessel
Vascular ring/sling
Anomalous innominate artery
Pulmonary artery dilation (absent pulmonary valve)
Bronchial or pulmonary cysts
Lymph nodes or tumors
Aspiration
Foreign body
Gastroesophageal reflux*
Tracheoesophageal fistula (repaired or unrepaired)
Bronchial Hypersecretion or Failure to Clear Secretions
Bronchitis, bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis*
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Immunodeficiency disorder
Vasculitis
Lymphangiectasia
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Intrinsic Airway Lesions
Endobronchial tumors
Endobronchial granulation tissue
Plastic bronchitis syndrome
Bronchial or tracheal stenosis
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Sequelae of bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Sarcoidosis
Congestive Heart Failure/Pulmonary Edema
*Common.
ILD, interstitial lung disease; TEF, tracheoesophageal fistula. 
Modified from Kercsmar CM. The respiratory system. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1994:445.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
60
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
infants and young children. Infection with Mycoplasma species may 
produce airway hyperactivity in older children. Other entities to con­
sider are cystic fibrosis, interstitial lung disease, or vocal cord dysfunc­
tion. In comparison with asthma, one key distinguishing feature of 
these diagnoses is that the wheezing does not respond to treatment 
with bronchodilators.
Asthma
Asthma is defined as airway obstruction that is reversible either spon­
taneously or with the use of medication. Chronic airway inflammation 
and bronchial hyperresponsiveness are the likely causes of the airway 
obstruction. The airways of patients with even mild asthma demon­
strate inflammation, manifested as mucosal edema, hypersecretion of 
mucus, smooth muscle constriction, and inflammatory cell infiltrate. 
Even when asthma symptoms are not present, airway inflammation 
may be demonstrated. Furthermore, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, 
the tendency of airway smooth muscle to constrict in response to a 
variety of environmental stimuli, is present in virtually all children 
with asthma and may be exacerbated by airway inflammation. Airway 
remodeling, the deposition of collagen in the subepithelial basement 
membrane area, occurs in some but not all asthmatic patients. Fixed 
airway obstruction is a long-­term complication that may occur as a 
result of airway remodeling.
The diagnosis of asthma is made by a combination of history, phys­
ical examination, and spirometry testing. For the child with acute 
wheezing and respiratory distress, a therapeutic trial of an inhaled β-­
agonist is the best “diagnostic test” for reversible airway obstruction. 
Once the acute symptoms have improved, other diagnostic studies can 
be undertaken. Spirometry, particularly measurement of the forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and mid-­maximal forced expi­
ratory flow rates (FEF25–75%), provides a good indication of airflow 
obstruction in the larger and smaller airways, respectively. If airway 
obstruction is detected in the resting state, a bronchodilator (typically 
albuterol) is administered, and spirometry is repeated. An improve­
ment of ≥12% and ≥200 mL in FEV1 above baseline is considered sig­
nificant and indicative of reversible airway obstruction (Fig. 4.2). If 
the baseline spirometry is normal, an inhalation challenge test, with 
either increasing doses of methacholine or hyperventilation of cold, 
dry air, can provoke a statistically (but usually not clinically) signifi­
cant decrease in FEV1; a fall in FEV1 of 10% or greater is considered 
diagnostic of airway hyperresponsiveness and asthma. In children too 
young to perform spirometry (typically under the age of 5 years), the 
repeated nature of wheezing episodes and the improvement in symp­
toms after treatment with antiinflammatory agents and bronchodila­
tors, peripheral blood eosinophilia (>4%), a family history of atopy, 
and/or a personal history of atopy (eczema, food allergy, or allergic rhi­
nitis) are strongly suggestive of the diagnosis of asthma. Other studies 
include measurement of total serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels. 
This immunoglobulin is often elevated in individuals with asthma and/
or allergy, as well as in those predisposed to asthma.
Patients with acute asthma typically present with shortness of 
breath, wheezing, cough, and increased work of breathing. Persistent 
cough may be the most prominent or even sole feature of acute asthma 
(see Chapter 3). Many asthma episodes are misdiagnosed as bronchitis 
(which is rare in children). Chest wall retractions and the use of acces­
sory muscles indicate significant airway obstruction. Acute asthma 
exacerbations that are unresponsive to aggressive bronchodilator 
administration are termed status asthmaticus. The severity of asthma 
0
–1
0
1
2
3
Time
4
5
6
7
8
2
4
6
8
Volume
0
16
12
8
4
–4
Flow (L/sec)
PRED
PRE
POST
4.71
4.01
85
4.19
89
5
4.06
2.97
73
3.38
83
14
86
74
81
Ref
Pre
%Ref
Post
%Ref
%Chg
4.50
2.32
52
3.18
71
37
8.22
6.59
80
7.02
85
7
8.22
6.59
80
7.02
85
7
3.72
4.17
12
Spirometry
Litres
Litres
L/sec
L/sec
L/sec
L/sec
FVC
FEV1
FEV1/FVC
FEF25–75%
PEF
PIF
Fig. 4.2  Spirometry demonstrating a scooped flow volume loop seen in obstructive disease in asthma. Fol­
lowing bronchodilator use (PRED, predicted), there is a positive bronchodilator response of >12% in forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). FEF, forced expiratory flow rate; FVC, forced vital capacity; PEF, peak 
expiratory flow rate; PIF, peak inspiratory flow rate. (From South M, Isaacs D. Practical Paediatrics. 7th ed. 
Oxford: Churchill Livingstone; 2013.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
61
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
exacerbation may be assessed with the parameters presented in Table 
4.7. Common triggers of acute asthma episodes include upper respi­
ratory tract infections, exposure to cold air, exercise, allergens, pollut­
ants, strong odors, and tobacco smoke.
A brief history should be obtained for every child with acute 
asthma to determine the duration of symptoms, the character of 
previous episodes (severity, need for hospitalization, and need for 
intensive care, including mechanical ventilation), antecedent illness, 
symptoms, exposures, and both chronic and acute use of medica­
tions, including dose and time of last administration. History should 
also focus on identifying risk factors for severe asthma (Table 4.8) 
and classification of asthma type, which are based on age (Figs. 4.3, 
4.4, and 4.5). It is also important to assess the degree of asthma con­
trol. The physical examination should focus on respiratory rate, air 
exchange, degree and localization of wheezing, other adventitious 
lung sounds, mental status, presence of cyanosis, and degree of 
fatigue. A chest radiograph should be obtained for all patients with 
a first episode of wheezing to evaluate for other causes of wheezing 
if clinically indicated. Patients with recurrent asthma should have a 
chest radiograph if there is evidence for a foreign body or pneumo­
nia, or concern for a pneumothorax. Chest radiograph findings in 
asthma are nonspecific, but they usually show symmetric hyperin­
flation and increased peribronchial thickening. Spirometry has lim­
ited efficacy in the emergency management of status asthmaticus. 
TABLE 4.7  Severity of Asthma Exacerbations
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Respiratory Arrest 
Imminent
Symptoms
Breathlessness
While walking
While at rest (infant―softer, 
shorter cry; difficulty feeding)
While at rest (infant―
stops feeding)
Can lie down
Prefers sitting
Sits upright
Talks in
Sentences
Phrases
Words
Alertness
May be agitated
Usually agitated
Usually agitated
Drowsy or confused
Signs
Respiratory rate
Increased
Increased
Often >30/min
Guide to rates of breathing in awake children:
Age
<2 mo
2–12 mo
1–5 yr
6–8 yr
Normal rate
<60/min
<50/min
<40/min
<30/min
Use of accessory muscles; 
suprasternal retractions
Usually not
Commonly
Usually
Paradoxical thoracoabdominal 
movement
Wheeze
Moderate, often only end 
expiratory
Loud; throughout exhalation
Usually loud; throughout 
inhalation and exhalation
Absence of wheeze
Pulse/minute
<100
100–120
>120
Bradycardia
Guide to normal pulse rates in children:
Age
2–12 mo
1–2 yr
2–8 yr
Normal rate
<160/min
<120/min
<110/min
Pulsus paradoxus
Absent <10 mm Hg
May be present
10–25 mm Hg
Often present
>25 mm Hg (adult)
20–40 mm Hg (child)
Absence suggests respiratory 
muscle fatigue
Functional Assessment
PEF percent predicted or 
percent personal best
≥70%
∼40–69% or response lasts <2 hr <40%
<25%
Note: PEF testing may not be needed 
in very severe attacks
Pao2 (on air)
Normal (test not 
necessary)
≥60 mm Hg (test not usually 
necessary)
<60 mm Hg: possible cyanosis
and/or Pco2
<42 mm Hg (test not 
usually necessary)
<42 mm Hg (test not usually 
necessary)
≥42 mm Hg: possible respira­
tory failure
Sao2 (on air) at sea level
>95% (test not usually 
necessary)
90–95% (test not usually 
necessary)
<90%
Hypercapnia (hypoventilation) develops more readily in young children than in adults and adolescents.
Pao2, arterial oxygen pressure; Pco2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PEF, peak expiratory flow; Sao2, oxygen saturation.
From NHLBI/National Asthma Education and Prevention Program, Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of 
Asthma. NIH Publication; 2007.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
62
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Although peak expiratory flow rates are often measured, this test is a 
measure of large airway function only, is effort dependent, and may 
be unreliable in an anxious, untrained patient. The major value of 
peak flow measurements in acute asthma is to provide an objective 
trend indicative of improvement (or lack thereof) in airway caliber if 
frequent and scheduled treatments are needed.
A CBC is not of use unless other complicating conditions (i.e., 
bacterial infection, anemia, hemoglobinopathy) are suspected. Serum 
electrolyte measurements are of little value unless dehydration is sus­
pected. Hypokalemia can be associated with the frequent administra­
tion of β-­agonists.
Treatment of acute asthma should be instituted in any child with 
wheezing, dyspnea, cough, and no other immediately discernible 
cause of the symptoms. Patients with moderate to severe airway 
obstruction can have significant hypoxemia as a result of ventilation-­
perfusion mismatch. Consequently, supplemental humidified oxygen 
should be administered to any child who has significant wheezing, 
accessory muscle use, or an oxygen saturation of <93%. The mainstay 
of treatment for an asthma exacerbation is the administration of an 
inhaled β-­adrenergic agonist and systemic corticosteroids. Inhala­
tion of β-­agonist by nebulizer or metered-­dose inhaler is the route 
of choice because the onset of action is rapid, sustained, and rela­
tively free of significant side effects even in the most severely affected 
patients. Anticholinergic agents (ipratropium bromide), when com­
bined with a β-­agonist as inhaled treatment, can provide additional 
bronchodilation. The effect is most marked in children who pres­
ent to the emergency department with significant airway obstruc­
tion. With few exceptions, any patient who presents with wheezing 
responsive to bronchodilator therapy or any patient requiring hos­
pital admission should receive corticosteroids. In severe respiratory 
distress, intravenous magnesium or theophylline (or the intravenous 
formulation aminophylline) may be of benefit. A small percentage of 
children with acute asthma progress to severe status asthmaticus and 
respiratory failure. A number of clinical signs and symptoms define 
respiratory failure in such severely affected patients: a Pao2 <60 mm 
in room air or cyanosis in 40% Fio2, a Paco2 of 40 mm or higher or 
rising and accompanied by respiratory distress, deterioration in clin­
ical status in spite of aggressive treatment, a change in mental status, 
and fatigue. Patients meeting any of these criteria should be admitted 
to an intensive care unit.
TABLE 4.8  Risk Factors for Death from 
Asthma
Asthma History
Previous severe exacerbation (e.g., intubation or ICU admission for asthma)
Two or more hospitalizations for asthma in the past year
Three or more ED visits for asthma in the past year
Hospitalization or ED visit for asthma in the past month
Using more than two canisters of SABA per month
Difficulty perceiving asthma symptoms or severity of exacerbations by 
patient, family, and physician
Other risk factors: lack of a written asthma action plan, sensitivity to Alter­
naria
Social History
Low socioeconomic status or inner-­city residence
Illicit drug use
Major psychosocial problems
Comorbidities
Cardiovascular disease
Other chronic lung disease
Chronic psychiatric disease
ED, emergency department; ICU, intensive care unit; SABA, short-­
acting β2-­agonist.
From National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Expert Panel Report 
3 (EPR 3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. 
Available at: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.htm
Components of
Severity
Symptoms
≤2 days/week
≥2 days/week
but not daily
Daily
Throughout
the day
0
Nighttime
awakenings
Interference with
normal activity
Impairment
Risk
Step 1
0–1/year
Exacerbations
requiring oral
systemic
corticosteroids
Short-acting
beta2-agonist use
for symptom
control (not
prevention of EIB)
Step 2
≥2 exacerbations in 6 months requiring oral systemic
corticosteroids, or ≥4 wheezing episodes/1 year lasting
>1 day AND risk factors for persistent asthma
Exacerbations of any severity may occur in patients in any severity category.
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time.
Step 3 and consider short course of
oral systemic corticosteroids
In 2–6 weeks, depending on severity, evaluate level of asthma control that is
achieved. If no clear benefit is observed in 4–6 weeks, consider adjusting
therapy or alternative diagnoses.
Recommended Step for
Initiating Therapy
1–2x/month
3–4x/month
Daily
Several times
per day
>2 days/week
but not daily
>1x/week
≤2 days/week
None
Minor limitation
Some limitation
Extremely limited
Classification of Asthma Severity
(0–4 years of age)
Intermittent
Moderate
Persistent
Severe
Mild
Key: EIB, exercise-induced bronchospasm
Notes
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, 
   
   not replace, the clinical decision-making 
   required to meet individual patient needs.
• Level of severity is determined by both 
    impairment and risk. Assess impairment 
  domain by patient's/caregiver's recall of 
  previous 2–4 weeks. Symptom assessment
  for longer periods  should reflect a global 
  assessment such as inquiring whether the
  patient’s asthma is better or worse since the
  last visit. Assign severity to the most severe 
  category in which any feature  occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to 
    correspond frequencies of exacerbations 
  with different levels of asthma severity. 
  For treatment purposes, patients who had ≥2 
  exacerbations requiring oral systemic 
  corticosteroids in the past 6 months, or ≥4 
  wheezing episodes in the past year, and who 
  have risk factors for persistent asthma may be
  considered the same as patients who have
  persistent asthma, even in the absence of
  impairment levels consistent with persistent 
  asthma.
Fig. 4.3  Classifying asthma severity ages 0–4. (From NHLBI/National Asthma Education and Prevention Pro­
gram, Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. NIH Publication; 2007.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
63
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
Components of
Severity
Symptoms
≤2 days/week
≤2x/month
>2 days/week
but not daily
Daily
Throughout
the day
Nighttime
awakenings
Lung function
Interference with
normal activity
Impairment
Risk
Step 1
0–1/year (see note)
≥2/year (see note)
Exacerbations
requiring oral
systemic
corticosteroids
Short-acting
beta2-agonist use for
symptom control (not
prevention of EIB)
Step 2
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEV1.
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity category.
Step 3, medium-
dose ICS option
Step 3, medium-dose
ICS option, or step 4
and consider short course of
oral systemic corticosteroids
In 2–6 weeks, evaluate level of asthma control that is achieved, and adjust therapy
accordingly.
Recommended Step for
Initiating Therapy
3–4x/month
>1x/week
but nightly
Daily
Several times
per day
>2 days/week
but not daily
Often 7x/week
≤2 days/week
None
Minor limitation
• Normal FEV1
  between
  exacerbations
• FEV1 >80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC >85%
• FEV1 <60%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC <75%
• FEV1 = >80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC >80%
• FEV1 = 60–80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC = 75–80%
Some limitation
Extremely limited
Classification of Asthma Severity
(5–11 years of age)
Intermittent
Moderate
Persistent
Severe
Mild
Key: EIB, exercise-induced bronchospasm; 
FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; 
FVC, forced vital capacity; ICS, inhaled 
corticosteroids; ICU, intensive care unit
Notes
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, 
   not replace, the clinical decision-making 
  required to meet individual patient needs.
• Level of severity is determined by both 
 impairment and risk. Assess impairment 
 domain by patient's/caregiver's recall of the 
 previous 2–4 weeks and spirometry. Assign
 severity to the most severe category in which
 any feature occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to 
  correspond frequencies of exacerbations with
 different levels of  asthma severity. In general, 
 more frequent and intense exacerbations (e.g., 
 requiring urgent, unscheduled care,
 hospitalization, or ICU admission) indicate 
 greater underlying disease severity. For 
 treatment purposes, patients who had ≥2 
 exacerbations requiring oral systemic 
 corticosteroids in the past year may be 
 considered the same as patients who
 have persistent asthma, even in the 
 absence of impairment levels consistent 
 with persistent asthma.
Fig. 4.4  Classifying asthma severity ages 5–11. (From NHLBI/National Asthma Education and Prevention 
Program, Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. NIH Publication; 
2007.)
Identification and treatment of chronic asthma require careful 
assessment of the severity of the disease, according to frequency and 
intensity of symptoms, and subsequent grading into mild, moderate, 
and severe categories (see Figs. 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5). All patients except 
those with mild intermittent disease are best managed with chronic 
administration of an inhaled antiinflammatory agent (corticosteroids) 
and the intermittent use of an inhaled β-­agonist for treatment of acute 
wheezing episodes. Leukotriene receptor antagonists may be consid­
ered as an alternative preventive therapy for mild asthma. Oral corti­
costeroids are administered for short intervals to control more severe 
exacerbations. Avoidance of environmental triggers (allergens, tobacco 
smoke) is also paramount to successful management.
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis is a common, acute viral infection of the distal lower 
respiratory tract, and is characterized as lower airway obstruction 
secondary to airway edema, mucus, and cellular debris. Impaired gas 
exchange can occur as a result of airway obstruction and ventilation-­
perfusion inequalities. RSV is the most important respiratory pathogen 
in infants and young children. In addition, it has been identified as 
the etiologic agent in 5–40% of pneumonias in young children. Other 
viruses, such as adenovirus, influenza, human metapneumovirus, 
parainfluenza, and coronavirus, can also cause bronchiolitis. The most 
severe disease occurs in infants younger than 6 months. By 5 years of 
age, 95% of all children have serologic evidence of RSV infection. Rein­
fections are common in older children and adults, because immunity 
to RSV is short lived and incomplete. In older children and adoles­
cents, infections with RSV are often limited to the upper respiratory 
tract. In temperate climates, RSV epidemics occur yearly, beginning in 
midwinter and persisting through early spring.
In infected infants, upper respiratory tract symptoms usually pre­
cede the lower respiratory tract involvement by 3–7 days. Low-­grade 
fever, rhinitis, and pharyngitis are common signs in the initial phase of 
the disease. This then progresses to cough, increased work of breath­
ing, and wheezing (see Chapter 3). Apnea may also occur, particularly 
in infants younger than 3 months of age. Chest wall retractions and 
dyspnea are frequently observed, and adventitious sounds (wheezing, 
crackles) are appreciated on auscultation of the chest. Most children 
with bronchiolitis demonstrate clinical improvement after 5–7 days, 
but the duration of illness can be as long as 21 days. Bacterial super­
infection of the lower respiratory tract is rare. Approximately 30% of 
infants with bronchiolitis caused by RSV have recurrent episodes of 
wheezing caused by bronchial hyperactivity and are diagnosed with 
asthma. This is in part due to persistent inflammation of the distal 
respiratory tract produced by the viral infection.
The clinical determination of the severity of the lower respiratory 
tract involvement in infants infected with bronchiolitis can be diffi­
cult. Physical findings often associated with respiratory distress, such 
as tachypnea, intercostal retractions, and wheezing, are not necessarily 
correlated with the level of hypoxemia. Carbon dioxide retention sec­
ondary to alveolar hypoventilation is not a common finding in other­
wise previously normal children, but hypercapnia and acute respiratory 
acidosis can be serious problems in infants with chronic pulmonary 
disease or congenital heart disease. Chest radiograph findings include a 
diffuse interstitial pneumonitis and bilateral lung overinflation; alveolar 
infiltrates or consolidation are present in approximately 20% of children. 
Infants with congenital heart disease, pulmonary hypertension, prema­
turity, and young age (younger than 12 weeks) have an increased rate of 
severe disease and mortality; the course of illness is usually prolonged, 
and intensive care and mechanical ventilation are frequently needed.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
64
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Components of
Severity
Symptoms
≤2 days/week
≥2 days/week
but not daily
Daily
Throughout
the day
Nighttime
awakenings
Interference with
normal activity
Impairment
Normal FEV1/FVC:
8–19 yr
20–39 yr
40–59 yr
60–80 yr
85%
80%
75%
70%
Risk
Step 1
Exacerbations
requiring oral
systemic
corticosteroids
Short-acting
beta2-agonist use for
symptom control (not
prevention of EIB)
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4 or 5
Recommended Step for
Initiating Treatment
3–4x/month
Daily
Several times
per day
>2 days/week
but not daily, and
not more than
1x on any day
≤2x/month
≤2 days/week
None
Minor limitation
Some limitation
Extremely limited
Classification of Asthma Severity
≥12 years of age
Intermittent
Moderate
Persistent
Severe
Mild
Lung function
• Normal FEV1
  between
  exacerbations
• FEV1 >80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC normal
• FEV1 <60%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC
  reduced >5%
• FEV1  >80%
  predicted
• FEV1/FVC normal
• FEV1 >60% but
  <80% predicted
• FEV1/FVC reduced
  5%
0–1/year (see note)
≥2/year (see note)
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEV1.
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity category.
>1x/week
but not nightly
Often 7x/week
Key: FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 
second; FVC, forced vital capacity; ICU, 
intensive care unit
Notes:
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, 
   not replace, the clinical decision-making 
   required to meet individual patient needs.
• Level of severity is determined by 
   assessment of both impairment and risk.
  Assess impairment domain by patient's/
  caregiver's recall of previous 2–4 weeks 
  and spirometry. Assign severity to the 
  most severe category in which any feature 
  occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to 
 correspond frequencies of exacerbations 
 with different levels of  asthma severity. 
 In general, more frequent and intense 
 exacerbations (e.g., requiring urgent, 
 unscheduled care, hospitalization, or ICU 
 admission) indicate greater underlying 
 disease severity. For treatment purposes, 
 patients who had ≥2 exacerbations requiring 
 oral systemic corticosteroids in the past year 
 may be considered the same as patients who 
 have persistent asthma, even in the absence 
 of impairment levels consistent with persistent 
 asthma.
and consider short course of
oral systemic corticosteroids
In 2–6 weeks, evaluate level of asthma control that is achieved, and adjust therapy
accordingly.
Fig. 4.5  Classifying asthma severity ages 12 and older. (From NHLBI/National Asthma Education and Pre­
vention Program, Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. NIH 
Publication; 2007.)
The diagnosis of bronchiolitis is usually made on clinical grounds. 
Bronchiolitis is most common in children under 2 years of age and 
should be suspected in the wheezing child who has current or anteced­
ent upper respiratory tract infection symptoms in the late fall or win­
ter months. The definitive diagnosis of RSV or other viral infection is 
based on the presence of the viral genome in respiratory secretions. 
This testing is often not needed if the clinical findings are consistent 
with bronchiolitis. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is specific 
and accurate, and has a short turnaround time in identifying the virus 
from nasopharyngeal swabs.
Suctioning and supplemental oxygen remain the cornerstone of 
treatment for bronchiolitis if needed. Unlike asthma, the wheezing 
accompanying bronchiolitis is often less responsive to bronchodila­
tors. Nonetheless, patients with significant hypoxia and hypercapnia 
may receive a trial treatment with aerosol bronchodilators to determine 
if this may improve symptoms, which may be continued if infants do 
show improvement. Infants with bronchiolitis do not respond to treat­
ment with antiinflammatory agents, such as corticosteroids, so these 
are not recommended. Severely ill patients may require mechani­
cal ventilation; heated, humidified, high-­flow nasal cannula oxygen 
decreases intubation rates and is used in children with severe respi­
ratory distress. Other modalities, such as hypertonic or normal saline 
aerosols, positive expiratory pressure (PEP) therapy, and chest phys­
iotherapy have shown mixed results but may be of benefit for patients 
who are hospitalized.
Monthly administration (intramuscularly) of a humanized mono­
clonal antibody (palivizumab) against RSV can reduce morbidity from 
bronchiolitis but does not completely prevent infection. Infants at high 
risk (infants who are premature, those with bronchopulmonary dys­
plasia or other forms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, those 
with complex congenital heart disease) who are younger than 2 years 
are most likely to benefit.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae Infections
One of the basic tenets regarding respiratory infections in children is 
that “bacteria do not make you wheeze.” Mycoplasma pneumoniae is 
an exception to that rule and should be considered in an older child 
who presents with new-­onset wheezing. In addition, infections with 
M. pneumoniae can precipitate exacerbations in patients with asthma. 
Productive or dry coughs secondary to tracheobronchitis are the 
most common symptoms of M. pneumoniae infections. Pulmonary 
symptoms span from mild viral symptoms to more severe presen­
tations of pneumonia. Other clinical manifestations of M. pneumo­
niae infections include fever/chills, rhinorrhea, and otitis media (see 
Chapter 5). Extrapulmonary manifestations not only are due to the 
infection itself but also can be due to immune or vascular complica­
tions. Examples of M. pneumoniae extrapulmonary findings include 
hemolytic anemia, rash, mucositis, cardiac disease, polyarthritis, 
transverse myelitis, rhabdomyolysis, and central nervous system dis­
ease. The incidence of M. pneumoniae infection peaks between the 
ages of 5 and 19 years; the organism usually does not produce disease 
in children younger than age 2. Infections with M. pneumoniae tend 
to be seasonal, occurring most frequently during autumn and early 
winter.
The findings of M. pneumoniae on chest radiographs are vari­
able. In about 5% of patients, the chest radiograph appears normal. 
A diffuse, bilateral, reticular infiltrate is the classic appearance in 
about half of patients. However, lobar, alveolar, and interstitial infil­
trates have also been described (Fig. 4.6). Enlargement of hilar or 
peritracheal lymph nodes may also be evident. Pleural effusions 
(usually small) are found in 14% of patients with M. pneumoniae. 
Atypical pneumonia (diffuse infiltrates with nonlobar pattern; fever, 
malaise, myalgias) is often caused by M. pneumoniae but may also 
be caused by Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella species, and other 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
65
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
related pathogens. PCR may help to confirm a diagnosis. Many M. 
pneumoniae infections are self-­limiting within 7–10 days. When 
antibiotics are used, treatment is with azithromycin. Doxycycline or 
fluoroquinolones may also be used in older children, although there 
is increasing emergence of M. pneumoniae resistance to macrolides 
in some areas of the world.
Vocal Cord Dysfunction
A functional disorder that mimics asthma, vocal cord dysfunction is 
typically manifested as wheezing, dyspnea, and shortness of breath 
refractory to treatment with inhaled bronchodilators. Vocal cord 
dysfunction should be considered in patients with wheezing who 
present with atypical findings or those who are difficult to treat. 
The wheezing is produced by adduction of the vocal cords during 
inspiration and expiration. The resultant high-­pitched inspiratory 
and expiratory noises are transmitted to the chest, although the 
sounds are best appreciated over the larynx. Despite the patient’s 
apparent dyspnea, gas exchange is usually unaffected. Spirometry 
shows variable flattening of the inspiratory flow loop. The diagnosis 
is established by direct laryngoscopy, which demonstrates paradox­
ical motion of the vocal cords. Speech therapy is the treatment of 
choice.
Foreign Body Aspiration
Aspiration of a foreign body into the intrathoracic airways must be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of a child with the sudden onset 
of respiratory distress or wheezing. If both main stem bronchi and the 
trachea are obstructed (typically by larger foreign bodies), the patient 
may have asphyxia and sudden death; aspiration of foreign bodies in 
the distal airways often takes a more indolent course. Aspiration of 
foreign bodies is most common in children between 1 and 4 years of 
age, particularly in males or in children with neurologic disorders or 
delayed development. It is rare in children younger than 6 months. The 
most common objects aspirated by children are small toy parts, coins, 
marbles, balloons, and food products (e.g., hot dogs, popcorn, seeds, 
nuts, grapes, carrots, and beans). Endobronchial aspiration of peanuts, 
raisins, popcorn kernels, or seeds tends to produce more difficulties 
than other kinds of foreign bodies (metallic or plastic objects) because, 
in addition to causing physical obstruction of the airway, vegetable 
matter produces an intense, local inflammatory response secondary to 
chemical and allergic bronchitis. Larger objects, such as coins, usually 
lodge in the esophagus. Esophageal foreign bodies can produce signif­
icant respiratory symptoms as a result of extrinsic compression of the 
posterior trachea. This compression can produce respiratory distress, 
stridor, and wheezing, especially in infants and young children. Dys­
phagia and vomiting can be late symptoms associated with an esopha­
geal foreign body.
The typical clinical manifestation after the acute event is abrupt 
respiratory distress, characterized by choking, gagging, cyanosis, and 
a harsh, paroxysmal cough (see Chapter 3). However, because many 
aspiration events occur while children are unsupervised, the history of 
foreign body ingestion or aspiration is frequently not elicited. Chronic 
cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, and wheezing may develop. Because the 
object is most frequently aspirated into the main stem or segmental 
bronchi (distal airway), the wheezing is typically unilateral. Physi­
cal examination may also reveal a decrease in breath sounds on the 
obstructed side, prolongation of the expiratory phase, and a tracheal 
shift. In some instances, retained foreign bodies in the airways can pro­
duce a persistent pneumonitis, and the chronic inflammatory response 
can result in bronchiectasis or lung abscess. Retained foreign body 
should be considered in a child with presumed asthma or pneumonia 
who is not improving with appropriate treatment.
The diagnosis of foreign body aspiration can be difficult to establish 
and necessitates a combination of clinical examination, radiographic 
studies, and ultimately endoscopic visualization. Radiopaque foreign 
bodies are generally easily visualized by radiographic studies. Radiolu­
cent foreign bodies may become apparent on inspiratory or expiratory 
chest radiographs, lateral decubitus films, fluoroscopy, or barium swal­
low studies when an esophageal foreign body could be compressing the 
posterior tracheal wall (Fig. 4.7). Because an occasional foreign body 
may not lodge in a bronchus, typical radiologic findings may not be 
seen. If a foreign body is likely to be present, rigid bronchoscopy for 
examination of the lower airway and foreign body removal is indicated. 
Flexible bronchoscopy provides an excellent visualization of the airway 
and should be reserved for when other diagnoses appear to be much 
more likely.
Stridor
Stridor, a harsh medium-­pitched sound typically heard on inspira­
tion, is caused by turbulent airflow in the upper airway. The phase of 
A
B
Fig. 4.6  Mycoplasma atypical pneumonia in an 8-­year-­old girl who pre­
sented with fatigue, low-­grade fever, and cough. A, The chest radio­
graph shows irregularity of the right hilum and bibasilar infiltration. B, 
Contrast-­enhanced CT demonstrates bilateral bronchopneumonia in the 
lower lobes. A direct fluorescent antibody test from nasopharyngeal 
aspirate confirmed the diagnosis. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pedi­
atric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:519, Fig. 
54.16.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
66
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
respiration in which stridor occurs is helpful in identifying the site of 
the airway obstruction (see Fig. 4.1). The relative anatomy of the upper 
airway in an adult versus in an infant is shown in Figure 4.8. The most 
common cause of stridor of infants and young children is laryngomala­
cia. Congenital anomalies should be suspected in children with recur­
rent or persistent stridor. Acute inspiratory stridor is most commonly 
caused by acute inflammation/infection, typically croup; however, an 
acute foreign body aspiration in the upper airway may also cause acute-­
onset stridor. Epiglottitis is the most serious life-­threatening infection 
in this area and must be identified quickly. A history of prior intubation 
in a patient with stridor and respiratory distress should raise concern 
for vocal cord paralysis or subglottic stenosis. An age-­related differen­
tial diagnosis is noted in Table 4.9. Differentiating features of common 
disorders are noted in Table 4.10.
Croup
Laryngotracheal bronchitis (croup) is generally a slowly progressive, 
mild, self-­limited viral inflammation of the subglottic larynx occurring 
in infants and young children. The most common causes are parainflu­
enza virus types 1 and 3, influenza A, respiratory syncytial virus, and 
adenovirus. The circumferential cricoid cartilage, which consists of the 
subglottic airway just below the vocal cords, is the narrowest part of the 
upper airway in a child (see Fig. 4.8). The inflammation associated with 
a viral infection in this location causes airway obstruction as edema 
develops within the confines of the cricoid cartilage. Most patients will 
develop mild rhinorrhea, cough, and low-­grade fever prior to charac­
teristic barky cough and inspiratory stridor (see Chapter 3). The cry or 
voice may become hoarse. Stridor typically worsens when the patient is 
upset or active and improves with warm humidified air. Unless the air­
way obstruction is severe, the child generally has no trouble handling 
saliva. If a patient develops drooling or rapid progression of respiratory 
distress, epiglottitis or bacterial tracheitis should be considered. The 
diagnosis is usually apparent from the history and physical examina­
tion. If the diagnosis is not clear, obtaining a lateral neck radiograph is 
indicated and will show the classic “steeple” sign (Fig. 4.9).
Management varies from outpatient observation with parent edu­
cation to endotracheal intubation. For mild cases, the patient must 
be well hydrated; the use of extra humidity is soothing to the airways 
and helps to keep secretions from being tenacious, so that they are 
less likely to become obstructive. In more severe cases (stridor at rest, 
retractions), nebulized epinephrine used as a mucosal vasoconstric­
tor may provide relief. Usually, patients being treated in this manner 
are observed in the hospital for a possible “rebound” effect that may 
occur 2–6 hours after treatment. Parenteral or oral dexamethasone is 
a safe and effective additional therapy for moderate to severe croup; 
3
3
4
4
4
4
5
5
1
1
2
2
Fig. 4.8  Anatomy of upper airway. Relative comparative anatomy of the 
larynx in an infant (left) and an adult (right). Specific landmarks: 1, epi­
glottis; 2, arytenoid cartilages; 3, thyroid cartilage; 4, cricoid cartilage; 5, 
laryngeal ventricle, the air space below the false vocal cords and above 
the true vocal cords. Its radiolucency is an excellent landmark on lateral 
radiograph. The infant larynx is situated relatively high in the cervical 
region. In addition, the base of the infant’s tongue is close to the larynx, 
and the epiglottis is located near the palate. These anatomic differences 
partially explain the predominantly obligate nose breathing of the young 
infant, as well as the relative ease with which upper airway obstructions 
develop in infants.
A
B
C
*
*
*
Fig. 4.7  Nonradiopaque foreign body aspiration in a 5-­year-­old girl who presented with persistent coughing 
and respiratory distress while eating popcorn. A, Frontal chest radiograph obtained at end-­inspiration shows 
mild hyperinflation (asterisk) of the right lower lobe. B, Frontal chest radiograph obtained at end-­inspiration 
in the left lateral decubitus position demonstrates normal volume loss in the left lung and mild hyperinflation 
(asterisk) of the right lower lobe. C, Frontal chest radiograph obtained at end-­inspiration in the right lateral 
decubitus position shows persistent hyperinflation (asterisk) of the right lower lobe. (From Coley BD, ed. 
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:490, Fig. 52.7.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
67
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
steroid use has decreased the requirement for endotracheal intuba­
tion. Patients with severe croup are usually admitted to the hospital 
for observation. If intubation is needed, an endotracheal tube one-­half 
to one size smaller than that used for a child with a normal airway of 
the same age and size is chosen. In atypical cases of recurrent croup 
or in patients in whom extubation is difficult, an endoscopic evalua­
tion of the airway with laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy is necessary to 
exclude an underlying anatomic abnormality.
Bacterial Tracheitis
Bacterial tracheitis is a bacterial superinfection of a previous tracheal 
(croup, influenza virus) viral process and is usually caused by Staphylo­
coccus aureus. A variety of other organisms, including Moraxella catarrh­
alis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and non-­typable Haemophilus influenzae, 
have also been identified as being occasionally involved. There is gen­
erally a virus-­like mild phase, followed by a rapid deterioration, during 
which the patient clinically appears more ill with high fever and respira­
tory distress. Some patients have a two-­phased illness with croup, initial 
recovery, followed by tracheitis. Neck and chest radiographs often show 
irregular scalloping of the trachea. Radiopaque densities from inspis­
sated mucus may be seen. Close monitoring and intravenous antibiotic 
treatment directed toward the likely causative organisms are required. 
Endotracheal intubation for control of the airway is usually necessary, 
particularly in younger patients. Extubation is performed on the basis of 
clinical improvement and a resolution of excessive amounts of purulent 
secretions. Sometimes the exudate secondary to the tracheitis is thick 
and can cause airway obstruction similar to that from a foreign body. 
Antistaphylococcal antibiotic therapy is indicated.
Epiglottitis
Epiglottitis is an acute, rapidly progressive, potentially lethal infection 
of the epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, and false vocal cord area. It is an 
emergency because of the potential for rapid airway obstruction; eval­
uation and treatment are directed toward establishing an airway while 
the physician is confirming the diagnosis and treating the infection. 
In the past, epiglottitis was caused by H. influenzae type b in nearly 
100% of cases. Since the introduction of the polysaccharide conju­
gated H. influenzae type b vaccine, there has been a dramatic fall in 
the incidence of acute epiglottitis in the United States. However, in an 
internationally mobile world, patients who have not been vaccinated 
may acquire epiglottitis in any country. In addition, other, less com­
mon pathogens, such as S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and β-­hemolytic 
streptococci, may produce epiglottitis. Unusual presentations will also 
become more common, with children presenting at a younger age and 
immunosuppressive diseases being caused by atypical organisms.
Typically, there is an abrupt onset, usually without an obvious pro­
drome, with rapid progression toward airway compromise. Initially, 
complaints of sore throat and odynophagia are common. Patients are 
usually febrile, and drooling is present. The typical presentation is an 
ill-­appearing child sitting forward with their head hyperextended who 
does not want to lie down (Fig. 4.10). There is a “hot potato” voice and 
drooling, the mouth is open, and the tongue is protruding. Mild inspi­
ratory stridor and retractions may be present, but these are usually not 
obvious, because the patient generally takes short, shallow breaths. An 
intraoral examination is contraindicated because it may predispose to 
laryngospasm and airway obstruction.
TABLE 4.9  Age-­Related Differential Diagnosis of Airway Obstruction
Newborn
Foreign material (meconium, amniotic fluid)
Congenital subglottic stenosis (uncommon)
Choanal atresia
Congenital cysts
Micrognathia (Pierre Robin syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome, DiGeorge 
syndrome)
Macroglossia (Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome, hypothyroidism, Pompe 
disease, trisomy 21, hemangioma)
Laryngeal web, clefts, atresia
Laryngospasm (intubation, aspiration, hypocalcemia, transient)
Lingual thyroid
Vocal cord paralysis (weak cry; unilateral or bilateral, with or without 
increased intracranial pressure from Arnold-­Chiari malformation or other 
CNS pathology; birth trauma)
Tracheal web, stenosis, malacia, atresia
Pharyngeal collapse (cause of apnea in preterm infant)
Tumors*
Infant
Laryngomalacia (most common cause)
Subglottic stenosis (congenital; acquired after intubation)
Tumors*
Tongue tumor (dermoid, teratoma, ectopic thyroid)
Laryngeal papillomatosis
Vascular rings
Toddler
Viral croup (most common etiology in children 3 mo–4 yr of age)
Bacterial tracheitis (toxic, high fever)
Foreign body (sudden cough; airway or esophageal) (see Chapter 3)
Spasmodic (recurrent) croup (see Chapter 3)
Laryngeal papillomatosis
Retropharyngeal abscess
Diphtheria (uncommon)
Infant Older Than 2–3 Yr
Epiglottitis (epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds)
Inhalation injury (burns, toxic gas, hydrocarbons)
Foreign bodies
Angioedema (family history, cutaneous angioedema)
Anaphylaxis (allergic history, wheezing, hypotension)
Peritonsillar abscess (adolescents)
Ludwig angina
Diphtheria
Parapharyngeal abscess
Tumors*
Trauma (blunt or penetrating airway injury; tracheal/larynx fracture; chemical 
burns, e.g., caustic ingestions)
*Tumors include lymphangiomas, hemangiomas, papillomas, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and chondrosarcomas.
CNS, central nervous system.
Modified from Kercsmar C. The respiratory system. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1994:444.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
68
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
TABLE 4.10  Differential Diagnosis of Upper Airway Obstruction
Laryngotracheobronchitis 
(Croup)
Laryngitis
Spasmodic 
Croup
Epiglottitis
Membranous 
Croup 
(Bacterial 
Tracheitis)
Retropharyngeal 
Abscess
Foreign 
Body
Angioedema
Peritonsillar 
Abscess
Laryngeal 
Papillomatosis
Age
3 mo–3 yr
5 yr–teens
3 mo–3 yr
2–6 yr
Any age (3–10 yr)
<6 yr
6 mo–5 yr
All ages
>10 yr
3 mo–3 yr
Location
Subglottic
Subglottic
Subglottic
Supraglottic
Trachea
Posterior pharynx
Supraglottic, 
subglottic, 
variable
Variable
Oropharynx
Larynx, vocal 
cords, trachea
Etiology
Parainfluenza, influenza virus, 
RSV; rarely Mycoplasma, 
measles, adenovirus
As per croup
Unknown
Haemophilus 
influenzae 
type b
Prior croup or influ­
enza virus with 
secondary bac­
terial infection 
by Staphylo­
coccus aureus, 
Moraxella 
catarrhalis, H. 
influenzae
S. aureus, anaerobes
Small objects, 
vegetable, 
toys, coins
Congenital C-­1 
esterase defi­
ciency; acquired 
anaphylaxis
Group A 
streptococci, 
anaerobes
HPV
Prodrome 
onset
Insidious, URI
As per croup
Sudden 
onset at 
night; prior 
episodes
Rapid, short 
prodrome
Biphasic illness 
with sudden 
deterioration
Insidious to sudden
Sudden
Sudden
Biphasic with 
sudden 
worsening
Chronic
Stridor
Yes—biphasic
No
Yes
Yes—soft 
inspiratory
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Possible
Retractions
Yes
No
Rare
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes (variable)
Yes
No
No
Voice
Hoarse
Hoarse; 
whispered
Hoarse
Muffled
Normal or hoarse
Muffled
Complete 
obstruc­
tion—
aphonic; 
other 
variable
Hoarse, may be 
normal
“Hot potato,” 
muffled
Hoarse
Position and 
appear­
ance
Normal
Normal
Normal
Tripod sitting, 
leaning 
forward; 
agitation
Normal
Arching of neck or 
normal
Normal
Normal; may have 
facial edema
Normal
Normal
Swallowing 
(dyspha­
gia)
Normal
Normal
Normal
Drooling
Normal
Drooling
Variable; usu­
ally normal
Normal
Drooling, 
trismus
Normal
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
69
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
Laryngotracheobronchitis 
(Croup)
Laryngitis
Spasmodic 
Croup
Epiglottitis
Membranous 
Croup 
(Bacterial 
Tracheitis)
Retropharyngeal 
Abscess
Foreign 
Body
Angioedema
Peritonsillar 
Abscess
Laryngeal 
Papillomatosis
Barking 
cough
Yes
Rare
Yes
No
Yes
No
Variable; 
brassy if 
tracheal
Possible
No
Variable
Toxicity
Rare
No
No
Severe
Severe
Severe
No, but 
dyspnea
No, unless 
anaphylactic 
shock or severe 
anoxia
Dyspnea
None
Fever
<101°F
<101°F
None
>102°F
>102°F
>101°F
None
None
>101°F
None
Radio­
graphic 
findings
Subglottic narrowing; steeple 
sign
Normal
Subglottic 
narrowing
Thumb sign of 
thickened 
epiglottis
Ragged irregular 
tracheal border; 
as per croup
Thickened retropha­
ryngeal space
Radiopaque 
object may 
be seen
As per croup
None needed
May be normal
WBC count
Normal
Normal
Normal
Leukocytosis 
with left shift
Leukocytosis with 
left shift
Leukocytosis with 
left shift
Normal
Normal
Leukocytosis 
with left shift
Normal
Therapy
Racemic epinephrine: aerosol, 
systemic steroids, aerosolized 
steroids, cool mist
None
Cool mist; 
occasion­
ally as for 
croup
Endotracheal 
intubation, 
ceftriaxone
Vancomycin; 
ceftriaxone; 
intubation if 
needed
Clindamycin; 
ampicillin-­
sulbactam (or 
vancomycin); 
ceftriaxone; 
surgical drainage if 
abscess
Endoscopic 
removal
Anaphylaxis; 
epinephrine, IV 
fluids, steroids; 
C-­1 esterase 
deficiency; 
replacement 
infusion therapy
Penicillin; 
aspiration
Laser therapy, 
repeated exci­
sion, interferon
Prevention
None
None
None
H. influenzae 
type b 
conjugated 
vaccine
None
None
Avoid small 
objects; 
supervision
Avoid aller­
gens; FFP for 
hereditary 
angioedema
Treat group A 
streptococci 
early
Treat maternal 
genitourinary 
lesions; possible 
cesarean 
section?
HPV vaccine to 
mother
FFP, fresh-­frozen plasma; HPV, human papillomavirus; IV, intravenous; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; URI, upper respiratory tract infection; WBC, white blood cell.
TABLE 4.10  Differential Diagnosis of Upper Airway Obstruction—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
70
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
If there is any question as to the diagnosis, a lateral soft tissue radio­
graph of the neck can be confirmatory (Fig. 4.11). Someone who has 
the expertise and equipment to handle sudden airway decompensation 
in a pediatric patient should accompany the patient to the radiology 
suite. When a clinical diagnosis of epiglottitis is at all likely, the patient 
should be taken immediately to the operating room and cared for by 
experienced pediatric anesthesiology and otolaryngology personnel 
capable of endotracheal intubation or less often tracheostomy.
Once the airway is secured and the diagnosis confirmed, blood 
specimens are obtained for culture and treatment is begun with cef­
triaxone. Patients usually require 36–48 hours of endotracheal intuba­
tion, with observation in the pediatric intensive care unit. If there is a 
question of safety of extubation, a second laryngoscopy is indicated.
Laryngomalacia
Laryngomalacia is the most common cause of inspiratory stridor 
and noisy respiration in neonates and infants. It is caused by the 
inspiratory collapse of the laryngeal cartilages, with prolapse of 
the epiglottis or arytenoid cartilages into the airway during inspi­
ration. It typically presents with high-­pitched inspiratory stridor. 
Stridor may occur at birth, but the onset is often delayed, occur­
ring at 2–4 weeks of age. The condition is usually self-­limited and 
resolves with time: often by 8–12 months of age but occasionally not 
until 18–24 months of age. Laryngomalacia should be suspected in 
infants with recurrent croup, as acute viral infections or agitation 
can worsen symptoms. Patients often will have associated gastro­
esophageal reflux disease, and some may have feeding difficulties or 
A
B
Fig. 4.9  Croup in a 1-­year-­old child. A, Frontal radiograph of the neck shows a tapered reduction of the sub­
glottic tracheal caliber from the level of the vocal cords (upper arrow) to the normal-­caliber trachea below 
(lower arrow). The right mild tracheal deviation is a normal sign resulting from the left aortic arch. B, Lateral 
view shows a normal epiglottis (upper arrow), distention of the pharynx, normal palatine tonsils (arrowhead), 
and increased density in the subglottic trachea (lower arrow).
Fig. 4.10  Child with epiglottitis. Characteristic posture in a patient with 
epiglottitis. The child is leaning forward and drooling, and the neck is 
hyperextended.
Fig. 4.11  Epiglottitis. The patient is a 3½-­year-­old child with fever and 
sudden onset of stridor. Lateral radiograph shows an enlarged epiglottis 
(“thumbprint” sign) and aryepiglottic folds (arrow) and distention of the 
pharynx.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
71
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
failure to thrive. Severe cases may cause apneic events or pulmonary 
hypertension.
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the clinical presentation 
(stridor is worse when the patient is supine or during activity, and 
exacerbations occur with upper respiratory tract infections) and find­
ings on flexible laryngoscopy. Approximately 15–25% of patients with 
laryngomalacia may have other airway lesions. Therefore a complete 
airway evaluation with rigid bronchoscopy has been recommended 
in patients with severe respiratory distress, failure to thrive, or any 
underlying concern for a concurrent airway lesion, and if the stri­
dor of laryngomalacia does not follow the typical course. Unusually 
severe cases of laryngomalacia may necessitate operative interven­
tion, such as a supraglottoplasty to trim redundant soft tissue or even 
a temporary tracheotomy. Laryngomalacia may be accompanied by 
tracheomalacia, a partial collapse of the tracheal cartilages with res­
piration. Tracheomalacia may be congenital or secondary to extrinsic 
compression by vascular rings or tumors. Patients with tracheoma­
lacia manifest with wheezing, cough, stridor, dyspnea, tachypnea, or 
cyanosis.
Vocal Cord Paralysis
Vocal cord paralysis is a common cause of congenital neonatal 
laryngeal obstruction, but can also occur in older children. Vocal 
cord paralysis may be bilateral or unilateral, and it often can cause 
difficulty feeding, respiratory distress, and a weak cry. In neonates 
with no surgical history, it is associated with neurologic syndromes, 
such as the Arnold-­Chiari malformation. Traction on the brainstem 
or increased intracranial pressure and herniation put pressure on 
the vagus nerve, which is thought to cause the paralysis. It can also 
be iatrogenic, particularly in neonates with a history of thoracic sur­
gery or difficult birth delivery. Tracheotomy is often necessary to 
maintain the airway in bilateral vocal cord paralysis, and neurologic 
and MRI evaluation should be performed to identify any central 
causes. Vocal cord paralysis also occurs in older children and may 
be caused by a polyneuropathy (Guillain-­Barré syndrome), brain­
stem encephalitis, neck or thoracic surgery, or compression by local 
masses.
Vascular Rings
Vascular rings are common and can produce symptoms related to 
compression of the trachea and/or the esophagus (Table 4.11). Feeding 
often exacerbates manifestations when the obstructed esophagus acts 
as an additional extrinsic force on the trachea. Patients present with 
cough, dysphagia, odynophagia, tachypnea, emesis, noisy breathing, 
stridor, and/or wheezing. Because they handle oral secretions poorly, 
they may develop aspiration pneumonia. They also do not tolerate 
neck flexion. The two most common symptomatic lesions are the right 
aortic arch with a left ligamentum arteriosus (or patent ductus arteri­
osus) and the double aortic arch. The diagnosis may be suspected on 
a chest radiograph by a demonstrated right-­sided aortic arch or a nar­
row displaced trachea. An upper gastrointestinal series demonstrates 
the indentation of the anterior and/or posterior esophagus, whereas 
endoscopy demonstrates the pulsatile extrinsic compressing vessels 
(Fig. 4.12). MRI or echocardiography is usually diagnostic; angiogra­
phy is not needed to find most of these lesions.
Subglottic Stenosis
Congenital subglottic stenosis occurs when the subglottic space is 
narrowed, and typically presents in children younger than 3 months 
with respiratory distress, biphasic or inspiratory stridor, and recurrent 
croup. Acquired subglottic stenosis may develop secondary to endotra­
cheal intubation, particularly if the intubation has been prolonged for 
several months, if an oversized tube was used, or if multiple intubations 
were required. Subglottic stenosis should be suspected in any child with 
these risk factors who does not tolerate extubation because of upper 
airway obstruction. Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy are required for 
evaluation to diagnose subglottic stenosis and also evaluate for other 
lesions such as subglottic cysts or hemangiomas. Acquired subglottic 
stenosis is often more severe than the congenital type. In both types of 
subglottic stenosis, infection and gastroesophageal reflux may exacer­
bate symptoms and contribute to narrowing of the airway. A cricoid 
split operation, tracheotomy, or laryngotracheal reconstruction may be 
needed. Serial dilatations are no longer commonly used because they 
may continue to injure the cartilage and its overlying mucosa.
Cough
Cough is a common complaint in children (see Chapter 3). The nature 
of the cough is often helpful in establishing the etiology of respiratory 
distress. For example, a barky cough is typically associated with viral 
croup, whereas a more productive cough can be associated with pneu­
monia. Pneumonia is most commonly caused by bacteria or viruses; 
however, there are other common noninfectious causes of pneumonia 
and pneumonitis.
Viral and Bacterial Pneumonia
Pneumonia is defined as acute inflammation of the lung parenchyma, 
and can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or fungi (see Chapter 3). Clini­
cally, it is often defined as a lower respiratory tract infection, associated 
with fever, respiratory symptoms, and evidence of lung parenchyma 
involvement, either by physical examination or chest radiograph 
findings. S. pneumoniae is the most common bacterial pathogen of 
community-­acquired pneumonia; H. influenzae and S. aureus are less 
common causes. Viral pathogens are a common cause of pneumonia in 
young children; it can be difficult to discern which pathogen is causing 
the clinical symptoms. Atypical pathogens, such as M. pneumoniae, are 
a common cause of pneumonia in school-­aged children (Table 4.12). 
Children with immunodeficiency, sickle cell disease, cystic fibrosis, or 
HIV may present with more atypical pathogens.
Patients will often begin with an upper respiratory infection with 
rhinitis and cough (see Chapter 3). They then develop tachypnea and 
fever and then may develop respiratory distress with subcostal, inter­
costal, and suprasternal retractions; nasal flaring and use of accessory 
muscles; and hypoxia. Tachypnea and worsening cough are commonly 
noted. Patients with lower lobe pneumonias may also present with 
abdominal pain. Early in the course of illness, crackles, rhonchi, and 
wheezing are common findings. Later in the course of illness, as lungs 
consolidate and/or pleural effusions or empyema develops, decreased 
breath sounds and dullness to percussion may develop. Wheezing is 
more likely in viral or atypical pneumonia; however, unilateral wheez­
ing may also correlate with a bacterial lobar pneumonia.
Diagnosis is made by chest radiograph, which will show a consol­
idation, and may show empyema or pleural effusion if present (Fig. 
4.13). However, it is important to note that in children with mild 
lower respiratory tract disease with clinical symptoms consistent with 
pneumonia, a chest radiograph is not needed to make a diagnosis. 
Patchy infiltrates are most suggestive of atypical or viral pneumo­
nia. A lobar consolidation or large pleural effusion is likely from a 
bacterial etiology. Laboratory testing may be helpful in patients with 
more severe disease, but is not necessary in all patients. Peripheral 
white blood cell (WBC) count and acute phase reactants are likely 
elevated, and can be used to follow response to therapy along with 
clinical response. Blood cultures should be obtained for patients with 
moderate to severe disease, or who fail to demonstrate improvement 
after the initiation of antibiotics. Viral or atypical pathogen testing 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
72
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
TABLE 4.11  Vascular Rings
Lesion
Symptoms
Plain Film
Barium Swallow
Bronchoscopy
MRI 
Echocardiography
Treatment
Double arch
Stridor, respiratory 
distress
Swallowing dysfunc­
tion
Reflex apnea
AP—wider base of 
heart
Lat.—narrowed 
trachea displaced 
forward at C3–C4
Bilateral indentation 
of esophagus
Bilateral tracheal 
compression—both 
pulsatile
Diagnostic
Ligate and divide 
smaller arch 
(usually left)
Right arch and
ligamentum/ductus
Respiratory distress
Swallowing dysfunc­
tion
AP—tracheal devi­
ation to left (right 
arch)
Bilateral indentation 
of esophagus R > L
Bilateral tracheal 
compression—R 
pulsatile
Diagnostic
Ligate ligamentum 
or ductus
Anomalous
innominate
Cough
Stridor
Reflex apnea
AP—normal
Lat.—anterior tra­
cheal compression
Normal
Pulsatile anterior tra­
cheal compression
Unnecessary
Conservative
Aberrant right
subclavian
Occasional swallow­
ing dysfunction
Normal
AP—oblique defect 
upward to right
Lat.—small defect on 
right posterior wall
Usually normal
Diagnostic
Ligate artery
Pulmonary
sling
Expiratory stridor
Respiratory distress
AP—low L hilum, R 
emphysema/atel­
ectasis
Lat.—anterior bowing 
of right bronchus 
and trachea
±Anterior indenta­
tion above carina 
between esophagus 
and trachea
Tracheal displace­
ment to left
Compression of right 
main bronchus
Diagnostic
Detach and 
reanastomose to 
main pulmonary 
artery in front of 
trachea
AP, anteroposterior; L, left; Lat., lateral; R, right.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:88.
may be helpful as this may decrease the need for additional testing 
or antibiotic use.
Treatment for bacterial pneumonia is antibiotics directed at the 
suspected cause of pneumonia and supplemental care (oxygen, intra­
venous fluids) as indicated based on the patient’s clinical presentation. 
Hospitalization may be required for patients with hypoxia or toxic 
appearance, moderate to severe respiratory distress, or age younger 
than 6 months, or if there are concerns about observation or com­
pliance with therapy at home. Those with complicated pneumonia 
(pleural effusion, empyema, abscess, or extrapulmonary infection) 
or suspected/documented pathogen with increased virulence are also 
likely to require hospitalization and further interventions.
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or extrinsic allergic alveolitis, results 
from the inhalation of organic dust particles. Although numerous 
causes have been identified, the clinical features of the various types 
of hypersensitivity pneumonitis are similar and depend on the inten­
sity and frequency of exposure to the allergen; both acute and chronic 
forms have been described.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
73
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
TABLE 4.12  Etiologic Agents of Pneumonia Grouped by Age of the Patient
Age Group
Frequent Pathogens (in Order of Frequency)
Neonates (<3 wk)
Group B streptococcus, Escherichia coli, other gram-­negative bacilli, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae (type b,* non­
typable), herpes simplex
3 wk–3 mo
Respiratory syncytial virus, other respiratory viruses (rhinoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, adenovirus, coronavirus), 
S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypable); if patient is afebrile, consider Chlamydia trachomatis
4 mo–4 yr
Respiratory syncytial virus, other respiratory viruses (rhinoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, adenovirus, coronavirus), 
S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypable), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, group A streptococcus
≥5 yr
M. pneumoniae, S. pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypable), influenza viruses, adenovirus, 
coronaviruses, other respiratory viruses, Legionella pneumophila
*H. influenzae type b is uncommon with routine H. influenzae immunization.
From Kelly MS, Sandora TJ. Community acquired pneumonia. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediat­
rics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
A
B
Fig. 4.13  Radiographic findings characteristic of pneumococcal pneumonia in a 14-­year-­old boy with cough 
and fever. Posteroanterior (A) and lateral (B) chest radiographs reveal consolidation in the right lower lobe, 
strongly suggesting bacterial lobar pneumonia. (From Kelly MS, Sandora TJ. Community acquired pneumonia. 
In Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 428.3.)
A
B
Fig. 4.12  Double aortic arch in an infant aged 5 months. A, Anteroposterior view. The barium-­filled esophagus 
is constricted on both sides. B, Lateral view. The esophagus is displaced forward. The anterior arch was the 
smaller and was divided at surgery. (From Bernstein D. Other congenital heart and vascular malformations. 
In Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:2422, Fig. 459.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
74
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
In the acute form of the disease, the patient typically has fever, rig­
ors, cough, and dyspnea several hours after exposure. The symptoms 
usually resolve within 24 hours of the onset once the offending mate­
rial is removed. In the chronic or subacute forms of hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis, the affected individual may have exercise intolerance, 
anorexia, weight loss, and a productive cough. Diffuse crackles are the 
prominent finding on physical examination; the patient may be cya­
notic if gas exchange is significantly impaired. Digital clubbing is an 
unusual finding. In acute cases, inflammation of the alveoli and pul­
monary interstitium are common reactions, whereas the chronic form 
can result in interstitial fibrosis and noncaseating granulomas. Chronic 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis can insidiously lead to respiratory failure 
and cor pulmonale.
A number of laboratory studies may be helpful in confirming the 
diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Chest radiograph demon­
strates diffuse reticulonodular infiltrate. Pulmonary function studies 
(spirometry) characteristically show a restrictive defect, and the car­
bon monoxide diffusion capacity is reduced. During the acute phase of 
the disease, the patient may have a peripheral leukocytosis and eosin­
ophilia. Serologic studies looking for precipitating immunoglobulin G 
antibodies to specific antigens are useful in identifying the offending 
agent. However, these antibodies may be found in asymptomatic indi­
viduals exposed to the allergen, and thus their presence is not neces­
sarily correlated with severity of pulmonary disease. Percutaneous or 
intradermal tests may also be useful, particularly if an avian hypersen­
sitivity pneumonitis is suspected.
Removal of the specific organic dust from the patient’s environment 
is critical to treatment. Mild episodes of hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
may resolve spontaneously once the offending allergen is eliminated. 
Severe exacerbations often necessitate treatment with systemic cortico­
steroids; bronchodilators may be beneficial if the patient is experienc­
ing symptoms of bronchospasm. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis must 
be differentiated from other causes of interstitial or diffuse lung disease 
(Table 4.13).
Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is an immunologic 
disorder identified in patients with chronic lung disease, in which air­
way colonization (but not invasive infection) with Aspergillus fumigatus 
causes chronic antigen exposure and increased bronchial hyperactivity. 
This condition can lead to bronchiectasis, pulmonary fibrosis, and pro­
gressive respiratory insufficiency. Hypersensitivity to other fungal species 
that produces a clinical picture similar to that of ABPA has been reported.
It is important that the diagnosis of ABPA be made and that 
appropriate therapy with systemic corticosteroids be instituted, 
because this condition can result in irreversible lung damage. ABPA 
is characterized by fever, weight loss, wheezing, and productive cough 
yielding purulent or rust-­colored sputum. This condition should be 
TABLE 4.13  Classification of Interstitial Lung Disease (Pediatric Diffuse Lung Disease)*
I. Disorders More Prevalent in Infancy
	A.	 Diffuse developmental disorders
	
1.	Acinar dysplasia
	
2.	Congenital alveolar dysplasia
	
3.	Alveolar–capillary dysplasia with pulmonary vein misalignment
	B.	 Growth abnormalities
	
1.	Pulmonary hypoplasia
	
2.	Chronic neonatal lung disease
	C.	 Prematurity-­related chronic lung disease (bronchopulmonary dysplasia)
	D.	 Acquired chronic lung disease in term infants
	E.	 Structural pulmonary changes with chromosomal abnormalities
	
1.	Trisomy 21
	F.	 Others
	
1.	Associated with congenital heart disease in chromosomally normal 
children
	G.	 Specific conditions of undefined etiology
	
1.	Pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis
	
2.	Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy
	H.	 Surfactant dysfunction mutations and related disorders
	
1.	SPFTB pathologic genetic or gene variants—PAP and variant dominant 
histologic pattern
	
2.	SPFTC pathologic genetic or gene variants—CPI dominant histologic 
pattern; also DIP and NSIP
	
3.	ABCA3 pathologic genetic or gene variants—PAP variant dominant 
pattern; also CPI, DIP, NSIP
	
4.	Others with histology consistent with surfactant dysfunction disorder 
without a yet recognized genetic disorder
II. Disorders Not Specific to Infancy
	A.	 Disorders of the normal host
	
1.	Infectious and postinfectious processes
	
2.	Disorders related to environmental agents: hypersensitivity pneumo­
nia, toxic inhalation
	
3.	Aspiration syndromes
	
4.	Eosinophilic pneumonia
	B.	 Disorders related to systemic disease processes
	
1.	Immune-­related disorders
	
2.	Storage disease
	
3.	Sarcoidosis
	
4.	Langerhans cell histiocytosis
	
5.	Malignant infiltrates
	C.	 Disorders of the immunocompromised host
	
1.	Opportunistic infection
	
2.	Disorders related to therapeutic intervention
	
3.	Disorders related to transplantation and rejection syndromes
	
4.	Diffuse alveolar damage of unknown etiology
	D.	 Disorders masquerading as interstitial disease
	
1.	Arterial hypertensive vasculopathy
	
2.	Congestive vasculopathy, including venoocclusive disease
	
3.	Lymphatic disorders
	
4.	Congestive changes related to cardiac dysfunction
III. Unclassified
	A.	 Includes end-­stage disease, nondiagnostic biopsies, and those with 
inadequate material
*Many of these entities may present as child interstitial lung disease syndromes.
CPI, chronic pneumonitis of infancy; DIP, desquamative cell interstitial pneumonia; NSIP, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia; PAP, pulmonary alveolar 
proteinosis.
From Kurland G, Deterding RR, Hagood JS, et al. An official American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline: classification, evaluation, and 
management of childhood interstitial lung disease in infancy. Am J Resp Crit Care Med. 2013;188:376–394.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
75
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
considered in patients with chronic or atypical and progressive or fre­
quently relapsing lung diseases, such as asthma or cystic fibrosis, who 
have undergone clinical deterioration. In developing countries, it is 
often misdiagnosed as pulmonary tuberculosis. ABPA is associated 
with peripheral eosinophilia and markedly elevated serum IgE levels. 
Although these laboratory findings are not pathognomonic for this 
condition, the presence of a normal serum IgE makes the diagno­
sis of active disease unlikely. Affected individuals have evidence of 
hypersensitivity to A. fumigatus, and sputum evaluation may demon­
strate Aspergillus hyphal elements. Elevated levels of specific IgE and 
immunoglobulin G antibodies to A. fumigatus can be useful in estab­
lishing the diagnosis.
The typical chest radiographic findings include increased bron­
chopulmonary markings, opacification of the affected area, and local­
ized pulmonary consolidation. Linear radiolucencies and parallel 
markings radiating from the hilum (“tram lines”) caused by dilated, 
thickened bronchi may also be present. Chest CT may demonstrate 
bronchiectasis, mucoid impaction, and pleuropulmonary fibrosis. 
The treatment of choice is systemic corticosteroids, administered 
for weeks to months. Antifungal agents, such as itraconazole, may 
be effective in preventing exacerbations, but are not helpful in treat­
ing acute exacerbations; therefore, these may be a helpful adjunctive 
therapy.
Other Causes of Respiratory Distress
Aspiration of Oropharyngeal Contents
Central nervous system or neuromuscular disease in infants and chil­
dren can result in dysfunction of the swallowing mechanism, leading 
to repeated episodes of pulmonary aspiration. Aspiration is the most 
common cause of respiratory distress in such children and typically 
manifests with intractable wheezing, chronic airway inflammation, 
and recurrent pneumonias.
Video fluoroscopic swallow studies, in which barium mixed with 
foods of a variety of textures and consistencies are fed to a child under 
direct visualization and fluoroscopy, can be useful in making the 
diagnosis and establishing that the child has an abnormal swallowing 
mechanism. These studies can be helpful with regard to therapy and 
may determine the appropriate feeding techniques, food consistencies, 
and feeding volumes that are less likely to cause aspiration in a vulner­
able child.
Nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings may be necessary in 
children who do not respond to conservative management and who 
continue to have repeated episodes of aspiration. Nevertheless, the 
affected child can continue to have periodic aspiration of oropharyn­
geal secretions despite these interventions. A Nissan fundoplication 
or jejunostomy tube may be needed to reduce the incidence of gastric 
aspiration.
Gastroesophageal Reflux
Gastroesophageal reflux can be a primary cause of or an exacerbat­
ing factor in wheezing in infants and young children (see Chapter 15). 
Direct inhalation of stomach contents into the lungs can produce bron­
chospasm and a chemical pneumonitis. Gastroesophageal reflux with 
aspiration has also been implicated in cases of bacterial pneumonia, 
bronchiectasis, obliterative bronchiolitis, and lung abscesses. Tachy­
pnea, wheezing, and cough are the usual clinical findings, typically 
occurring within 1 hour of the aspiration event. The signs and symp­
toms of the pneumonitis, however, can be delayed.
Although pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents was once assumed 
to be the basis of reflux-­induced wheezing, reflex bronchoconstriction 
in response to esophageal acidification can also produce bronchospasm 
in some patients. Other respiratory symptoms associated with gastro­
esophageal reflux, such as stridor and obstructive apnea, can manifest 
as the result of reflex laryngospasm. Gastroesophageal reflux can also 
complicate and worsen underlying lung diseases, such as asthma or sub­
glottic stenosis, by provoking bronchospasm and potentiating airway or 
laryngeal inflammation and possibly bronchial hyperactivity.
Pneumothorax
A pneumothorax occurs when air leaks from the alveoli or airways 
into the pleural space. The most common cause of pneumothorax 
in children is chest wall trauma. Children with asthma or other 
underlying chest disease may also develop a pneumothorax. How­
ever, spontaneous pneumothorax can occur in otherwise healthy 
children with no antecedent illness or injury, most commonly ado­
lescent males or young adult men who are tall, thin, and athletic 
(Fig. 4.14). In patients with an acute pneumothorax with no history 
of trauma or asthma, the presence of Marfan or Ehlers-­Danlos syn­
dromes should be considered. Familial autosomal dominant pneu­
mothorax may be a forme fruste of Birt-­Hogg-­Dube syndrome due 
to pathologic variants in the FLCN gene. Clinical presentation usu­
ally includes acute onset of dyspnea and chest or shoulder pain. The 
physical examination reveals hyperresonance to percussion over 
the ipsilateral chest, with decreased breath sounds auscultated on 
the affected side. If the air dissects up through the mediastinum, it 
may escape into the subcutaneous tissues, producing subcutaneous 
emphysema. Diagnosis can be confirmed by chest radiograph. Pro­
gressive air leak without air escape can lead to a tension pneumo­
thorax. With increasing pressure, there is mediastinal shift, airway 
compression, and a decrease in cardiac output. Tension pneumo­
thorax can be life-­threatening if it is not recognized and treated 
rapidly. Small, spontaneous pneumothoraces will often resolve with 
supportive care and supplemental oxygen. The treatment of choice 
for a pneumothorax of greater than 20% volume is drainage with 
needle aspiration or with an indwelling chest tube.
Pneumomediastinum
Pneumomediastinum is the presence of air or other gas in the medias­
tinum and is characterized as either traumatic or spontaneous. Blunt 
or penetrating trauma to the chest or iatrogenic (i.e., during surgical 
procedures) can cause a traumatic pneumomediastinum. Spontaneous 
pneumomediastinum can be either primary, where there is no under­
lying airway/lung condition that would predispose an individual to an 
air leak, or secondary, where a predisposition is from an underlying 
airway/lung condition such as asthma or cystic fibrosis. In general, 
spontaneous pneumomediastinum is uncommon in pediatrics; how­
ever, it should be kept in the differential in children presenting with 
sudden chest pain or shortness of breath.
Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis is a multisystem disorder that involves the eccrine 
and mucous secretory glands. Inherited as an autosomal recessive 
trait, cystic fibrosis is the most common life-­shortening genetic 
disease in Caucasian children of northern European ancestry and 
is an important cause of chronic suppurative lung disease (see 
Chapter 3). Chronic infection and inflammation lead to the weak­
ening and destruction of the airway wall, which results in bron­
chiectasis, the abnormal dilatation of the subsegmental airways, 
and in pulmonary abscesses. The pulmonary deterioration char­
acteristic of cystic fibrosis is rather insidious and is characterized 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
76
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
by increasing airway obstruction over a period of years. How­
ever, some infants and children with cystic fibrosis can present 
in acute respiratory distress because of pneumonia, empyema, or 
pneumothorax.
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), another progressive lung disease 
(ciliopathy), occurs in approximately 1 in 16,000 children and is the 
result of ultrastructural abnormalities of the cilia (see Chapter 3). 
The absence of dynein arms (inner and outer) is the most common 
form of the syndrome, but other structural abnormalities can result 
in decreased or absent ciliary movement. Acquired ciliary dyskine­
sia may be caused by a number of different environmental and infec­
tious agents and is usually a temporary condition. The abnormal 
mucociliary clearance of endobronchial secretions causes a chronic 
bronchitis. Wheezing is a common clinical manifestation resulting 
from the obstruction of the airways by mucus. Neonatal tachypnea is 
the earliest manifestation. Repeated or persistent severe upper respi­
ratory tract infections, usually in the form of chronic pansinusitis or 
recurrent suppurative otitis media, are typical. Male sterility result­
ing from the impaired movement of spermatozoa is also present. 
Although Kartagener initially described several patients with situs 
inversus totalis, chronic sinusitis, and bronchiectasis, dextrocardia is 
present in only 50% of patients with this syndrome.
Arriving at a diagnosis necessitates a high index of suspicion and 
warrants pursuit in the child with recurrent wheezing, bronchitis, 
sinusitis, and otitis media. Findings on chest radiographs are gener­
ally nonspecific, and frequently demonstrate areas of pulmonary con­
solidation. Extensive atelectasis with significant respiratory distress 
has been described in neonates with this condition. Bronchiectasis 
is a late sequela of dyskinetic cilia syndrome. Functional assays for 
mucociliary clearance or examination of nasal or tracheal epithe­
lial cells for ultrastructural ciliary defects with electron microscopy 
is necessary to establish a diagnosis. Exhaled nitric oxide fraction 
(FeNO) is very low in PCD. Genetic testing is also available for the 
∼30 etiologic genes; nonetheless, ∼50% have no identifiable patho­
logic gene variant. Most cases are inherited as autosomal recessives; 
however, autosomal dominant and X-­linked inheritance have been 
reported.
Hemoptysis
Hemoptysis is the expectoration of blood or blood-­tinged sputum and 
is a rare finding in pediatric patients. First, one must differentiate if the 
blood is from the airway or an extrapulmonary source. Oral or naso­
pharyngeal causes as well as hematemesis from the gastrointestinal 
tract can present similarly. The most common cause of hemoptysis in 
pediatrics is lower respiratory infections like pneumonia or tracheo­
bronchitis—most of which cases are mild and self-­limiting. Foreign 
body aspiration where the bleeding is caused from mechanical injury 
to the airway is the second most likely etiology of hemoptysis in chil­
dren. Other potential etiologies that can lead to severe hemoptysis and 
respiratory compromise include vascular abnormalities, interstitial or 
granulomatous lung disease resulting in diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, 
or pulmonary hemosiderosis (Table 4.14). A CBC to help quantify the 
amount of blood lost as well as look for thrombocytopenia is important 
in these cases. Inflammatory markers and coagulation studies can also 
be useful. A plain chest radiograph is normal in 33–55% of patients, 
but can be helpful to evaluate for a foreign body or signs of infection. 
CT scanning with contrast angiography can assist in finding vascu­
lar abnormalities. Acute hemorrhage on CT scan will appear as focal 
consolidation with surrounding ground-­glass appearance. Ultimately, 
bronchoscopy is indicated if a foreign body is suspected, the etiology 
remains unknown, or respiratory compromise is occurring. Specifi­
cally, rigid bronchoscopy allows visualization of the airway as well as 
potential therapy for the etiology—injection of hemostatic agents, tam­
ponading of a lesion if necessary—while providing a way for mechan­
ical ventilation.
Electronic Cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use–Associated 
Lung Injury
The use of electronic cigarettes (e-­cigarettes), also known as vap­
ing, where a battery-­powered device produces aerosol for inhaling, 
has been associated with respiratory distress. These devices are 
commonly used for inhaling nicotine and/or tetrahydrocannabinol 
A
B
*
*
Fig. 4.14  Spontaneous pneumothorax in a tall, thin teenager presenting with tachypnea, tachycardia, and 
normal blood pressure. A, Frontal chest radiograph shows a large pneumothorax occupying the entire left 
hemithorax (asterisks), with a mild cardiomediastinal shift to the right. A bleb is noted along the surface of the 
collapsed left lung (arrow). B, Coronal CT image obtained 1 month after thoracostomy tube removal shows 
biapical blebs (arrows), which are larger on the right. The right apical bleb was not seen on the chest radio­
graphs. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:585, 
Fig. 60.6.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
77
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
(THC). The syndrome is named e-­cigarette, or vaping, use–asso­
ciated lung injury (EVALI). A diagnosis of EVALI should be sus­
pected in any patient with a history of using e-­cigarette or vaping 
products within the prior 3 months presenting with shortness of 
breath, cough, respiratory distress, myalgias, headaches, or gastro­
intestinal symptoms like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal 
pain (Table 4.15). Pulmonary infiltrates are usually noted on chest 
x-­ray but are universally noted on chest CT. The typical CT find­
ings include lower lobe “crazy paving” consisting of ground-­glass 
opacities (GGOs) combined with thickened interlobular septa and 
subpleural sparing. In addition, there may be ground-­glass nod­
ules and consolidation (Figs. 4.15 and 4.16). Although alternative 
diagnoses need to be excluded, it is important to note that influ­
enza, COVID-­19, or other respiratory infections cannot be read­
ily distinguished from EVALI by signs, symptoms, presentation, or 
imaging. The inhalation injury that has been seen associated with 
e-­cigarettes/vaping includes exacerbation of asthma, hypersensi­
tivity pneumonitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, lipoid pneumonia, 
and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. The severity of the illness ranges 
from minimal or no respiratory support to the need for invasive 
mechanical ventilation, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO), and death. Vitamin E acetate, an additive in some of the 
THC-­containing e-­cigarette/vaping products, is strongly linked 
to EVALI. Systemic glucocorticoids provide patients with clinical 
improvement. Treating any concurrent or possible other infections, 
connecting patients with services for cessation of e-­cigarette/vaping 
products, and close follow-­up are also necessary. Figure 4.17 shows 
the clinical algorithm for patients hospitalized with suspected 
EVALI.
COVID-­19
Severe acute respiratory syndrome–associated coronavirus 2 
(SARS-­CoV-­2) produces a broad spectrum of presentations and 
manifestations within the COVID-­19 (coronavirus disease 2019) 
pandemic. Many pediatric patients are asymptomatic or minimally 
symptomatic, while others develop various degrees of pulmonary 
symptoms: mild-­moderate (mild pneumonia), severe (dyspnea, 
hypoxia, or >50% lung involvement on imaging), and critical 
(respiratory failure, shock, or multiorgan system dysfunction) 
often in the context of the multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
in children (MIS-­C) (Table 4.16) (see Chapter 53). The case defi­
nition for other presentations of COVID-­19 is noted in Table 4.17. 
The presentation may depend on the stage of the illness (Fig. 4.18). 
Early systemic features include fever, cough, headache, myalgias, 
and gastrointestinal manifestations (abdominal pain, emesis, and 
diarrhea). In patients with a pulmonary presentation, COVID-­19 
pneumonia presents with cough, dyspnea, cyanosis, and fever. 
Chest x-­rays are usually abnormal, and CT imaging demonstrates 
the “crazy paving” pattern predominantly with bilateral multifo­
cal GGOs or a combination of GGOs with consolidation usually 
of the lower lobes with a subpleural predominance (Figs. 4.19 and 
4.20). The differential diagnosis of COVID-­19 pneumonia includes 
other causes of acute respiratory distress syndrome, pneumocys­
tis or adenovirus pneumonia, EVALI, hypersensitivity pneumonia, 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Lemierre disease, and acute or 
chronic interstitial lung disease in childhood. The diagnosis is 
confirmed by nasopharyngeal PCR viral testing (usually in the 
acute COVID pneumonia syndrome) or by immunoglobulin M 
and immunoglobulin G antibodies to COVID-­19 (usually the later 
inflammatory MIS-­C).
NONPULMONARY CAUSES OF RESPIRATORY 
DISTRESS
Cardiac
Cardiac disease is an important and common nonpulmonary cause 
of respiratory distress. Increased work of breathing and respira­
tory distress most commonly occur in cardiac diseases caused by 
large left-­to-­right shunts, dysfunction of the systemic ventricle, 
and vascular lesions that obstruct the airway (see Chapter 9). Car­
diac failure from any cause is often manifested as respiratory dis­
tress. Infants with congenital heart defects that produce a large 
left-­to-­right shunt that results in pulmonary vascular engorge­
ment, edema formation, and reduced lung compliance demon­
strate tachypnea, dyspnea, and grunting. Wheezing or “cardiac 
asthma” can occur when there is compression of intrathoracic air­
ways by vascular engorgement and interstitial edema. With most 
TABLE 4.14  Etiology of Pulmonary 
Hemorrhage (Hemoptysis)
Focal Hemorrhage
Bronchitis and bronchiectasis (especially cystic fibrosis related)
Infection (acute or chronic), pneumonia, abscess
Tuberculosis
Trauma
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (with or without hereditary hemor­
rhagic telangiectasia)
Foreign body (chronic)
Neoplasm including hemangioma
Pulmonary embolus with or without infarction
Bronchogenic cysts
Diffuse Hemorrhage
Idiopathic of infancy
Congenital heart disease (including pulmonary hypertension, venoocclusive 
disease, congestive heart failure)
Prematurity
Cow’s milk hyperreactivity (Heiner syndrome)
Goodpasture syndrome
Collagen vascular diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis)
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura and vasculitic disorders
Granulomatous disease (granulomatosis with polyangiitis)
Celiac disease
Coagulopathy (congenital or acquired)
Malignancy
Immunodeficiency
Exogenous toxins, especially inhaled
Hyperammonemia
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Tuberous sclerosis
Lymphangiomyomatosis or lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Physical injury or abuse
Catamenial
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2313, 
Table 436.4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
78
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
TABLE 4.15  CDC Surveillance Case Definitions* for Severe Pulmonary Disease Associated with 
E-­cigarette Use (August 30, 2019)
Case Classification
Criteria
Confirmed
Using an e-­cigarette (“vaping”) or dabbing† during the 90 days before symptom onset
AND
Pulmonary infiltrate, such as opacities on plain film chest radiograph or ground-­glass opacities on chest computed tomography
AND
Absence of pulmonary infection on initial work-­up: Minimum criteria include negative respiratory viral panel influenza polymerase 
chain reaction or rapid test if local epidemiology supports testing. All other clinically indicated respiratory infectious disease test­
ing (e.g., urine antigen for Streptococcus pneumoniae and Legionella, sputum culture if productive cough, bronchoalveolar lavage 
culture if done, blood culture, HIV-­related opportunistic respiratory infections if appropriate) must be negative
AND
No evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses (e.g., cardiac, rheumatologic, or neoplastic process)
Probable
Using an e-­cigarette (“vaping”) or dabbing† in 90 days before symptom onset
AND
Pulmonary infiltrate, such as opacities on plain film chest radiograph or ground-­glass opacities on chest computed tomography
AND
Infection identified via culture or polymerase chain reaction, but clinical team§ believes this is not the sole cause of the underlying 
respiratory disease process OR minimum criteria to rule out pulmonary infection not met (testing not performed) and clinical 
team* believes this is not the sole cause of the underlying respiratory disease process
.
AND
No evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses (e.g., cardiac, rheumatologic, or neoplastic process)
*These surveillance case definitions are meant for surveillance and not clinical diagnosis; they are subject to change and will be updated as additional 
information becomes available if needed.
†Using an electronic device (e.g., electronic nicotine delivery system [ENDS], electronic cigarette [e-­cigarette], vaporizer, vape[s], vape pen, dab pen, 
or other device) or dabbing to inhale substances (e.g., nicotine, marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabinol concentrates, cannabinoids, 
synthetic cannabinoids, flavorings, or other substances).
§Clinical team caring for the patient.
From Schier JG, Meiman JG, Layden J, et al. Severe pulmonary disease associated with electronic-­cigarette–product use — interim guidance. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68:787–790. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6836e2external icon
congenital heart defects with left-­to-­right shunts, an abnormal 
heart murmur and cardiomegaly are prominent clues to the diag­
nosis. Acute myocarditis, usually of viral etiology, can manifest 
with tachypnea, dyspnea, grunting, and diaphoresis. The physical 
examination reveals tachycardia and decreased heart sounds, and 
chest radiography shows an enlarged heart. Cardiomyopathy may 
be congenital, may have a metabolic or toxic cause, may be famil­
ial, or may be idiopathic. Other causes of cardiac failure, such 
as severe hypertension, renal failure, and severe anemia, should 
also be sought. Systemic ventricular failure caused by obstructing 
lesions, such as aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, or mitral 
stenosis, also causes increased pulmonary vascular engorge­
ment and edema, which results in the same symptoms as those 
for a large left-­to-­right shunt. Depending on the severity of the 
left ventricular outflow obstruction, systemic blood flow may be 
decreased, resulting in poor perfusion and metabolic acidosis. If 
blood flow into the systemic ventricle from the pulmonary veins or 
left atrium is decreased or obstructed, as in total anomalous pul­
monary venous return or mitral stenosis, then severe pulmonary 
edema, hypoxemia, and respiratory distress ensue. Many of these 
lesions manifest early in infancy. Tachypnea, wheezing, cyanosis, 
and metabolic acidosis are typical presenting signs. Accurate diag­
nosis depends on echocardiography; cardiac catheterization may 
be needed in complex cases.
Neurologic
Children with certain primary neurologic disorders, such as 
increased intracranial pressure or neuromyopathic weakness, may 
present in respiratory distress. Common symptoms include irregular 
respirations, hypoventilation, and hyperventilation. These symptoms, 
accompanied by an altered mental status, should prompt an evalua­
tion of the central nervous system for problems such as meningitis, 
cerebritis or encephalitis, intracranial hemorrhage, mass lesion, or 
toxic ingestion.
Other
Metabolic derangement that results in acidosis can produce tachypnea 
and possible dyspnea. Common causes of acidosis include diabetic 
ketoacidosis, sepsis, and ingestions (such as aspirin). The presence of 
multisystem involvement in addition to respiratory distress should lead 
to arterial blood gas determination, urinalysis, and possibly a toxicol­
ogy screen.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
79
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
A
C
D
B
Fig. 4.16  A–B, Axial and coronal images of a high-resolution CT chest scan significant for diffuse mid- and 
lower zone predominant airspace abnormalities comprising ground-glass opacities and consolidation. C, 
Transbronchial biopsy with organizing pneumonia, characterized by numerous airspace plugs of fibromyxoid 
tissue (arrows) (hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification ×150). D, Scant acute inflammatory cells 
and associated pulmonary macrophages (Papanicolaou stain, original magnification 60×). (From MacMurdo 
M, Lin C, Saeedan MB, et al. e-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury: Clinical, Radiologic, 
and Pathologic Findings of 15 Cases. Chest. 2020;157:e181–e187. Fig. 1 A-D, Case 4.)
A
B
Fig. 4.15  A, Chest x-ray of a patient with E-cigarette or Vaping-product associated lung injury showing significant bilateral alveolar opacities. B, CT 
scans in axial view showing bilateral ground-glass opacities and dependent consolidations with a subpleural sparing pattern. (From Cherian SV, Kumar 
A, Estrada-Y-Martin RM. E-Cigarette or Vaping Product-Associated Lung Injury: A Review. Am J Med. 2020;133:657–663. Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Child admitted with respiratory distress, dyspnea, cough, chest pain, or GI symptoms (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain)
History of e-cigarette use within past 90 daysa
CXR and/or chest CT scan findings: Bilateral diffuse ground-glass opacities (CXR is less sensitive); findings often out of proportion to examination
Suspicion of EVALI
Consult pulmonology and medical toxicology
Concern for infection (may require discussion with subspecialists)
Yes
No
Yes
No
Treat infection first
Respiratory symptoms improving as
expected (team discussion)
Continue standard of care
• Complete blood cell count with differential
• Sputum culture (can order induced sputum in children aged ≥13 years old or endotracheal tube culture if intubated
• Respiratory viral panel
• HIV
• Blood culture
• High-resolution chest CT scan without contrast or CT angiography of the chest if pulmonary embolus is suspected
  (e.g., teenager is on oral contraception)
• Electrolytes, liver function tests, serum urea nitrogen, creatinine
• Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and/or C-reactive protein
• Urine drug screen (especially important if vaping use > 3 months, as elicited on history)
• Consider flexible bronchoscopy with BAL, viral and bacterial culture, fungal culture, cytology
• Consider rheumatologic work-up
• PFTs: Spirometry, lung volumes (TLC), DLCO
• 6MWT when patient is stable
1. Treatment with systemic glucocorticoidsb
2. PFTs before and after steroids if possible: Spirometry, TLC, DLCO, 6MWT when
    patient is stable
3. Consult psychiatry if concerns for chemical dependency
4. Consult child life and social work
5. Discharge with steroid taper per pulmonology (longer taper if bronchiolitis obliterans
    are seen on transbronchial biopsy specimen, if biopsy was done)
6. Discharge with primary care visit within 1–2 days and pulmonology clinic
    appointment within 2 weeks
7. Consider referral to teenager recovery program (addiction treatment program)
Glucocorticoid treatment considerationsb
• High dose (1 g IV daily for 3 doses): Moderate-severe disease on CT scan, patients in
  the ICU, lack of improvement with lower dose
• Moderate dose (500 mg IV daily for 3 doses): moderate disease on CT scan,
  mild hypoxemia not improving, mild PFT abnormalities, lack of improvement
  with lower dose
• Low dose (60–300 mg/day IV for 3–5 days); mild disease on CT scan, mild or no
  hypoxemia, normal PFT and/or normal 6MWT results, concern for coinfection
• Oral dose (30–40 mg twice daily for 5 days): mild disease on CT scan, no hypoxemia,
  normal PFT results, minimal respiratory symptoms, concern for coinfection,
  systemic hypertension
Fig. 4.17  Clinical algorithm for pediatric patients hospitalized for suspected electronic cigarette or vaping prod­
uct use–associated lung injury (EVALI). The algorithm includes U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC)-­based diagnostic criteria, recommended consultations, laboratory work-­up and imaging, and recommended 
treatment and follow-­up.a May need to speak with peers and family, especially for patients who are intubated. 
bGlucocorticoid dosage considerations. 6MWT, 6-­minute walk test; CXR, chest radiography; DLCO, diffusing 
capacity for carbon monoxide; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenously; PFT, pulmonary function test; TLC, total 
lung capacity. (From Rao DR, Maple KL, Dettori A, et al. Clinical features of e-­cigarette, or vaping, product use-­
associated lung injury in teenagers. Pediatrics. 2020;146[1]:e20194104. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-­4104.)
TABLE 4.16  Case Definition for Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-­C)
 • An individual aged <21 yr presenting with fever,* laboratory evidence of inflammation,† and evidence of clinically severe illness requiring hospitalization, with 
multisystem (two or more) organ involvement (cardiac, renal, respiratory, hematologic, gastrointestinal, dermatologic, or neurologic); AND
 • No alternative plausible diagnoses; AND
 • Positive for current or recent SARS-­CoV-­2 infection by RT-­PCR, serology, or antigen test; or COVID-­19 exposure within the 4 wk prior to the onset of symptoms
*Fever >38.0°C for ≥24 hr, or report of subjective fever lasting ≥24 hr.
†Including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: an elevated C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, fibrinogen, procalcitonin, 
d-­dimer, ferritin, lactic acid dehydrogenase, or interleukin 6, elevated neutrophils, reduced lymphocytes, and low albumin.
RT-­PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2020/han00432.asp).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 4.17  Clinical Criteria for COVID-­19
In the absence of a more likely diagnosis:
 • At least two of the following symptoms:
 • Fever (measured or subjective)
 • Chills
 • Rigors
 • Myalgia
 • Headache
 • Sore throat
 • Nausea or vomiting
 • Diarrhea
 • Fatigue
 • Congestion or runny nose
OR
 • Any one of the following symptoms:
 • Cough
 • Shortness of breath
 • Difficulty breathing
 • New olfactory disorder
 • New taste disorder
OR
 • Severe respiratory illness with at least one of the following:
 • Clinical or radiographic evidence of pneumonia
 • Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Laboratory Criteria
Laboratory evidence using a method approved or authorized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or designated authority:
Confirmatory* laboratory evidence:
 • Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 ribonucleic acid (SARS-­CoV-­2 RNA) in a clinical or an autopsy specimen using a molecular amplifi­
cation test
Presumptive* laboratory evidence:
 • Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 by antigen test in a respiratory specimen
Supportive* laboratory evidence:
 • Detection of specific antibody in serum, plasma, or whole blood
 • Detection of specific antigen by immunocytochemistry in an autopsy specimen
Epidemiologic Linkage
One or more of the following exposures in the prior 14 days:
 • Close contact† with a confirmed or probable case of COVID-­19 disease
 • Member of a risk cohort as defined by public health authorities during an outbreak
Criteria to Distinguish a New Case from an Existing Case
A repeat positive test for SARS-­CoV-­2 RNA using a molecular amplification detection test within 3 mo of the initial report should not be enumerated as a new case for surveil­
lance purposes. To date, there has been minimal evidence of reinfection among persons with a prior confirmed COVID-­19 infection and growing evidence that repeat positive 
RNA tests do not correlate with active infection when viral culture is performed. Similarly, the experience with other coronaviruses is that reinfection is rare within the first 
year. NOTE: The time period of 3 mo will be extended further when more data become available to show that risk of reinfection remains low within 1 yr of the initial report.
Case Classification
Suspect
 • Meets supportive laboratory evidence‡ with no prior history of being a confirmed or probable case.
Probable
 • Meets clinical criteria AND epidemiologic linkage with no confirmatory laboratory testing performed for SARS-­CoV-­2
 • Meets presumptive laboratory evidence
 • Meets vital records criteria with no confirmatory laboratory evidence for SARS-­CoV-­2
Confirmed
 • Meets confirmatory laboratory evidence
Other Criteria
Vital Records Criteria
 • A death certificate that lists COVID-­19 disease or SARS-­CoV-­2 as an underlying cause of death or a significant condition contributing to death.
*The terms confirmatory, presumptive, and supportive are categorical labels used here to standardize case classifications for public health surveil­
lance. The terms should not be used to interpret the utility or validity of any laboratory test methodology.
†Close contact is generally defined as being within 6 feet for at least 15 min. However, it depends on the exposure level and setting; for example, in 
the setting of an aerosol-generating procedure in health care settings without proper personal protective equipment (PPE), this may be defined as 
any duration. Data are insufficient to precisely define the duration of exposure that constitutes prolonged exposure and thus a close contact.
‡For suspect cases (positive serology only), jurisdictions may opt to place them in a registry for other epidemiologic analyses or investigate to deter­
mine probable or confirmed status.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19): 2020 interim case definition. Approved August 5, 2020. 
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/coronavirus-­disease-­2019-­covid-­19/case-­definition/2020/08/05/
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
82
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Stage I
(early infection)
Viral response phase
Host inflammatory response phase
Severity of illness
Stage II
(pulmonary phase)
IIA
IIB
Mild constitutional symptoms
Fever >99.6˚F
Dry cough
Lymphopenia
Remdesivir
Reduce immunosuppression
(avoid excess steroids)
Careful use of corticosteroids; statins; human immunoglobulin,
IL-1/IL-2/IL-6/JAK inhibitors/GM-CSF inhibitors
Shortness of breath without
(IIA) and with hypoxia (IIB)
(PaO2/FiO2 ≤300 mm Hg)
Abnormal chest imaging
Transaminitis
Low-normal procalcitonin
ARDS
SIRS/shock
Cardiac failure
Elevated inflammatory markers
(CRP, LDH, IL-6, D-dimer, ferritin)
Troponin, NT-proBNP elevation
Clinical
symptoms
Clinical signs
Potential
therapies
Time course
Stage III
(hyperinflammation phase)
Fig. 4.18  Staging of acute COVID-­19 infection. Classification of COVID-­19 disease states and potential ther­
apeutic targets. The figure illustrates three escalating phases of COVID-­19 disease progression, with asso­
ciated signs, symptoms, and potential phase-­specific therapies. ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; 
JAK, Janus kinase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NT-­proBNP, N-­terminal pro B-­type natriuretic peptide; SIRS, 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome; GM-­CSF, granulocyte macrophage colony-­stimulating factor. 
(Modified from Siddiqi HK, Mehra MR. COVID-­19 illness in native and immunosuppressed states: a clinical-­
therapeutic staging proposal. J Heart Lung Transpl. 2020;39[5]:405–407 [Fig. 1, p. 406].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
83
CHAPTER 4  Respiratory Distress
A
H
I
G
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 4.19  Chest radiography and chest CT findings of children with COVID-19 in conjunction with symptom and time interval between imaging studies. (A 
and B) Imaging findings of a 13-year-old female patient with COVID-19. A, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 13-year-old female patient presented with 
fever for 2 days. Chest radiography and chest CT images were obtained on the same day. The chest radiography was normal. B, Chest CT image in the axial 
plan revealed a single, peripheral located, ground-glass opacity (GGO) at the posterobasal segment of the right lower lobe. The opacity was obscured with 
the right liver lobe and diaphragm on chest radiography. (C and D) Imaging findings of a 10-year-old male patient with COVID-19. C, Posteroanterior chest 
radiograph of a 10-year-old male patient presented with cough and fever for 2 days. Chest radiography and chest CT images were obtained on the same 
day. The chest radiography revealed peripheral GGO (arrow) at the basal segments of the right liver lobe. D, Axial section chest CT examination revealed 
bronchovascular distributed GGOs in a 10-year-old male patient at the periphery of the basal segments of the right lower lobe. (E and F) Imaging findings 
of a 13-year-old male patient with COVID-19. E, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 13-year-old male patient presented with cough and fever for 2 days. 
Chest radiography and chest CT images were obtained on the same day. The chest radiography was interpreted as normal. F, Axial chest CT image of the 
13-year-old male patient without contrast demonstrates bilateral, multifocal, peripheral, and perivascular distributed millimetric nodular-shaped GGOs. The 
opacities were not detected on chest radiography due to the smaller size and lower density. (G and H) Imaging findings of a 16-year-old female patient with 
COVID-19. G, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of the 16-year-old female patient presented with cough and fever for 3 days. Chest radiography and chest 
CT images were obtained on the same day. The chest radiography demonstrates paramediastinal GGO at the right upper lobe (red frame). H, Axial chest CT 
image of the 16-year-old female patient without contrast demonstrates peripherally distributed GGO at the right upper lobe with an interlobular interstitial 
thickening. I, Anteroposterior chest radiography of an intubated 15-year-old female patient who presented with diarrhea and hypotension on the 4th day of 
fever demonstrates diffusely distributed GGOs in the right lung in addition to left perihilar and basilar opacities. Right-sided pleural effusion (arrows) was 
also depicted. The patient was diagnosed with multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with COVID-19, and she was the only patient that resulted 
in COVID-19–related pediatric death in our clinic. Laboratory examinations revealed lymphopenia (6.64 × 10 9/L), thrombocytopenia (94 × 10 9/L), elevated 
creatinine (1.24 mg/dL), troponin-T (37.45 pg/mL), PRO-BNP (5578 pg/mL), bilirubin (0.48 mg/dL), alanine transaminase (43.8 (U/L), and C-reactive protein 
(377 mg/L). (From Bayramoglu Z, Canıpek E, Comert RG, et al. Imaging Features of Pediatric COVID-19 on Chest Radiography and Chest CT: A Retrospective, 
Single-Center Study. Acad Radiol. 2021;28:18–27. Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
84
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
A
B
Fig. 4.20  Axial (A) and coronal (B) contrast enhanced chest CT in a 16-year-old female with cough, fever, and 
tachycardia, who was COVID-19 positive. The images show geographic ground-glass opacities with septal 
thickening (crazy paving) in the left lower lobe, with increased density near the diaphragm. (From Rom­
berg EK, Menashe SJ, Kronman MP, et al. Pediatric radiologic manifestations of COVID-19. Clin Imaging. 
2021;75:165–170. Fig. 6.)
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Respiratory distress may be a result of disorders of the extratho­
racic or intrathoracic airways (intrinsic or extrinsic compression-­
obstruction), alveoli, pulmonary vasculature, pleural spaces, or 
thorax. The distress may be secondary to pulmonary, cardiovascular, 
hematologic, or central nervous system diseases. The most important 
aspect of the evaluation of a child with respiratory distress is obser­
vation of the child’s breathing pattern and a brief, directed history 
and physical examination. Laboratory testing, imaging studies and/or 
endoscopy may be required. Once the cause is identified, treatment 
should be started quickly to avoid progression to respiratory failure.
Red flags for impending respiratory failure include cyanosis, dys­
pnea as well as sudden onset of distress (epiglottitis, foreign body aspi­
ration), hemoptysis, severe retractions, lethargy, a sitting up–leaning 
forward posture, dysphagia, drooling, and aphonia. It is imperative 
to identify the symptoms of impending respiratory failure (decreased 
mental status, cyanosis) and not delay treatment with unnecessary 
clinical or radiologic studies. It is also important not to miss a foreign 
body, which with time may produce chronic respiratory disease that is 
often confused with pneumonia or asthma.
Signs of a more chronic process include lack of resolution with 
normal therapy, chronicity of symptoms, positive family history, dig­
ital clubbing, weight loss, and/or failure to thrive. These signs should 
prompt further work-­up and consultation with a pulmonary specialist 
as needed. Asthma will rarely cause digital clubbing, so its presence 
should raise concern for another underlying primary lung disease 
process.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
84.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl 
J Med. 2014;370:744–751.
Davis JL, Murray JF. History and physical examination. In: Broaddus VC, 
Mason RJ, Ernst JD, et al., eds. Murray and Nadel’s Textbook of Respiratory 
Medicine. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders-­Elsevier; 2016:263–277.e2.
Meeks M, Bush A. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). Pediatr Pulmonol. 
2000;29:307–316.
Ryu J, Hagood JS, Haddad GG. Diagnostic approach to respiratory disease. In: 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, et al., eds. Nelson’s Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2150–2161.
Viteri SD, Sampayo EM. Respiratory distress. In: Florin TA, Ludwig S, eds. 
Netter’s Pediatrics. Philadelphia: Elsevier-­Saunders; 2011:17–23.
Zarogoulidis P, Kioumis I, Pitsiou G, et al. Pneumothorax: from definition to 
diagnosis and treatment. J Thorac Dis. 2014;6:S372–S376.
Wheezing
Bajantri B, Venkatram S, Diaz-­Fuentes G. Mycoplasma pneumoniae: a poten­
tially severe infection. J Clin Med Res. 2018;(7):535–544.
Bakker DA, Berger RM, Witsenburg M, et al. Vascular rings: a rare cause of 
common respiratory symptoms. Acta Pediatr. 1999;88:947–952.
Cave AJ, Atkinson LL. Asthma in preschool children: a review of diagnostic 
challenges. J Am Board Fam Med. 2014;27:538–548.
Ducharme FM, Tse SM, Chauhan B. Diagnosis, management, and prognosis of 
preschool wheeze. Lancet. 2014;383:1593–1604.
Esposito S, Blasi F, Arosio C, et al. Importance of acute Mycoplasma pneumoni­
ae and Chlamydia pneumoniae infections in children with wheezing. Eur 
Respir J. 2000;16:1142–1146.
Gardiner SJ, Gavranich JB, Chang AB. Antibiotics for community-­acquired 
lower respiratory tract infections secondary to Mycoplasma pneumoniae in 
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004875.
Global Initiative for Asthma. GINA report: global strategy for asthma man­
agement and prevention; 2020. Available online at: https://ginasthma.org/
gina-­reports/.
Johnson JD, Theurer WM. A stepwise approach to the interpretation of pulmo­
nary function tests. Am Fam Physician. 2014;89:359–366.
NHLBI/National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel 
Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. NIH 
Publication; 2007.
Principi N, Esposito S, Blasi F, et al. Role of Mycoplasma pneumoniae and 
Chlamydia pneumoniae in children with community-­acquired lower respi­
ratory tract infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32:1281–1289.
Ralston SL, Lierthal AS, Messiner HC, et al. The diagnosis, management, and 
prevention of bronchiolitis. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e1474–e1502.
Tesse R, Borrelli G, Mongelli G, et al. Treating pediatric asthma according to 
guidelines. Front Pediatr. 2018;6:1–7.
Wagner T. Bronchiolitis. Pediatr Rev. 2009;30:386–395. https://www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/health-­topics/all-­publications-­and-­resources/2020-­focused-­updates-­
asthma-­management-­guidelines.
Stridor
Ahmad SM, Soliman AM. Congenital anomalies of the larynx. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am. 2007;40:177–191.
Alcaide ML, Bisno AL. Pharyngitis and epiglottitis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 
2007;21:449–469.
D’Souza JN, Schroeder JW. Congenital anomalies of the larynx, trachea, and 
bronchi. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, et al., eds. Nelson’s Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2207–2211.
Friedman ER, Robson CD, Hudgins PA. Pediatric airway disease. In: Som PM, 
Curtin HD, eds. Head and Neck Imaging. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-­Elsevier; 
2011:1811–1903.
Halpin LJ, Anderson CA, Corriette N. Stridor in children. BMJ. 
2010;340:c2193.
Ida JB, Thompson DM. Pediatric stridor. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 
2014;47:795–819.
Rodrigues KK, Roosevelt GE. Acute inflammatory upper airway obstruction 
(croup, epiglottitis, laryngitis, and bacterial tracheitis). In: Kliegman RM, 
St. Geme JW, et al., eds. Nelson’s Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2020:2202–2206.
Valika T, Schroeder JW. Laryngotracheal stenosis and subglottic stenosis. In: 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, et al., eds. Nelson’s Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2213.
Cough
Agrawal R, Chakabarti A, Shah A, et al. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergil­
losis: review of literature and proposal of new diagnostic and classification 
criteria. Clin Exp Allergy. 2013;43:850–873.
Bradley JS, Byington CL, Shah SS, et al. Executive summary: the management 
of community acquired pneumonia in infants and children older than 3 
months: clinical practice guidelines by the Pediatric Infectious Disease 
Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 
2011;53:617–630.
Gereige RS, Laufer PM. Pneumonia. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34:438–456.
Howenstine MS, Eigen H. Current concepts on interstitial lung disease in 
children. Curr Opin Pediatr. 1999;11:200–204.
Hu X, Lee JS, Pianosis PT, et al. Aspiration related pulmonary syndromes. 
Chest. 2015;147:815–823.
Kelly MS, Sandora TJ. Community acquired pneumonia. In: Kliegman RM, St. 
Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al. (eds): Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
Kurland G, Deterding RR, Hagood JS, et al. An official American Thoracic 
Society clinical practice guideline: classification, evaluation, and manage­
ment of childhood interstitial lung disease in infancy. Am J Resp Crit Care 
Med. 2013;188:376–394.
Sullivan JS, Sundaram SS. Gastroesophageal reflux. Pediatr Rev. 2012;33:243–
254.
Wark PA, Gibson PG. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis: new concepts 
of pathogenesis and treatment. Respirology. 2001;6:1–7.
Other Causes
Ahmed M, Advani S, Moreira A, et al. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children: a systematic review. EClinical Medicine. 2020;26:100527.
Artunduaga M, Rao D, Friedman J, et al. Pediatric chest radiographic and CT 
findings of electronic cigarette or vaping product use – associated lung 
injury (EVALI). Radiology. 2020;295:430–438.
Batra PS, Holinger LD. Etiology and management of pediatric hemoptysis. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2001;127(4):377–382.
Bayramoglu Z, Canipek E, Comert RG, et al. Imaging features of pediatric 
COVID-­19 on chest radiography and chest CT: a retrospective, single-­
center study. Acad Radiol. 2021;28(1):18–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
acra.2020.10.002. Epub 2020 Oct 5.
Cai J, Xu J, Lin D, et al. A case series of children with 2019 novel corona­
virus infection: clinical and epidemiological features. Clin Infect Dis. 
2020;71(6):1547–1551.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-­19) 2020 interim case definition, approved August 5, 2020. 
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/coronavirus-­disease-­2019-­
covid-­19/case-­definition/2020/08/05/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Electronic cigarettes. www.
cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-­cigarettes/severe-­lung-­disease/
healthcare-­providers/index.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Information for healthcare 
providers about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) 
partner updates. https://www.cdc.gov/mis-­c/hcp/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim clinical guidance for 
management of patients with confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-­19). 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-­ncov/hcp/clinical-­guidance-­
management-­patients.html.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
84.e2
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated with coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-­19). https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2020/han00432.asp.
Chao JY, Derespina KR, Herold BC, et al. Clinical characteristics and 
outcomes of hospitalized and critically ill children and adolescents with 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19) at a tertiary care medical center in 
New York City. J Pediatr. 2020;223:14–19.e2.
Cui X, Zhang T, Zheng J, et al. Children with coronavirus disease 2019: a 
review of demographic, clinical, laboratory and imaging features in 2,597 
pediatric patients. J Med Virol. 2020;92(9):1501–1510.
DeBiasi RL, Song X, Delaney M, et al. Severe COVID-­19 in children and 
young adults in the Washington, DC metropolitan region. J Pediatr. 
2020;223:199–203.e1.
Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of 2,143 pediatric 
patients with 2019 coronavirus disease in China. Pediatrics. 2020.
FDA website: https://www.fda.gov/news-­events/press-­announcements/
coronavirus-­covid-­19-­update-­fda-­authorizes-­drug-­combination-­
treatment-­covid-­19.
FDA website: https://www.fda.gov/news-­events/press-­announcements/
coronavirus-­covid-­19-­update-­fda-­authorizes-­monoclonal-­antibody-­
treatment-­covid-­19.
Gonsalves CL, Zhu JW, Kam AJ. Diagnosis and acute management of E-­
cigarette or vaping product use-­associated lung injury in the pediatric 
population: a systematic review. J Peds. 2021;228:260–270.
Hoang A, Chorath K, Moreira A, et al. COVID-­19 in 7780 pediatric patients: a 
systematic review. EClinical Medicine. 2020;24:100433.
Jiang L, Tang K, Levin M, et al. COVID-­19 and multisystem inflammatory syn­
drome in children and adolescents. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;20:e276–e288.
Katal S, Johnston SK, Johnston JH, et al. Imaging findings of SARS-­CoV-­2 
infection in pediatrics: a systematic review of coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-­19) in 850 patients. Acad Radiol. 2020;27:1608–1621.
Kazachkov M, Pirzada. Diagnosis of EVALI in the COVID-­19 era. Lancet 
Respir Med. 2020;8(12):1169–1170.
Kim L, Whitaker M, O’Halloran A, et al. Hospitalization rates and character­
istics of children aged <18 years hospitalized with laboratory-­confirmed 
COVID-­19, COVID-­NET, 14 states, March 1-­July 25, 2020. MMWR (Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep). 2020;69(32):1081–1088.
Kligerman S, Raptis C, Larsen B, et al. Radiologic, pathologic, clinical, and 
physiologic findings of electronic cigarette or vaping product use-­
associated lung injury (EVALO): evolving knowledge and remaining 
questions. Radiology. 2020;294:491–505.
Laws RL, Chancey RJ, Rabold EM, et al. Symptoms and transmission of 
SARS-­CoV-­2 among children – Utah and Wisconsin, March-­May 2020. 
Pediatrics. 2021;147(1):e2020027628.
Oualha M, Bendavid M, Berteloot L, et al. Severe and fatal forms of COVID-­19 
in children. Arch de Pediatrie. 2020;27:235–238.
Rao DR, et al. Clinical features of E-­cigarette, or vaping, product use-­
associated lung injury in teenagers. Pediatrics. 2020;146:e20194104.
Reddy A, et al. Characterizing e-­cigarette vaping-­associated lung injury in the 
pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2021;56(1):162–170.
Schier JG, Meiman JG, Layden J, et al. Severe pulmonary disease associated 
with electronic-­cigarette–product use — interim guidance. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68:787–790. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6836e2external icon.
Shnayder R, Needleman JP. Hemoptysis. Pediatrics in review. 2018; 39(6):319–
321.
Siddiqi HK, Mehra MR. COVID-­19 illness in native and immunosuppressed 
states: a clinical-­therapeutic staging proposal. J Heart Lung Transpl 
202;39(5):405–407.
Steinberger S, Lin B, Bernheim A, et al. CT features of coronavirus disease 
(COVID-­19) in 30 pediatric patients. AJR. 2020;215:1303–1311.
Sun D, Li H, Lu XX, et al. Clinical features of severe pediatric patients with 
coronavirus disease 2019 in Wuhan: a single center’s observational study. 
World J Pediatr. 2020;16:251–259.
Tagarro A, Epalza C, Santos M, et al. Screening and severity of coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-­19) in children in Madrid, Spain. JAMA Pediatr. 
2021;175(3):316–317.
Thakrar PD, Boyd KP, Swanson CP, et al. E-­cigarette, or vaping, product use-­
associated lung injury in adolescents: a review of imaging features. Pediatr 
Radiol. 2020;50:338–344.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
