993
The coexistence of fever and rash suggests a relatively wide spectrum 
of pathologic entities for diagnostic consideration. This spectrum 
includes local or systemic infection with a wide range of microbial 
pathogens; toxin-­mediated disorders, including those associated with 
bacterial superantigen production; inflammatory conditions includ­
ing vasculitides and rheumatologic diseases; and hypersensitivity dis­
orders. While most conditions causing fever and rash are benign and 
self-­limited, a thorough clinical evaluation is crucial to identify those 
caused by life-­threatening diseases or those requiring specific treat­
ment. The essential elements for accurate diagnosis include a detailed 
history and a thorough physical examination including a careful sys­
tematic observation of the patient for evidence of toxicity. Because this 
approach lacks perfect sensitivity, the laboratory may play an import­
ant role in the diagnostic process.
FEVER AND RASH
History
Information about the features of the rash includes when it occurred 
in relation to the fever, its evolution or progression, its anatomic dis­
tribution, and whether it is pruritic or painful (Table 53.1). Degree 
of illness should be evaluated, especially in the infant and toddler, by 
assessing oral intake, activity level, and urine output. A description of 
the fever pattern can be useful (see Chapter 52) and immunization sta­
tus will help prioritize the differential diagnosis. Essential information 
from the epidemiologic and social history should include season of the 
year; geographic location of the patient’s residence; exposure to known 
ill contacts; recent travel or exposure to individuals from different 
geographic areas; exposure to pets, wildlife, or insects; recent immu­
nizations; ingestion of raw meat or fish, unpasteurized dairy, and/or 
potentially contaminated meat or produce; a detailed list of medica­
tions; previous blood transfusion; and, for the adolescent patient, intra­
venous drug use and sexual activity.
The medical and family history should be used to assess the overall 
health of the patient over time, as well as that of family members, to 
determine the possibility of underlying primary or acquired immu­
nodeficiency or diseases associated with autoimmunity or chronic 
inflammation. A history of increased susceptibility to infection, as 
manifested by chronic or recurrent infections after infancy such as 
pneumonia, sinusitis, bronchitis, otitis media, diarrhea, and bacte­
remia, is an important indicator of underlying immunodeficiency 
disease (see Chapter 54). In addition, the occurrence of an unusually 
severe infection or an infection with a pathogen of low virulence (e.g., 
Pneumocystis jiroveci) should raise suspicion for an immunodefi­
ciency state. A history of hemolytic anemia, leukopenia, thrombocy­
topenia, or arthritis suggests an autoimmune disorder or malignancy, 
which may also be associated with impairment in immune function 
(see Chapter 44).
In a thorough systems review, the clinician should assess the prob­
ability of a subacute or chronic underlying infectious, inflammatory, 
or malignant disease by inquiring about anorexia, nausea, vomit­
ing, weight loss or failure to thrive, night sweats, fatigue, cough, and 
exercise intolerance. The clinician should seek symptoms suggesting 
multisystem disease, such as myalgias, arthralgias, headache, pre­
cordial pain or pain with inspiration, abdominal pain, jaundice, skin 
photosensitivity, peripheral edema, alopecia, Raynaud phenomenon, 
and hematuria. In patients with symptoms that indicate the presence 
of multisystem disease, a thorough survey of the functional status of 
the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems is clinically 
relevant. Specific inquiries into visual disturbances, photophobia, dis­
ordered mentation, neck stiffness, paresthesia, weakness, or seizure 
activity are essential and may reveal potentially life-­threatening infec­
tion within the central nervous system or a systemic vasculitis involv­
ing the nervous system, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or 
polyarteritis nodosa.
Examination
The physical examination is used to refine the probability of underlying 
serious illness, to identify rashes typical of a specific diagnosis, to look 
for noncutaneous disease manifestations, and to identify if further test­
ing or treatment is indicated (Tables 53.2 and 53.3; also see Chapters 
52 and 61).
A critical first step is an assessment of the patient’s vital signs and 
degree of toxicity. Lethargy, irritability, altered mental status, decreased 
activity, poor perfusion, pallor, mottled skin, decreased pulses, or cya­
nosis indicates serious illness; resuscitation and treatment directed at 
the most likely diagnoses should be initiated without delay. The impor­
tance of the height of fever in predicting the risk of serious illness is 
unclear. Underlying chronic illness and degree of toxicity are more use­
ful for risk assessment than fever height. The presence of tachycardia 
and tachypnea in any patient with fever and rash suggests the possibility 
of sepsis. Tachycardia may also be seen in endocarditis or in myocar­
ditis secondary to certain viruses, Kawasaki disease (KD), multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome children (MIS-­C), or acute rheumatic fever. 
Evidence of alteration in mental status suggests either sepsis associated 
with decreased organ perfusion or primary meningoencephalitis. The 
presence of hypotension usually indicates septic shock, but other dis­
orders such as toxic shock syndrome (TSS), dengue hemorrhagic shock 
syndrome, KD shock syndrome, MIS-C, hemorrhagic fever with renal 
syndrome caused by hantavirus, and lupus myocarditis must also be 
considered in this context. Hypertension may be noted in association 
with vasculitic disorders involving small-­ to medium-­sized arteries, 
such as polyarteritis and SLE.
The clinical characteristics of the rash are often helpful in estab­
lishing an etiologic diagnosis. A morphologic nomenclature of cuta­
neous manifestations helps the clinician with differential diagnosis, 
Fever and Rash
Michelle L. Mitchell
53
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
994
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
documentation, and communication (see Chapter 61). An exanthem 
is defined as a skin eruption occurring as a sign of a generalized dis­
ease. An enanthem is an eruption on the mucous membranes that 
occurs in the context of generalized disease. Exanthems and enan­
thems may be macular, maculopapular, vesicular, urticarial, petechial, 
or diffusely erythematous. Rashes are usually classified according to 
their most typical lesion morphology. However, morphology may 
vary as rashes evolve; the rash of Rocky Mountain spotted fever is 
classically described as petechial, but it may initially be maculo­
papular. In addition, the rash of chickenpox begins as a papule that 
progresses to vesicular that then forms crusted lesions; all stages are 
present at the same time. Because a wide variety of infectious agents, 
including viruses and a broad range of bacteria (including rickett­
siae), as well as drugs and inflammatory conditions can cause exan­
thems and enanthems, few of these eruptions are pathognomonic 
(Tables 53.4, 53.5, and 53.6).
Specific Skin Lesions
Maculopapular Eruptions
Macules are flat, nonpalpable circumscribed lesions, while papules 
are <1 cm, circumscribed palpable lesions. Maculopapular lesions 
may coalesce into a more confluent morbilliform (measles-­like) erup­
tion. A rash with multiple small papules that feels like sandpaper is 
described as scarlatiniform. Maculopapular rashes are usually seen 
in viral illnesses, drug eruptions, and immune complex–mediated 
disorders. The classic childhood exanthems such as measles, rubella, 
erythema infectiosum (fifth disease, caused by parvovirus B19), and 
roseola (exanthem subitum, caused by human herpesvirus types 
6 and 7) produce a maculopapular rash and are usually clinically 
TABLE 53.1  Essential Elements of the 
History in the Clinical Assessment of Fever 
and Rash
Demographic Data
Age
Sex
Ethnicity
Season
Geographic area; resident or travel to endemic areas
Diet history (raw meats, shellfish; unpasteurized dairy, etc.)
Ill contacts (home, daycare, school, workplace)
Sexual contacts
Pets (dogs, cats, reptiles, turtles, rodents, birds), wildlife, insects (especially ticks)
Medications and drugs
Transfusions
Immunizations
Occupational
Features of Rash
Temporal associations (onset relative to fever)
Progression and evolution
Location and distribution
Pain or pruritus
Timing and pattern of desquamation
Associated Symptoms
Focal (suggesting organ-­specific illness)
Systemic (suggesting generalized or multisystem illness)
Prior Health Status
Medical and surgical history
Growth and development
Recurrent infectious illnesses
Family History
TABLE 53.2  Essential Elements of 
the Physical Examination in the Clinical 
Assessment of Fever and Rash
Degree of Toxicity
Vital Signs
Fever pattern
Tachycardia or bradycardia
Tachypnea
Hypotension or hypertension
Characteristics of Rash
Macular
Papular
Maculopapular
Petechiae or purpura
Diffuse erythroderma
Accentuation in flexural creases
Desquamation with stroking (Nikolsky sign) or spontaneous
Localized erythroderma
Expansile
Painful
Urticaria
Vesicles, pustules, bullae
Nodules
Ulcers
Distribution and Localization of Rash
Generalized or localized
Symmetric or asymmetric
Centripetal or centrifugal
Associated Enanthem
Buccal mucosa
Palate
Pharynx and tonsils
Genitals
Associated Findings (Isolated or in Clusters)
Ocular
Cardiac
Pulmonary
Gastrointestinal
Musculoskeletal; myalgia
Neurologic
Lymphadenopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly
Arthritis/arthralgia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
995
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
recognizable (Figs. 53.1 and 53.2; see Table 53.6). Other organisms 
that commonly cause a maculopapular rash include enteroviruses, 
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, acute HIV, 
and hepatitis B virus. Erythema migrans, the distinctive rash of 
Lyme disease (caused by the tick-­borne spirochete Borrelia burgdor­
feri), begins as a papule at the site of a recent tick bite and slowly 
expands over days to weeks to form an erythematous, annular lesion, 
sometimes with partial central clearing (Fig. 53.3). The rash of south­
ern tick-­associated rash illness (STARI) appears similarly. Erythema 
marginatum, a rare but major manifestation of acute rheumatic 
fever, is also distinctive (Fig. 53.4).
Morbilliform drug eruptions are often indistinguishable from viral 
exanthems and typically present 7–14 days after exposure to a drug 
(Fig. 53.5). As with most viral exanthems, the rash starts on the trunk 
and spreads to the extremities. Examples of causative agents include 
aminopenicillins, cephalosporins, antiepileptics, and sulfonamides. 
Morbilliform drug eruptions usually resolve spontaneously after dis­
continuation of the culprit drug, but sometimes they are the first sign 
of the potentially life-­threatening syndrome drug rash with eosino­
philia and systemic symptoms (DRESS, also known as drug-­induced 
hypersensitivity syndrome, formerly anticonvulsant hypersensitivity 
syndrome).
Inflammatory diseases can also present with fever and maculo­
papular rash. Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SJIA, Still disease) 
classically presents with an evanescent, salmon-­colored macular rash 
on the trunk and proximal extremities that coincide with fever spikes 
(see Chapter 44). Many of the hereditary periodic fever syndromes 
manifest with macular, maculopapular, or urticarial rashes associated 
with fever (see Chapter 54).
Petechiae and Purpura
Extravasation of red blood cells from the vasculature into the skin pro­
duces petechiae and purpura. These lesions do not blanch with applied 
pressure. Petechiae are pinpoint lesions (<3 mm). Purpura are larger 
lesions and can be either palpable or nonpalpable. While the majority of 
patients with fever and petechiae have a benign illness, their presence, 
especially in a child younger than 24 months, is of particular concern. 
Between 2% and 20% of affected patients have an underlying bacterial 
infection, and depending on the clinical setting, 0.5–10% have sepsis 
caused by Neisseria meningitidis. Other potentially serious infections 
signaled by a petechial rash and fever include bacterial endocarditis 
and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Group A streptococcal (GAS) 
pharyngitis is the most common bacterial cause of fever and petechiae, 
with up to 20% of patients with fever and petechiae being diagnosed 
with GAS pharyngitis in some studies. Common viral causes include 
enterovirus and adenovirus. Febrile children may develop petechiae 
after coughing or vomiting; petechiae in this setting are almost always 
located in the superior vena cava distribution above the nipple line. 
Further, petechiae confined solely to the area above the nipple line is 
rarely associated with invasive bacterial disease. Noninfectious causes 
of fever and petechiae include drug eruptions and acute leukemia. Not 
all children with fever and petechiae have thrombocytopenia.
Diffuse purpuric lesions may be noted in a wide variety of disor­
ders. These include infectious diseases associated with organisms with 
a predilection for vascular endothelium, such as N. meningitidis (Fig. 
53.6) and rickettsiae (Fig. 53.7), uncommon bacterial diseases such as 
rat-­bite fever (Fig. 53.8) and Vibrio vulnificus or Brazilian purpuric fever 
caused by Haemophilus aegyptius, and a number of viral hemorrhagic 
fever diseases. Purpura is also associated with disseminated intravas­
cular coagulation (DIC) and profound thrombocytopenia, such as in 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (see Chapter 51). Purpura fol­
lowed by subsequent necrosis of skin is referred to as purpura fulmi­
nans, a severe, life-­threatening condition that has been reported after 
relatively benign infections such as varicella or with more serious dis­
orders (meningococcemia) (Fig. 53.9). Purpura can also occur in the 
noninfectious vasculitides, such as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (HSP) 
and granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Discrete, raised purpuric lesions 
(palpable purpura) distributed predominantly over the buttocks and 
lower extremities are typical for this disorder. While bacteremia must 
be considered for all febrile patients presenting with diffuse or discrete 
purpuric lesions (see Figs. 53.6, 53.7, 53.8, and 53.9), patients with HSP 
are generally well-­appearing but may have significant discomfort from 
arthritis or abdominal pain.
Vesiculobullous Eruptions
Vesicular rashes (sharply demarcated, raised lesions containing clear 
fluid), bullae (vesicles exceeding 1 cm in diameter), or pustules (raised 
lesions containing cloudy fluid composed of serum and inflamma­
tory cells) may be suggestive of focal or disseminated infection with 
various pathogens or signal a serious drug reaction. Localized ves­
icles may suggest infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 
or 2 (especially if the vesicles are grouped on an erythematous base), 
TABLE 53.3  Rashes Involving Palms and 
Soles
Bacterial
Meningococcemia
Disseminated gonococcemia
Endocarditis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rat-­bite fever
Secondary and congenital syphilis
Murine typhus
Pseudomonas folliculitis
Viral
Hand-­foot-­mouth disease
Chickenpox
Measles
Chikungunya
Parvovirus B19 (papular-purpuric gloves and socks syndrome)
Monkeypox
Infestation
Scabies
Immunologic
Palmoplantar pustulosis (SAPHO syndrome)
Keratoderma blennorrhagica (reactive arthritis)
Vasculitis
Kawasaki disease
MIS-­C
SLE
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Erythema multiforme
Graft versus host disease
Id reaction to fungi
Guttate psoriasis
Other
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children; SAPHO, syno­
vitis, acne, plantar pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis; SLE, systemic 
lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 53.4  Differential Diagnosis of Fever and Rash
Lesion
Pathogen or Associated Factor
Maculopapular 
or Macular 
Rash
Viruses
Measles (confluent), rubella (discrete), roseola 
(human herpesvirus 6),* fifth disease (parvovirus),* 
EBV,* enteroviruses,* hepatitis B virus (papular 
acrodermatitis or Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome), HIV, 
dengue virus, adenovirus, chikungunya virus
Bacteria
Rheumatic fever (group A streptococcus), scarlet 
fever, erysipelas, Arcanobacterium haemolyticum, 
secondary syphilis, leptospirosis, Pseudomonas, 
meningococcal infection (early), Salmonella (typhoid 
rose spots), Lyme disease, STARI, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae,* Listeria monocytogenes, Brucella 
melitensis, Coxiella burnetii (Q fever), rat-­bite fever
Rickettsiae
Early Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus (scrub, 
murine, endemic), ehrlichiosis (monocytic)
Other
Kawasaki disease,* Coccidioides immitis, drug 
reactions, SJIA, hereditary fever syndromes, HLH, 
toxoplasmosis, MIS-­C
Diffuse 
Erythroderma
Bacteria
Scarlet fever (group A streptococcus),* 
other streptococci, toxic shock syndrome 
(Staphylococcus aureus and group A 
streptococcus),* staphylococcal scarlet fever, 
ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia chaffeensis), MIS-­C
Fungi
Candida albicans
Urticarial Rash
Viruses
EBV, hepatitis B and C, HIV, enteroviruses
Bacteria
M. pneumoniae, group A streptococci, Shigella, 
meningococcus, Yersinia, Borrelia burgdorferi
Other
Various parasites, insect bites, food-­drug allergens 
(usually afebrile)
Vesicular, 
Bullous, 
Pustular
Viruses
Herpes simplex,* varicella-­zoster,* 
coxsackieviruses,* echoviruses, vaccinia, variola, 
monkeypox, chikungunya
Bacteria
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, 
staphylococcal bullous impetigo, group A 
streptococcal crusted impetigo, gonococcemia,* 
Vibrio vulnificus, rat-­bite fever, anthrax
Other
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-­Johnson 
syndrome,* rickettsialpox
Lesion
Pathogen or Associated Factor
Petechial-­
Purpuric
Viruses
Atypical measles, congenital rubella, 
cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, HIV, hemorrhagic 
fever viruses, hemorrhagic varicella, EBV, 
hepatitis B, adenovirus, yellow fever, parvovirus, 
chikungunya
Bacteria
Sepsis (meningococcal,* gonococcal, pneumococcal,* 
S. aureus*), endocarditis, rat-­bite fever 
(Spirillum minus or Streptobacillus moniliformis), 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, group A streptococcus, 
Capnocytophaga canimorsus, Yersinia pestis
Rickettsiae
Rocky Mountain spotted fever,* epidemic and 
murine typhus, ehrlichiosis
Other
Vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, Henoch-­Schönlein 
purpura,* malaria
Erythema 
Nodosum
Viruses
EBV, hepatitis B and C, HSV, HIV
Bacteria
Group A streptococcus, tuberculosis, Yersinia, 
Bartonella henselae (cat-­scratch disease), 
brucellosis, Q fever, M. pneumoniae, tularemia, 
syphilis, mycobacteria, Chlamydia spp., 
meningococcus, Campylobacter spp.
Fungi
Coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, 
sporotrichosis, cryptococcosis
Other
Sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, estrogen-­
containing oral contraceptives, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, Behçet disease, lymphoma, 
ascaris, filariasis
Distinctive Rashes
Ecthyma 
gangrenosum
P. aeruginosa (main cause), Vibrio vulnificus, 
and various other gram-­negative bacteria; 
Staphylococcus aureus; Streptococcus pyogenes; 
various molds
Erythema migrans
Lyme disease, STARI
Necrotic eschar
Scrub typhus, aspergillosis, mucormycosis, 
cutaneous anthrax, rickettsialpox and other 
rickettsiae (early)
Erysipelas
Group A streptococcus (main cause), 
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Koplik spots
Measles
Erythema marginatum
Acute rheumatic fever (group A streptococcus)
Erythema multiforme
Herpes simplex virus or M. pneumoniae
Rose spots
Salmonella
*Common.
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in chil­
dren; SJIA, systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis; STARI, southern tick-­associated rash illness.
Modified from Prince A. Infectious diseases. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1994:299.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
997
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
varicella-­zoster virus (especially if grouped vesicles are distributed in 
a dermatomal pattern) (Fig. 53.10), or infection with nonviral patho­
gens, such as Rickettsia akari (the cause of rickettsialpox, a mouse 
mite–­borne rickettsiosis found worldwide but common in New York 
City). Localized pustules and bullae are usually suggestive of pyoder­
mas caused by Staphylococcus aureus, but pustular lesions distributed 
on the palms and soles in the context of fever may represent infective 
emboli with microabscess formation (Janeway lesions), which are often 
caused by S. aureus endocarditis.
Vesicles distributed in a more generalized pattern, especially with 
a concentration of lesions over the head and trunk in various stages 
of evolution, are suggestive of primary varicella-­zoster virus infection 
(chickenpox). A more generalized pattern with a concentration over 
the extremities is suggestive of enteroviral infection, especially with cox­
sackievirus A16 (hand-­foot-and-mouth disease), or A6 in even more 
severe presentations. Orthopoxviruses such as monkeypox, like small­
pox, cause a systemic febrile rash illness with lesions that progress from 
papules to vesicles to pustules concentrated on the face and extremities. 
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare cutane­
ous hypersensitivity reaction characterized by numerous sterile pustules 
beginning on the face and spreading to the trunk and limbs. It typically 
presents within 24 hours after exposure to an offending drug, usually 
a β-­lactam or macrolide antibiotic. The clinician evaluating the sexu­
ally active patient presenting with asymmetric generalized pustules or 
vesicopustular lesions should also consider disseminated infection with 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Diffuse vesiculobullae may be noted in Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome (SJS) or in toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), life-­
threatening mucocutaneous hypersensitivity diseases usually related to 
drugs.
Nodules
Nodules (discrete, raised, firm, well-­demarcated lesions without fixa­
tion to the overlying skin) may be associated with a number of underly­
ing infectious or inflammatory disorders, such as polyarteritis nodosa 
and Sweet syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis). Red, pink, 
or plum-­colored nodules distributed in a seemingly random manner 
over the skin surface may represent leukemic infiltrates. The subcuta­
neous nodules of acute rheumatic fever are usually located over bony 
extensor surfaces near tendons and are found in <5% of patients with 
acute rheumatic fever. They may also be found in patients with polyar­
ticular JIA and dermatomyositis.
Erythema nodosum (erythematous and painful nodules usually 
distributed over the extremities) may be associated with viral infections 
including hepatitis B and C; bacterial infectious agents including group A 
β-­hemolytic streptococcus (most common), chlamydia, Brucella species, 
and Yersinia species; mycobacterial infections; fungal infections, particu­
larly Coccidioides immitis and less often Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomy­
ces dermatitidis, or Cryptococcus neoformans; or drug reactions, especially 
in response to oral contraceptives and sulfonamides. Other noninfectious 
causes include SLE, sarcoidosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Ulcers
Ulcers are depressed lesions in which the epidermis and some or all of 
the dermis has been destroyed. In immunocompromised hosts, infec­
tion with HSV may manifest with shallow erosive or ulcerative lesions. 
In immunocompetent hosts, cutaneous ulcerations may be noted in 
noninfectious disorders associated with vasculitis, such as SLE, polyar­
teritis nodosa, and HSP.
Pyoderma gangrenosum and ecthyma gangrenosum are painful 
cutaneous ulcerative lesions with an erythematous, raised edge. The 
lesions usually begin as a papule and break down rapidly with central 
necrosis. It may be seen in immunocompromised patients, typically in 
the setting of neutropenia, often with systemic infections with bacterial 
pathogens (typically gram-­negative), such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
or Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (ecthyma). In immunocompetent 
patients, the lesion may manifest in the context of inflammatory 
bowel disease (pyoderma gangrenosum), PAPA (pyogenic arthritis, 
pyoderma gangrenosum, acne), or rheumatoid arthritis. Digital ulcer­
ations may be noted in patients with small-­vessel vasculitis, such as 
SLE. Oral ulcerations may be noted in those with herpes simplex or 
coxsackievirus (hand-­foot-and-mouth disease) or as a manifestation of 
Behçet disease, SLE, PFAPA (periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, phar­
yngitis, adenitis), cyclic neutropenia, or inflammatory bowel disease.
Erythema
Diffuse erythema (erythroderma) is associated with toxin-­mediated 
disorders characterized by superantigen production. Bacterial super­
antigens cause nonspecific T-­cell stimulation resulting in several acute 
rash-­fever disorders, such as staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome 
(SSSS; Fig. 53.11), streptococcal scarlet fever, staphylococcal or strep­
tococcal TSS, and possibly KD.
Localized erythema in the context of acute fever is strongly sug­
gestive of cellulitis, erysipelas, or abscess. The presence of warmth, ten­
derness, and associated lymphangitis is highly indicative. Organisms 
causing cellulitis or abscess formation are usually inoculated directly 
into the skin as a result of trauma. However, bacteremic localization is 
well described among young children with preseptal or facial cellulitis 
associated with Haemophilus influenzae type b (pre–H. influenzae type 
b vaccine) or Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Patients with SLE or dermatomyositis may present with an iso­
lated erythematous malar rash (butterfly rash), which is exacerbated 
by exposure to sunlight. The acute onset of intense “slapped-­cheek” 
erythema of the face suggests erythema infectiosum, a recognizable 
exanthem caused by parvovirus B19, and should be differentiated eas­
ily from the malar rash of SLE, which usually manifests other char­
acteristics, such as chronicity as well as hyperkeratosis and follicular 
plugging. In addition, patients with erythema infectiosum tend to have 
a maculopapular, lacelike rash over the arms, which may spread to the 
buttocks and thighs (Fig. 53.12; see Table 53.6).
Patients with dermatomyositis may have localized lilac-­colored 
lesions over the eyelids (heliotrope rash), which may be associated 
with periorbital edema. Such patients characteristically, but not invari­
ably, have an erythematous, scaly eruption on the face, neck, knees, 
elbows, and phalanges. When the rash is localized over the knuckles, 
it resembles dripped wax and has been referred to as Gottron papules. 
Patients with autoinflammatory disorders (periodic fever syndromes) 
may present with localized erythema or fasciitis (see Chapter 54).
Other Physical Examination Findings
Joint Manifestations
Pain, swelling, tenderness, and limited range of motion involving one 
joint or multiple joints, or that migrate from joint to joint, or discrete 
pain at the insertion of tendons, ligaments, or fascia (enthesopathy) 
may indicate a primary infectious illness, a “reactive” (immunologically 
mediated) disorder, or a systemic inflammatory condition. Primary 
infectious illnesses associated with this finding include N. gonorrhoeae, 
B. burgdorferi (Lyme disease), parvovirus, and rubella, including 
vaccine-­associated strains. Reactive disorders, such as reactive arthritis 
(arthritis/enthesitis, conjunctivitis, urethritis), may be associated with 
infection caused by enteric pathogens, such as Salmonella and Shi­
gella organisms, or genital pathogens, such as N. gonorrhoeae or Chla­
mydia species, but may also include diseases of unknown origin, such 
as inflammatory bowel disease, in which the rash is usually erythema 
nodosum. A serum sickness–like reaction can be seen after treatment 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
998
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
         
TABLE 53.5  Common Bacterial Exanthems
Disease
Cause
Age
Season
Transmission
Incubation 
(Days)
Prodrome
Scarlet fever
Group A streptococcus
School age
Fall, winter, 
spring
Direct contact, 
droplets
1–4
Sore throat, headache, 
abdominal pain, cervical 
lymphadenopathy, fever, 
0–2 days, acute onset
Staphylococcal 
scalded skin 
syndrome (SSSS)
S. aureus–producing 
exfoliative toxin
Neonates, infants, 
young 
children
Any
Colonization, 
contact
Unknown
None
Toxic shock 
syndrome (TSS)
S. aureus–producing toxic 
shock syndrome toxin-­1 
(TSST-­1) and 
staphylococcal 
enterotoxins (SEs)
Group A 
streptococcus–producing 
Streptococcus pyogenes 
exotoxins (SPEs)
Adolescent females 
if menstrual; 
others variable
Any
Colonization, 
contact
Variable, often 
1–5
Myalgias, fevers, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms
May be secondary to wound 
infection, trivial mucosal 
or respiratory infection, 
or necrotizing fasciitis or 
myositis
Meningococcemia
Neisseria meningitidis
Any (<5 yr and 
adolescents)
Winter, spring, 
follows 
influenza 
epidemics
Close, prolonged 
contact
5–15
Fever, malaise, myalgia, 1–10 
days
Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever 
(RMSF)
Rickettsia rickettsii
Any (>5 yr), 
male > 
female
Summer
Carrier ticks
3–12
Fever, myalgia, headache, 
malaise, ill appearance, 
2–4 days
Rickettsialpox
Rickettsia akari
Any
Any
Mouse mite
7–14
Fever, chills, headache, 
malaise, 4–7 days
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
999
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
         
Features and Rash 
Structure
Enanthem
Complications
Prevention/Treatment
Comments
Diffuse erythema with 
“sandpaper” feel; 
accentuation of erythema in 
flexural creases (Pastia lines); 
circumoral pallor, lasts 2–7 
days; may exfoliate
Palatal petechiae, 
strawberry 
tongue
Peritonsillar abscess, rheumatic 
fever, glomerulonephritis
Prevent rheumatic fever with 
penicillin within 10 days of 
onset of pharyngitis, treat with 
penicillin
Similar syndrome may be  
noted with Arcanobacterium 
haemolyticum in adolescents; 
group A streptococci may also 
produce toxic shock or true 
bacteremic shock syndromes in 
addition to cellulitis, lymphangitis, 
and erysipelas; Staphylococcus 
aureus may produce a 
scarlatiniform rash
Sudden onset, tender 
erythroderma progressing 
to diffuse flaccid bullae; 
significant perioral, perinasal 
peeling; eventual diffuse 
exfoliation (positive Nikolsky 
sign), possibly conjunctivitis, 
purulent rhinorrhea
Unusual
Shock
Treat with intravenous  
antibacterial active against  
S. aureus
—
Diffuse sunburn-­like 
erythroderma; hypotension, 
diarrhea, emesis, mental 
status changes; late 
desquamation
Conjunctivitis
Shock, multisystem organ 
dysfunction/failure
Treat with intravenous  
antibacterial active against 
S. aureus; penicillin if group 
A streptococcus suspected; 
clindamycin; possible intravenous 
immune globulin; prevent 
menstrual-­associated TSS by 
frequent changes of tampon
—
Erythematous, nonconfluent, 
discrete papules (early); 
petechiae, purpura present 
on trunk, extremities, palms, 
soles
Petechiae
Shock, meningitis, pericarditis, 
arthritis, endophthalmitis, 
gangrene, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation
Contacts: rifampin; general: 
vaccine; treat with ceftriaxone, 
penicillin (if sensitive)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 
pneumococcus, Haemophilus 
influenza type b, group A 
streptococcus may produce  
similar clinical manifestations
Early maculopapular, then 
petechial or, rarely, purpuric; 
present on extremities, then 
trunk, palms, and soles
Petechiae variable
Shock, myocarditis, encephalitis, 
pneumonia
Remove ticks as soon as possible; 
use tick repellants; treat with 
doxycycline
Ehrlichia chaffeensis and other 
rickettsiae may produce similar 
illnesses with or without a rash
At primary bite site, eschar; 
secondary papulovesicles 
in same stage throughout 
illness; fewer vesicles 
than in chickenpox (5–30); 
present on trunk and proximal 
extremities
Occasional, 
transient lesions 
in the oral cavity 
similar to that 
seen on the body
Usually none
Treat with doxycycline
Often confused with chickenpox; 
may be more common than 
expected, especially in crowded 
urban settings with poor housing
TABLE 53.5  Common Bacterial Exanthems—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1000
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
         
TABLE 53.6  Common Viral Exanthems
Disease
Cause
Age
Season
Transmission
Incubation 
(Days)
Prodrome
Measles (rubeola)
Measles virus
Any
Winter, spring
Respiratory droplet
10–12
High fever, cough, 
coryza, conjunctivitis, 
2–4 days
Rubella (German 
measles)
Rubella virus
Infants, young 
adults
Winter, spring
Respiratory droplet
14–21
Malaise, fever <101°F, 
posterior auricular, 
cervical, occipital 
adenopathy, 0–4 days
Roseola (exanthem 
subitum)
Human herpesvirus type 
6 (HHV-­6), human 
herpesvirus type 7 
(HHV-­7)
Infants/toddlers 
(6 mo–2 yr) for 
HHV-­6, can be 
older children for 
HHV-­7
Any
Secretions of 
asymptomatic 
close contacts
9–10 (HHV-­6); 
unknown 
(HHV-­7)
Irritability, high fever 3–7 
days, cervical, occipital 
adenopathy
Fifth disease 
(erythema 
infectiosum)
Parvovirus B19
Prepubertal children, 
schoolteachers
Winter, spring
Respiratory droplets; 
blood transfusion, 
placenta
5–15
Headache, malaise, 
myalgia; often afebrile
Chickenpox (varicella)
Varicella-­zoster virus
1–14 yr (most) but 
can vary
Late fall, winter, 
early spring
Respiratory droplet
10–21
Fever
Enteroviruses
Coxsackievirus, echovirus, 
and others
Often infants and 
young children but 
varies
Summer, fall
Fecal-­oral, 
respiratory, 
vertical, and 
possibly fomites
4–6
Variable: irritable, fever, 
sore throat, myalgias, 
headache
Mononucleosis
Epstein-­Barr virus
Children, adolescents Any
Close contact, saliva, 
blood transfusion
28–49
Fever, adenopathy, eyelid 
edema, sore throat, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
malaise; atypical 
lymphocytosis
Gianotti-­Crosti 
syndrome (papular 
acrodermatitis of 
childhood)
EBV, hepatitis B virus 
(uncommon where 
vaccination rates are 
high), coxsackieviruses, 
others
1–6 yr (primarily)
Any
Variable; fecal, 
sexual, blood 
products for 
hepatitis B
Unknown; 
50–180 days for 
hepatitis B
Usually none except for 
specific viral disease; 
arthritis-­arthralgia for 
hepatitis B
CNS, central nervous system; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HBIG, hepatitis B virus immune globulin; VZIG, varicella-­zoster immune globulin.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1001
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
Features and Rash  
Structure
Enanthem
Complications
Prevention/Treatment
Comments
Maculopapular (confluent), begins on 
face, spreads to trunk; lasts 3–6 
days
Brown color develops; fine 
desquamation; toxic, uncomfortable 
appearance, photophobia; rash may  
be absent in HIV infection
Koplik spots on 
buccal mucosa 
before rash
Febrile seizures, otitis, 
pneumonia, encephalitis, 
laryngotracheitis, 
thrombocytopenia; delayed 
subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
General: measles vaccine at 
12–15 mo and again at 4–6 yr
Exposure: measles vaccine if 
within 72 hr; immune globulin  
if within 6 days of exposure 
(must then wait 6–8 mo to 
vaccinate)
World Health Organization 
recommends treatment with 
vitamin A in all patients with 
measles
Reportable to public health 
department; epidemics 
reported, contagious 3 days 
before symptoms until 4 
days after rash
Increasing incidence as 
vaccination rates are 
decreasing
Discrete, nonconfluent, rose-­colored 
macules and papules, begins on  
face and spreads downward; lasts 
1–3 days
Variable 
erythematous 
macules on soft 
palate
Arthritis, thrombocytopenia, 
encephalopathy; fetal 
embryopathy
General: rubella vaccine at 
12–15 mo and again at 4–6 yr; 
exposure: possibly immune 
serum globulin
Reportable to public health 
department; epidemics 
reported, contagious 2 days 
before symptoms and 5–7 
days after rash
Discrete macules on trunk, neck;  
sudden-­onset rash with deferves­
cence; lasts 0.5–2 days; some  
patients have no rash
Variable 
erythematous 
macules on soft 
palate
Single or recurrent febrile 
seizures; encephalopathy; 
dissemination (e.g., liver, CNS, 
lung) in immunosuppressed 
patients
None
No epidemics
Local erythema of cheeks (slapped cheek 
appearance); lacy pink-­red erythema of 
trunk and extremities, ± pruritus; rash 
may lag prodrome by 3–7 days; lasts  
2–4 days, may recur 2–3 wk later
Rare, ill-­described, 
on buccal mucosa
Arthritis, aplastic crisis in  
patients with chronic hemolytic 
anemia (e.g., sickle cell), fetal 
anemic hydrops, vasculitis, 
Wegner granulomatosis
Isolation of patients with  
aplastic crisis but not normal 
host with fifth disease
Epidemics reported; once rash 
is present, the normal host 
is not contagious; patients 
with aplastic crisis often 
have no rash
Pruritic papules, vesicles in various 
stages, 2–4 crops and then crusts; 
distributed on trunk and then 
face, extremities; lasts 7–10 days; 
recurs years later in dermatomal 
distribution (zoster, shingles)
Oral mucosa, 
tongue
Staphylococcal or streptococcal 
skin infection, arthritis, 
cerebellar ataxia, encephalitis, 
thrombocytopenia, Reye 
syndrome (with aspirin), 
myocarditis, nephritis, hepatitis, 
pneumonia; dissemination in 
immunocompromised
VZIG for exposed 
immunosuppressed patients, 
susceptible pregnant women, 
preterm neonates, and 
infants at birth whose mother 
developed varicella 5 days 
before and 2 days after birth; 
active immunization with live 
attenuated vaccine at 12 mo
Acyclovir therapy for 
immunosuppressed and 
possibly normal patients 
(controversial); contagious 
1–2 days before rash until 
all lesions are crusted
Hand-­foot-and-mouth: vesicles in 
those locations; others: nonspecific, 
usually fine nonconfluent, macular or 
maculopapular rash, rarely petechial, 
urticarial, or vesicular; lasts 3–7 
days
Yes
Aseptic meningitis, hepatitis, 
myocarditis, paralysis: usually  
in younger patients
None
Rash may appear with fever 
or after defervescence; rash 
may be present in <50% 
of enteroviral illnesses; 
epidemics possible, 
contagious up to 2 wks
Maculopapular or morbilliform on 
trunk, extremities; may be confluent; 
often elicited by simultaneous 
administration of ampicillin or 
allopurinol; rash in 15% and in 50% 
with drug-­induced form, lasts 2–7 
days
Variable
Anemia, thrombocytopenia, 
aplastic anemia, 
hepatitis, encephalitis; 
rarely hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis, 
lymphoproliferative syndrome
None
Cytomegalovirus and 
toxoplasmosis also produce 
mononucleosis-­like illness; 
monospot or heterophile 
tests negative
Papules, papulovesicles, discrete or 
confluent; face, arms, extremities, 
often spares trunk; lasts 4–10 days
Variable
As per specific disease
Hepatitis B: HBIG plus vaccine
—
         
TABLE 53.6  Common Viral Exanthems—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1002
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Day of illness
1
104
103
102
Temperature
Temperature
101
100
99
98
Rash
Conjunctivitis
Coryza
Cough
Koplik’s spots
2
3
4
5
6
7
Measles
8
9
10
1
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
Rash
Sore throat
2
3
4
5
Day of illness
6
7
Scarlet
fever
8
9
10
Day of illness
1
104
103
102
Temperature
101
100
99
98
Rash
Malaise
Conjunctivitis
Coryza
Lymph nodes
2
3
4
5
6
7
Rubella
8
9
10
Temperature
1
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
Rash
Irritability
2
3
4
5
Day of illness
6
7
Roseola
8
9
10
Fig. 53.1  Schematic diagrams illustrating differences among four acute exanthems characterized by macu­
lopapular eruptions. (Modified from Gershon AA, Hotez PJ, Katz SL, eds. Krugman’s Infectious Diseases of 
Children. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:927, Fig. 45.1.)
Measles
Rubella
Scarlet fever
1st day
of rash
3rd day
of rash
1st day
of rash
3rd day
of rash
1st day
of rash
3rd day
of rash
Koplik’s spots
of buccal mucosa
Rash
discrete
Rash
discrete
Confluent
maculopapules
Discrete
maculopapules
Flushed
cheeks
Circumoral
pillor
Strawberry
tongue
Increased
density
in axilla
Positive
blanching
test
(Schultz-
Charlton)
Increased density
in groin
Transverse
lines
(Pastia’s sign)
Increased density
on neck
Fig. 53.2  Schematic drawings illustrating difference in appearance, distribution, and progression of rashes 
of measles, rubella, and scarlet fever. (From Gershon AA, Hotez PJ, Katz SL, eds. Krugman’s Infectious Dis­
eases of Children. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:928.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1003
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
with antibiotics. Children with systemic inflammatory conditions 
including KD, HSP, polyarteritis, SLE, SJIA, acute rheumatic fever, and 
some of the hereditary periodic fever syndromes may also have joint 
manifestations (see Chapters 44 and 54).
Cardiac Manifestations
Cardiac manifestations may accompany acute rheumatic fever, bacte­
rial endocarditis, KD, MIS-­C, or SJIA (see Chapter 44). The presence of 
tachycardia out of proportion to the severity of the fever may be indic­
ative of sepsis or the carditis accompanying acute rheumatic fever, KD, 
MIS-­C, viral myocarditis, or DRESS. A precordial friction rub is sug­
gestive of pericarditis, which is noted frequently in patients with SJIA. 
The presence of a new murmur or a changing murmur on auscultation 
can be suggestive of bacterial endocarditis, whereas the detection of 
the apical systolic murmur of mitral regurgitation or the diastolic mur­
mur of aortic insufficiency can be suggestive of acute rheumatic fever 
(see Chapter 9). A gallop rhythm on auscultation indicates underly­
ing myocarditis, which may accompany coxsackievirus or other viral 
infection, rheumatic disease, KD, or MIS-­C.
Ocular Manifestations
Isolated ocular manifestations in the setting of fever, such as conjunctival 
injection and frank conjunctivitis, may be suggestive of infection with 
measles or adenovirus, leptospirosis, KD, or onset of SJS, TEN, or reac­
tive arthritis. The skin, eye, mouth form of neonatal HSV can infect the 
eyes, causing conjunctivitis and keratitis. Anterior uveitis (redness with 
accompanying photophobia or pain or change in vision) may indicate 
KD, SJIA, sarcoidosis, ulcerative colitis, Behçet syndrome, or, uncom­
monly, an infection such as leptospirosis (see Chapter 43). Retinal hem­
orrhages seen on funduscopy may indicate bacterial endocarditis.
Fig. 53.3  Erythema migrans—erythematous target-­like plaque of Lyme 
disease. The primary skin lesion of Borrelia burgdorferi infection is 
noted for centrifugal expansion, sometimes leaving a central clearing. 
The rash of southern tick–­associated rash illness (STARI) is also similar 
to the rash of early Lyme disease. (Courtesy James Gathany; Content 
Providers CDC/James Gathany—this media comes from the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention’s Public Health Image Library [PHIL], 
with identification number #9875. From Borchers AT, Keen CL, Huntley 
AC, et  al. Lyme disease: a rigorous review of diagnostic criteria and 
treatment. J Autoimmun. 2015;57:82–115.)
Fig. 53.4  Polycyclic red borders of erythema marginatum in a febrile 
child with acute rheumatic fever. (From Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds. 
Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2003:808.)
A
B
Fig. 53.5  Morbilliform drug eruptions. A, Fine, pink macules and thin papules becoming confluent on the 
posterior upper arm, which is a dependent area in this hospitalized patient. B, More edematous (“urticarial”) 
pink papules; unlike true urticaria, these lesions are not transient. (From Julie V. Schaffer, MD. Fever and rash. 
In: Bolognia JL, ed. Dermatology Essentials. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014;3:28–38.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1004
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Neurologic Manifestations
Neurologic findings accompanying fever and rash may be indicative of 
specific infectious or immunologically mediated disorders. Mental sta­
tus findings suggestive of recent-­onset psychosis may indicate cerebri­
tis, which can accompany SLE. Significant alteration in mental status 
accompanied by seizure or focal motor impairment or cerebellar dys­
function may be suggestive of primary infectious encephalitis associated 
with arbovirus, herpes simplex, measles, varicella-­zoster virus, rickettsia, 
West Nile virus, or Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. Nuchal rigidity, 
the Kernig sign, or the Brudzinski sign indicates meningeal irritation, 
which may accompany infection caused by the enteroviruses; bacteria 
such as S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, or spirochetes such as B. burg­
dorferi; fungi such as H. capsulatum; or inflammation caused by under­
lying SLE, sarcoidosis, or KD. Cranial nerve palsies, ataxia, or peripheral 
neuropathy may accompany infection with B. burgdorferi early in the 
course of Lyme disease (especially Bell palsy), or it may indicate an 
underlying vasculitis, such as SLE. Movement abnormalities, particu­
larly chorea, may be suggestive of either SLE or acute rheumatic fever. 
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a life-­threatening syn­
drome of excessive immune activation that can have varied neurologic 
manifestations including seizure, mental status changes, and ataxia. The 
rash associated with HLH is also variable and can be maculopapular, 
erythrodermic, petechial, or purpuric. When seen in a patient with SJIA, 
the syndrome is called macrophage activation syndrome.
Pulmonary Manifestations
The presence of isolated lower respiratory tract findings (decreased 
breath sounds, rales, expiratory wheezing, respiratory distress, and 
cyanosis) indicates underlying pulmonary infection with an organism 
such as measles, adenovirus, M. pneumoniae, or Legionella pneumoph­
ila. Although sarcoidosis, collagen vascular disease, and systemic vas­
culitis (granulomatosis with polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis 
Fig. 53.6  Widespread purpura of meningococcemia. (From Callen JP, 
ed. Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2009:256, Fig. 28-­14.)
Fig. 53.7  Purpuric lesions in a patient with Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever. (From Callen JP, ed. Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009:258, Fig. 28-­16.)
A
B
C
Fig. 53.8  Rat-­bite fever. A, Erythematous papules on the abdomen. B, Purpuric pustules on the sole of the 
left foot. C, Pustules on erythematous bases on the right dorsal hand. (From Miraflor AP, Ghajar LD, Subrama­
niam S, et al. Rat-­bite fever: an uncommon cause of fever and rash in a 9-­year-­old patient. JAAD Case Rep. 
2015;1[16]:371–374 [Fig. 1, p. 372].)
Fig. 53.9  Purpura fulminans. Bacterial septicemia results in necrosis, 
small-­vessel thrombosis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation 
and is often associated with multiorgan failure. Several amputations 
may be required. (From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:371, Fig. 9.65.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1005
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
with polyangiitis, HSP) may involve the lower respiratory tract, isolated 
pulmonary findings are infrequently indicative of these disorders. The 
acute respiratory distress syndrome can develop in any patient with 
a serious systemic inflammatory condition such as sepsis, SJS, TEN, 
HLH, and DRESS.
Clusters of Findings
Clusters of findings on examination that are of diagnostic importance 
include the following.
The mucocutaneous–lymph node cluster (bilateral conjunctival 
injection, palmar-­plantar erythema/indurative edema of the hands and 
feet, erythema of the oropharyngeal mucosa/“strawberry” tongue, cervi­
cal lymphadenopathy) is suggestive of KD, TSS, SJS, streptococcal scarlet 
fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, dengue, leptospirosis, or MIS-­C.
The reticuloendothelial cell hyperplasia cluster (hepatospleno­
megaly with or without generalized adenopathy) is suggestive of (1) 
disseminated infectious disease caused by bacteria (Salmonella typhi 
or other enteric fever pathogens), virus (cytomegalovirus, HIV-­1, 
EBV), rickettsia (Orientia tsutsugamushi in “scrub typhus”), protozoa 
(malaria), or fungus (H. capsulatum, C. immitis); (2) disseminated 
malignancy including Langerhans cell histiocytosis, leukemia, and 
lymphoma; (3) sarcoidosis; (4) HLH; or (5) rheumatologic disease.
The mononucleosis-­like syndrome cluster (exudative pharyngitis 
and regional adenopathy with or without splenomegaly) is suggestive 
of infection with group A streptococcus, Arcanobacterium haemolyti­
cum, Francisella tularensis, EBV, HIV, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, 
coxsackievirus, or DRESS.
Diagnostic Studies
The history and physical examination together determine the prior 
probability of a specific disease. In the context of a very high or very 
low prior probability of a specific disease, laboratory testing adds very 
little useful information. Thus, ancillary testing is most useful when the 
prior probability of specific disease is equivocal.
Laboratory Tests
In an ill-­appearing child, basic laboratory testing including CBC with 
smear, CRP, ESR, procalcitonin, chemistries, blood cultures, and possi­
bly cerebral spinal fluid culture should be obtained. Coagulation stud­
ies should be completed in patients with petechiae, purpura, bleeding, 
or concern for DIC.
A Gram stain of any ulcerative, pustular, petechial, or purpuric 
lesion can be useful. The identification of bacteria suggests pyogenic 
infection, which may be localized or disseminated. The presence of 
only polymorphonuclear white blood cells in the fluid of pustular 
lesions does not exclude bacterial infection from consideration, espe­
cially disseminated infection with N. gonorrhoeae. Specimens of these 
lesions or any fluid from a pustule should also be obtained for bacterial 
culture and possibly fungal or mycobacterial culture depending on the 
level of suspicion for these types of pathogens.
Vesicular and bullous lesions in a febrile child with an uncertain 
diagnosis can be unroofed, scraped at the base, and submitted for 
microscopic examination after Tzanck preparation. The presence of mul­
tinucleated giant cells or eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions indicates 
infection with herpesvirus or varicella-­zoster virus. The sensitivity of the 
Tzanck preparation for cutaneous herpes simplex infection is 64% and 
Fig. 53.10  Skin lesions of chickenpox. Note the varying stages of devel­
opment (macules, papules, and vesicles) present at the same time. 
(From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 
5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Fig. 53.11  An infant with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. (From 
Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
A
B
C
Fig. 53.12  A, Erythema infectiosum. Facial erythema (“slapped cheek”). The red plaque covers the cheek 
and spares the nasolabial fold and the circumoral region. B, A macular eruption appears on the extensor 
extremities. C, The eruption fades into a lacy netlike pattern. (From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Dermatol­
ogy. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:536, Figs. 14.19, 14.20.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1006
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
the specificity is 86%. Because the sensitivity of the procedure is low, a 
negative result does not exclude the diagnosis of herpes simplex infec­
tion. Thus, to identify the virus, a specimen of the lesion should also be 
obtained for polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which is more sensitive 
than culture.
Diagnosing a systemic infectious illness may necessitate the use of 
specific bacterial, viral, or fungal culture techniques; paired acute-­ and 
convalescent-­phase serologic study; antigen detection systems; or molecu­
lar techniques such as PCR or 16S (bacterial) and 28S (fungal) ribosomal 
DNA. Culture techniques are most specific when normally sterile tissue or 
body fluids are sampled and inoculated directly into liquid or solid media. 
Interpretation of bacterial cultures obtained from nonsterile sites, such as 
the tonsils and nasopharynx, is subject to increased rates of false-­positive 
results because of recovery of organisms that colonize these areas.
Serologic techniques are potentially useful in establishing a diagnosis 
of a specific infection. Confirmation of infection with the rickettsiae and 
several other atypical bacteria and viruses is probably best accomplished 
through serologic techniques demonstrating a fourfold increase in titer, 
but also highly suggestive with a high immunoglobulin G (IgG) at least 
2 weeks from illness onset if a first sample is negative or not obtained. 
Similarly, detection of a recent infection with group A streptococci may 
be accomplished by demonstrating very elevated or rising antibody titers 
to streptolysin O (ASO titer) or to deoxyribonuclease B (anti–DNase B).
Antigen detection systems are useful for rapid diagnosis. A solid-­
phase detection system, such as enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), has the advantage of being independent of the need for intact 
cellular material but is affected by antigen or antibody cross-­reactivity 
in the sample (which limits specificity) and by poor antigen-­antibody 
affinity (which limits sensitivity). Nonetheless, ELISA is the preferred 
technique for the serologic diagnosis of a wide spectrum of infectious 
agents, including B. burgdorferi (Lyme disease pathogen) (as the first 
part in a two-­tier serologic assay, the second being a Western immuno­
blot; see Chapter 52) and hepatitis B virus.
Latex particle agglutination is an alternative solid-­phase antigen 
detection system that does not require intact cellular material and whose 
advantages include rapidity of use and ease of interpretation. Latex par­
ticle agglutination is used for the rapid identification of patients with 
GAS pharyngitis or with invasive disease caused by encapsulated bacte­
ria, such as S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae type b, N. meningitidis, group 
B streptococci, and Escherichia coli BK1. Latex particle agglutination is 
limited by factors similar to those affecting ELISA. Latex agglutination 
tests for group A streptococci have specificities of more than 90%, which 
facilitates their use for clinical confirmation of infection, but their sen­
sitivities are only 60–90%, which limits their use in excluding infection.
PCR has replaced many of the previously commonly used latex 
agglutination assays. PCR testing is available for diagnosis of GAS 
pharyngitis and may preclude the need for culture confirmation. Mul­
tiplex PCRs of respiratory and diarrhea specimens provide higher sen­
sitivity and specificity compared to antigen tests, as well as offering the 
potential benefit of testing for multiple potential pathogens with one 
test. Multiplex PCR testing of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for common 
bacterial and viral pathogens is also available. CSF PCR testing should 
be in addition to CSF culture given current limited experience, unclear 
sensitivity, and specificity issues.
PCR from blood is available for certain bacteria and viruses. For DNA 
viruses that establish latency (e.g., cytomegalovirus and EBV), serologic 
testing is still utilized to help diagnose primary versus past infection 
that PCR cannot reliably differentiate between. However, PCR for these 
viruses also offers quantitation of viral load, which is useful in the care of 
immunocompromised hosts. Blood PCR is also used in the diagnostic 
work-­up of rickettsiae, but due to limited sensitivity, serologic testing is 
often needed. Neither PCR nor serology is useful in early management 
of rickettsial infections due to the typical turnaround time, so treatment 
needs to be determined based on clinical presentation. The identifica­
tion of patients with noninfectious systemic illness caused by underly­
ing rheumatologic disease, immune complex disease, or vasculitis is 
best accomplished through serologic techniques combined with other 
indirect laboratory evidence of active inflammation or tissue injury (see 
Chapter 44). Diagnoses of autoinflammatory diseases are based on clin­
ical criteria and can be confirmed with genetic testing (see Chapter 54).
Histopathology
Punch biopsy for light and electron microscopy and immunohistologic 
studies should be considered for diagnostic purposes for patients pre­
senting with fever and bullous lesions that are clearly not typical pyo­
dermas; fever and nodular lesions; or lesions suggestive of vasculitis 
(palpable purpura, livedo reticularis). A punch biopsy with indirect 
immunofluorescent antibody staining may also be useful for patients 
with petechial lesions, especially in an acral distribution, for the early 
diagnosis (within 48 hours of antibiotic initiation) of infection with R. 
rickettsii. This procedure has a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 
100%. The low sensitivity and restricted availability (Centers for Dis­
ease Control and Prevention [CDC] and some academic centers) of the 
test limits its use in decision making in the acute care setting.
Other Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography and ECG are part of the diagnosis of some fever and 
rash syndromes. The 2015 revision of the Jones criteria for diagnosis 
of acute rheumatic fever adds echocardiography to diagnose cardiac 
involvement even when it is not clinically evident. Prolonged P-­R 
interval on ECG remains one of the minor Jones criteria. In incom­
plete KD and presumed MIS-­C, echocardiography is used to help guide 
diagnosis when patients do not meet all classic criteria.
Diagnosis and Decision Making
Accurate diagnosis depends on careful synthesis of selected data obtained 
from the clinical assessment. Because most children with acute episodes 
of fever and rash have a common, self-­limited infectious disease, a spe­
cific diagnosis can often be established simply by pattern recognition 
alone (e.g., visual recognition of the common exanthems of childhood 
or a specific lesion such as erythema migrans) or with minimal use of 
adjunctive testing (a rash consistent with scarlet fever accompanied by 
a positive PCR or latex agglutination test for group A streptococcus). In 
some cases the spectrum of possible infectious pathogens may be broad, 
the presenting complaints or features of the rash may be atypical, or the 
diagnosis may not yield easily to simple pattern recognition. In these 
situations, empirical use of the laboratory may prove useful to the cli­
nician. It may also be preferable to “watchful waiting” and serial clinical 
follow-­up when the patient is judged to be at risk for a treatable illness 
associated with significant subsequent morbidity (e.g., streptococcal 
infection leading to acute rheumatic fever) or when specific information 
is necessary to advise parents of the risk of contagion to other children, 
to immunocompromised contacts, or to pregnant women.
Well-­appearing immune-­competent patients with fever and petechial 
rash present a challenge to the clinician. Such patients with cough or eme­
sis and petechiae only above the nipple line, and a positive streptococcal 
antigen or PCR test, or patients with normal leukocyte, absolute neutro­
phil, and platelet counts and a normal prothrombin time are exceedingly 
unlikely to have an invasive bacterial illness such as meningococcemia.
The subset of patients with fever and rash who have shock or appear 
toxic, have unstable vital signs, or have altered mental status must have 
a comprehensive evaluation and a diagnosis confirmed as quickly as 
possible to detect potentially life-­threatening underlying infection. 
Patients with thrombocytopenia and an abnormal coagulation profile 
should be admitted for further evaluation and treatment of DIC, which 
may have an underlying infectious or inflammatory cause. Patients 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1007
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
with thrombocytopenia and a normal coagulation profile may have 
infection with tick-­borne rickettsial pathogens, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 
EBV, an autoimmune disease such as SLE, or a primary hematologic-­
oncologic disorder, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
or leukemia, associated with an intercurrent infection; such patients 
should be evaluated for these disorders. Patients with eosinophilia and 
elevated transaminases may have DRESS.
Several serious diseases present with features that resemble benign 
processes; it is crucial to distinguish these as early in the clinical course 
as possible so definitive treatment can be given (Table 53.7).
Clinical Syndromes
In certain instances, the diagnostic approach to disorders manifest­
ing with fever and rash is wholly dependent on an aggregation of 
signs, symptoms, and laboratory results. These disorders either have 
many underlying causes manifesting with overlapping features or 
have unknown causes for which no confirmatory tests have yet been 
devised. These diseases are diagnosed by recognizing patterns and 
sometimes by excluding other diagnoses; some are based on formal­
ized aggregation, termed syndromic diagnosis. Although syndromic 
diagnosis is based on explicit clinical criteria, some of the clusters of 
TABLE 53.7  Potentially Life-­Threatening Conditions with Initial Skin Findings That Can Mimic 
a More Common Benign Disorder
Potentially Life-
­Threatening Condition
Benign Disorder That Is 
Mimicked Early in the Course
Clues to the Diagnosis as the Condition Evolves
DRESS/DIHS*
Morbilliform/urticarial drug eruption > 
viral exanthem
 • Facial swelling
 • High fever
 • Prominent lymphadenopathy
 • Marked peripheral blood eosinophilia, atypical lymphocytes
 • Elevated transaminases, other signs of internal organ involvement
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome/
toxic epidermal necrolysis
Morbilliform/urticarial drug eruption > 
viral exanthem
 • Early involvement of palms and soles
 • Duskiness of blistering (often initially in the center of lesions)
 • Painful/tender skin
 • Mucosal erosions (oral, nasal, ocular, genital)
RMSF/other rickettsial spotted 
fevers
Viral exanthem
 • Potential exposure to ticks (e.g., season [spring to late summer for RMSF], 
geographic location)
 • High fever, myalgias, headache (often for 2–5 days prior to rash)
 • Rash begins on wrists/ankles, spreads centripetally (± palms/soles)
 • Petechiae within erythematous macules/papules
Meningococcemia
Viral exanthem
 • Petechiae → retiform purpura
 • Fever with chills, myalgias
 • Headache, stiff neck
 • Leg pain, cold hands/feet, abnormal skin color
Kawasaki disease
Viral exanthem, morbilliform/urticarial 
drug eruption, erythema multiforme, 
“diaper dermatitis” (for early perineal 
eruption)
 • Early perineal erythema → desquamation
 • Conjunctival injection
 • “Chapped” lips, “strawberry” tongue
 • Acral erythema and edema
 • Continued high-­spiking fever >5 days
 • Prominent unilateral lymphadenopathy
Staphylococcal scalded skin 
syndrome
Seborrheic dermatitis, viral exanthem
 • Painful/tender skin
 • Periorificial (around mouth and eyes) edema and (later) radial scale-­crusts
 • Confluent erythema → superficial erosions/peeling, especially in 
intertriginous sites
Toxic shock syndrome
Scarlatiniform exanthem
 • Strawberry tongue
 • Mucositis
 • Rapid evolution
 • Hypotension
Necrotizing fasciitis
Cellulitis
 • Tense, “woody” induration
 • Extreme pain or (later) anesthesia
 • Rapid evolution
 • Erythema → dusky gray color
 • Watery, malodorous discharge
MIS-­C
Viral exanthem, scarlatiniform exanthem
 • Fever
 • Multisystem involvement
 • Recent SARS-­CoV-­2 infection or exposure to COVID-­19
 • Lab studies with multiorgan involvement and elevated inflammatory markers
*In general, begins ≥2 wk after the drug is initiated and has a relatively limited set of culprit medications.
DIHS, drug-­induced hypersensitivity syndrome; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; RMSF, Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2.
Modified from Bolognia J, Schaffer JV, Duncan KO, et al. Fever and rash. In: Bolognia J, Schaffer JV, Duncan KO, et al., eds. Dermatology 
Essentials. Oxford: Saunders; 2014:35, Table 3.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1008
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings were established originally 
for epidemiologic purposes (case definition) to facilitate exploration 
of an underlying cause. As such, although they are usually quite spe­
cific, these criteria may be less sensitive when they are applied in the 
acute care setting for the purposes of clinical diagnosis.
Kawasaki Disease
KD is a medium-­vessel vasculitis of childhood with a predilection 
for the coronary arteries. It is the second most common vasculitis of 
childhood after HSP, and it is the most common cause of acquired 
heart disease in children in the United States. Etiology is unknown, 
but epidemiologic studies support an infectious trigger. A genetic role 
is suspected given the 10-­ to 20-­fold increased incidence in Japan as 
compared to the United States and United Kingdom. The majority (75–
85%) of affected children are younger than 5 years old. Infants aged 
younger than 6 months and children over 5 years old are at the highest 
risk for coronary artery aneurysms.
The fever of KD is usually high and unremitting; patients are often 
irritable and ill-­appearing. Rash is seen in more than 80% of patients 
with KD and is polymorphic. It is often morbilliform but may also 
be erythema multiforme–like (fixed erythematous target lesions; Fig. 
53.13), urticarial, scarlatiniform, or pustular. Erythema and early 
desquamation (within 48 hours) of the perineum is common. Vesicu­
lobullous lesions and petechiae are unexpected.
Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds (Table 53.8 and Figs. 53.14, 
53.15, 53.16, 53.17, and 53.18). Fewer than 75% of patients meet the 
Fig. 53.13  Erythema multiforme in a child with Kawasaki disease. 
(From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 
5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
TABLE 53.8  Diagnosis of Classic Kawasaki Disease (KD)
Classic KD is diagnosed in the presence of fever for at least 5 days (the day 
of fever onset is taken to be the first day of fever) together with at least 
four of the five following principal clinical features. In the presence of four 
or more principal clinical features, particularly when redness and swelling 
of the hands and feet are present, the diagnosis of KD can be made with 
4 days of fever, although experienced clinicians who have treated many 
patients with KD may establish the diagnosis with 3 days of fever in rare 
cases:
	1.	Erythema and cracking of lips, strawberry tongue, and/or erythema of oral 
and pharyngeal mucosa
	2.	Bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection without exudate
	3.	Rash: maculopapular, diffuse erythroderma, or erythema multiforme–like
	4.	Erythema and edema of the hands and feet in acute phase and/or 
periungual desquamation in subacute phase
	5.	Cervical lymphadenopathy (≥1.5 cm diameter), usually unilateral
A careful history may reveal that one or more principal clinical 
features were present during the illness but resolved by the time of 
presentation.
Patients who lack full clinical features of classic KD are often evaluated for 
incomplete KD. If coronary artery abnormalities are detected, the diagnosis 
of KD is considered confirmed in most cases.
Laboratory tests typically reveal normal or elevated white blood cell 
count with neutrophil predominance and elevated acute-­phase 
reactants such as CRP and ESR during the acute phase. Low serum 
sodium and albumin levels, elevated serum liver enzymes, and 
sterile pyuria can be present. In the second week after fever onset, 
thrombocytosis is common.
Other clinical findings may include the following:
Cardiovascular
Myocarditis, pericarditis, valvular regurgitation, shock
Coronary artery abnormalities
Aneurysms of medium-­sized noncoronary arteries
Peripheral gangrene
Aortic root enlargement
Respiratory
Peribronchial and interstitial infiltrates on CXR
Pulmonary nodules
Musculoskeletal
Arthritis, arthralgia (pleocytosis of synovial fluid)
Gastrointestinal
Diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain
Hepatitis, jaundice
Gallbladder hydrops
Pancreatitis
Nervous system
Extreme irritability
Aseptic meningitis (pleocytosis of cerebrospinal fluid)
Facial nerve palsy
Sensorineural hearing loss
Genitourinary
Urethritis/meatitis, hydrocele
Other
Desquamating rash in groin
Retropharyngeal phlegmon
Anterior uveitis by slit-­lamp examination
Erythema and induration at BCG inoculation site
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious and 
noninfectious conditions, including the following:
Measles
Other viral infections (e.g., adenovirus, enterovirus)
Staphylococcal and streptococcal toxin-­mediated diseases (e.g., scarlet 
fever and toxic shock syndrome)
Drug hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
With epidemiologic risk factors:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever or other rickettsial infections
Leptospirosis
BCG, bacillus Calmette-­Guerin; CXR, chest radiography.
From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:544, Table 14.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1009
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
classic complete criteria at presentation; diagnosis of incomplete KD 
may be made with less than four criteria with the addition of labo­
ratory and echocardiographic criteria (Fig. 53.19). Application of this 
algorithm increases sensitivity for KD to 97%. Early diagnosis is crucial 
to decrease the risk of coronary artery aneurysms, which decreases to 
<5% in promptly treated patients at 7-­week follow-­up.
The differential diagnosis of KD includes scarlet fever, TSS, Rocky 
mountain spotted fever, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, measles, and 
MIS-­C (Tables 53.9 and 53.10 and Fig. 53.20). MIS-­C is a poten­
tially life-­threatening illness that has been epidemiologically linked 
to severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 (SARS-­CoV-­2) 
infection. Patients present with multiple systemic symptoms includ­
ing fever, rash, mucocutaneous changes, conjunctivitis, gastrointesti­
nal symptoms, and/or altered mental status. Signs include multiorgan 
involvement, often with elevated troponin, B-­type natriuretic peptide 
(BNP), or proBNP. There may also be acute kidney injury, elevated liver 
enzymes, and, in severe cases, hemodynamic instability or frank shock. 
Significant elevation of CRP has been almost uniformly present. The 
features may overlap with TSS and KD for which some patients may 
meet full or partial diagnostic criteria (see Table 53.9). Patients with 
MIS-­C may have a negative nasopharyngeal test for SARS-­CoV-2 but a 
positive antibody titer.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
TSS is a life-­threatening illness caused by superantigen-­producing 
strains of group A streptococcus and S. aureus. The syndrome is 
defined by fever, diffuse macular erythroderma with convalescent 
desquamation, hypotension, mucositis, strawberry tongue, and 
Fig. 53.14  Kawasaki disease. Nonpurulent conjunctival injection and 
“cherry red” lips with fissuring and crusting are early signs of the dis­
ease. (Courtesy Anne W. Luckey, MD.)
Fig. 53.15  Indurative edema of the hands in Kawasaki disease. (From 
Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Fig. 53.16  Desquamation of the fingers in a patient with Kawasaki disease, 
convalescent stage. (From Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., 
eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Fig. 53.17  Beau lines, a horizontal groove on the nails of a patient with 
Kawasaki disease, convalescent stage. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. 
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016.)
Fig. 53.18  A scarlet fever–like rash that desquamates in a child with 
Kawasaki disease. (From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology. 6th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1010
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
multiorgan dysfunction. Menstrual staphylococcal TSS classically 
affects menstruating teenage females secondary to vaginal coloniza­
tion with toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-­1)-­producing strains of 
S. aureus. TSST-­1 and other staphylococcal exotoxins also cause TSS 
in the setting of abscess, wound infections or burns, nasal packing, 
or other infections. Streptococcal TSS is often associated with severe 
cutaneous infections but has no identified source of entry in ∼50% of 
patients. Diagnostic criteria are slightly different for each syndrome.
Staphylococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome
Laboratory criteria for diagnosis include negative results on the fol­
lowing tests, if obtained: blood or CSF cultures (blood culture may be 
positive for S. aureus) and serologies for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 
leptospirosis, or measles. A probable case meets the laboratory criteria 
and four of five clinical criteria and a confirmed case meets the labora­
tory and all five clinical criteria:
Fever: temperature ≥102°F (≥38.9°C)
Rash: diffuse macular erythroderma
Desquamation: 1–2 weeks after onset of rash
Hypotension: systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg for adults or <5th 
percentile by age for children aged younger than 16 years
Multisystem involvement (three or more of the following organ systems):
	1.	 Gastrointestinal: vomiting or diarrhea at the onset of illness
	2.	 Muscular: severe myalgia or creatine phosphokinase level at least 
twice the upper limit of normal
	3.	 Mucous membrane: vaginal, oropharyngeal, or conjunctival 
­hyperemia
	4.	 Renal: blood urea nitrogen or creatinine at least twice the upper 
limit of normal for laboratory or urinary sediment with pyuria 
(≥5 leukocytes/high-­power field) in the absence of urinary tract 
­infection
	5.	 Hepatic: total bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase enzyme, or aspar­
tate aminotransferase enzyme levels at least twice the upper limit of 
normal for laboratory
	6.	 Hematologic: platelets <100,000/mm3
	7.	 Central nervous system: disorientation or alterations in conscious­
ness without focal neurologic signs when fever and hypotension are 
absent
No
Yes
Evaluation of Suspected Incomplete Kawasaki Disease1
Children with fever 5 days and 2 or 3 compatible clinical criteria2 OR
Infants with fever for 7 days without other explanation3
Assess laboratory tests
Treat5
CRP <3.0 mg/dL and ESR <40 mm/hr
CRP ≥3.0 mg/dL and/or ESR ≥40 mm/hr
Serial clinical and laboratory 
re-evaluation if fevers persist
Echocardiogram if typical
peeling6 develops
3 or more laboratory findings:
  1)  Anemia for age
  2)  Platelet count of ≥450,000 after the
7th day of fever
  3)  Albumin ≤3.0 g/dL
  4)  Elevated ALT level
  5)  WBC count of ≥15,000/mm3
  6)  Urine ≥10 WBC/hpf
OR
Positive echocardiogram4
Fig. 53.19  Evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease. 1In the absence of a “gold standard” for 
diagnosis, this algorithm cannot be evidence based but rather represents the informed opinion of the expert 
committee. Consultation with an expert should be sought any time assistance is needed. 2Characteristics 
suggesting that another diagnosis should be considered include exudative conjunctivitis, exudative pharyn­
gitis, ulcerative intraoral lesions, bullous or vesicular rash, generalized adenopathy, or splenomegaly. 3Infants 
6 months of age or younger are the most likely to develop prolonged fever without other clinical criteria for 
Kawasaki disease; these infants are at particularly high risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities. 4Echo­
cardiography is considered positive for purposes of this algorithm if any of three conditions are met: z score of 
left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery ≥2.5; coronary artery aneurysm is observed; 
or three or more other suggestive features exist, including decreased left ventricular function, mitral regur­
gitation, pericardial effusion, or z scores in left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery of 
2–2.5. 5If the echocardiogram is positive, treatment should be given within 10 days of fever onset or after 
the 10th day of fever in the presence of clinical and laboratory signs (CRP, ESR) of ongoing inflammation. 
6Typical peeling begins under the nail beds of fingers and toes. ALT, alanine transaminase; hpf, high-­powered 
field; WBC, white blood cell. (Reprinted with permission from McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, 
et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health 
professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135[17]:e927–e999.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1011
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
TABLE 53.9  CDC Case Definition for MIS-­C
All four diagnostic criteria must be met:
	1.	Age <21 yr
	2.	Clinical presentation should include all of the following:
	 a.	 Fever ≥38.0°C for ≥24 hr or report of subjective fever lasting ≥24 hr
	 b.	Laboratory evidence of inflammation, including, but not limited to, one 
or more of the following:
 
• Elevated CRP
 
• Elevated ESR
 
• Elevated fibrinogen
 
• Elevated procalcitonin
 
• Elevated d-­dimer
 
• Elevated ferritin
 
• Elevated lactic acid dehydrogenase (LDH)
 
• Elevated interleukin-­6 (IL-­6)
 
• Elevated neutrophils
 
• Reduced lymphocytes
 
• Low albumin
	 c.	 Evidence of clinically severe illness requiring hospitalization
	 d.	Multisystem (≥2) organ involvement (cardiac, renal, respiratory, 
hematologic, gastrointestinal, dermatologic, or neurologic)
	3.	No alternative plausible diagnoses
	4.	Positive for current or recent SARS-­CoV-­2 infection by RT-­PCR, serology, 
or antigen test; or COVID-­19 exposure within the 4 wk prior to the onset of 
symptoms
CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MIS-­C, multisys­
tem inflammatory syndrome in children; RT-­PCR, reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syn­
drome–coronavirus 2.
Source: United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Multi­
system inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated with coro­
navirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19). 2020. Available at https://emergency.
cdc.gov/han/2020/han00432.asp.
Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome
Confirmed case: isolation of group A streptococci from a normally 
sterile site (blood; cerebrospinal, pleural, or peritoneal fluid; tissue 
biopsy; surgical wound; etc.); or
Probable case: isolation of group A streptococci from a nonsterile site 
(throat, sputum, vagina, superficial skin lesion), and
Clinical signs of severity:
	1.	 Hypotension: systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg in adults or below 
5th percentile for age in children, and
	2.	 Two or more of the following signs:
 
• Renal impairment: creatinine ≥177 μmol/L (≥2 mg/dL) for 
adults or ≥2 times the upper limit of normal for age; in patients 
with pre-­existing renal disease, a twofold or greater elevation 
over the baseline level
 • Coagulopathy: platelets ≤100 × 109/L (≤100,000/mm3) or DIC 
defined by prolonged clotting times, low fibrinogen level, and the 
presence of fibrin degradation products
 • Liver involvement: serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine ami­
notransferase, or total bilirubin levels ≥2 times the upper limit of 
normal for age; in patients with pre-­existing liver disease, a twofold 
or greater elevation over the baseline level
 • Acute respiratory distress syndrome defined by acute onset of dif­
fuse pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia in the absence of cardiac 
failure, or evidence of diffuse capillary leak manifested by acute 
onset of generalized edema, or pleural or peritoneal effusions with 
hypoalbuminemia
 • A generalized erythematous macular rash that may desquamate
 • Soft tissue necrosis, including necrotizing fasciitis or myositis, or 
gangrene
Erythema Multiforme
Erythema multiforme (EM) is a self-­limited immune reaction that 
predominantly occurs in the setting of infection, most often HSV. M. 
pneumoniae and rarely drugs or systemic disease are causes of EM. It 
is characterized by the abrupt onset of fixed erythematous papules that 
evolve into target lesions (see Fig. 53.13). The basic lesions are round 
macular targets symmetrically distributed especially over the palms, 
soles, and extensor surfaces of the extremities. Severe mucosal lesions 
can also develop (EM major). Though it has potentially overlapping 
features with SJS (Stevens-­Johnson syndrome), it is a distinct disease.
Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome, Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis, and 
Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome
SJS and TEN are rare, life-­threatening mucocutaneous exfoliative der­
matoses that are usually drug related (Table 53.11). They are thought 
to be associated with an immune response to an antigenic complex 
Fig. 53.20  Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. (From 
Naka F, Melnick L, Gorelik M, et al. A dermatologic perspective on mul­
tisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Clin Dermatol. [published 
online ahead of print, 2020 Sep. 23].)
TABLE 53.10  Comparing and Contrasting 
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in 
Children (MIS-­C) with Kawasaki Disease
MIS-­C
Kawasaki Disease
Mean age 8–12 yr
Mean age <5 yr
Non-­Hispanic Blacks at higher risk
Asians at higher risk
Fever >24 hr
Fever >5 days
GI symptoms common (severe 
abdominal pain)
GI complaints not common
Myocarditis/myocardial dysfunction 
(left ventricular dysfunction)
Myocardial function normal/mildly 
reduced*
Coronary artery dilation or aneurysms 
(25–50%)
Coronary artery abnormalities such 
as aneurysms common if untreated
Renal involvement more common
Renal involvement rare
Proinflammatory state common
Proinflammatory state common
Lymphopenia common
Lymphopenia not common
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytosis
GI, gastrointestinal.
*Except in Kawasaki shock syndrome.
From Naka F, Melnick L, Gorelik M, et al. A dermatologic perspective on 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Clin Dermatol. [pub­
lished online ahead of print, 2020 Sep. 23], Table 5.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1012
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
formed by the reaction of intermediate drug metabolites with host 
tissues. SJS and TEN are characterized by diffuse cutaneous erythema 
and full-­thickness necrosis of the epidermis with detachment of the 
skin at the dermal-­epidermal junction. They differ in the percentage 
of involved total body surface area (BSA); SJS involves ≤10% BSA, SJS/
TEN overlap involves between 10% and 30% BSA, and TEN involves 
≥30% BSA. They differ histopathologically from SSSS, which also man­
ifests clinically with diffuse erythema and blistering in its cleavage 
plane. In SSSS, blistering is produced more superficially by disruption 
of the epidermal granular cell layer in response to one of two staphy­
lococcal exfoliative toxins (ET-­A or ET-­B). This results in easy disrup­
tion of skin with firm rubbing (Nikolsky sign). SSSS is usually seen in 
infants and young children, whereas SJS and TEN are seen in older 
children. The key feature that distinguishes SJS and TEN from SSSS 
is the presence of blistering lesions, which may involve the lips, eyes, 
nasal mucosa, genitalia, or rectum (Figs. 53.21 and 53.22). Extensive 
ocular involvement, including corneal ulceration, uveitis, and panoph­
thalmitis, may develop. Pulmonary and renal involvement have also 
been reported. Representative medications frequently associated with 
SJS and TEN include aminopenicillins, carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
medications. Prognosis is related to the speed with which the responsi­
ble medication is withdrawn, so a timely diagnosis is critical.
Serum Sickness and Serum Sickness–Like Reaction
Serum sickness is a systemic hypersensitivity condition resulting from 
immune complex deposition in tissue and blood vessels that causes tis­
sue damage through complement activation. It is classically associated 
with the administration of animal serum proteins, but the availability 
of alternative therapies, including monoclonal antibodies of human 
origin, has decreased the incidence of true serum sickness. A serum 
sickness–like reaction can be triggered by antibiotics or other drugs 
(particularly cefaclor, penicillins, sulfonamides, phenytoin, carbamaz­
epine) and presents 1–2 weeks after exposure. Symptoms include fever, 
rash, arthralgia or arthritis, and lymphadenopathy. The rash of serum 
sickness–like reaction is morbilliform or large fixed serpiginous and 
cyclic urticarial plaques; it can be confused with other circular rashes 
such as giant urticaria and EM (Fig. 53.23). Serum sickness–like reac­
tions do not exhibit the hypocomplementemia, vasculitis, circulating 
immune complexes, and renal lesions that are seen in serum sickness. 
Critical to making the diagnosis is identification of exposure to a drug 
in the preceding 1–2 weeks. A watchful waiting approach may support 
the diagnosis, inasmuch as the syndrome should resolve within approx­
imately 4 weeks if exposure to the purported offending agent has been 
curtailed. Persistence of findings beyond this period indicates another 
disorder associated with immune complex–mediated vasculitis.
Henoch-­Schönlein Purpura (IgA Vasculitis)
HSP is usually a self-­limited immunoglobulin A (IgA)-­mediated vas­
culitis representing the most common vasculitis of childhood. It affects 
vessels in the skin, joints, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. The clin­
ical manifestations include a rash, which initially is urticarial and then 
frequently evolves into a maculopapular eruption; after this eruption, 
petechiae and then purpuric plaques distributed predominantly on the 
buttocks and over the lower extremities develop (Fig. 53.24). These 
Fig. 53.21  Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. Mucous membrane involve­
ment with severe swelling and hemorrhagic crusting of the lips. (From 
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Fig. 53.22  Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. Confluent erythema, blisters, 
and exfoliation of the epidermis are present. (From Hurwitz S. Clinical 
Pediatric Dermatology: A Textbook of Skin Disorders of Childhood and 
Adolescence. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993:528.)
TABLE 53.11  Classification of Stevens-­
Johnson Syndrome (SJS), Toxic Epidermal 
Necrolysis (TEN), and Stevens-­Johnson 
Syndrome–Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis 
(SJS-­TEN) Overlap
SJS
SJS-­TEN
TEN
Lesional 
morphology
Targetoid lesions, 
dusky red 
macules, bullae
Targetoid 
lesions, dusky 
red macules, 
bullae
Targetoid 
lesions, dusky 
erythematous 
macules and 
plaques, 
detachment of 
epidermis
Localization of 
skin lesions
May be scattered 
and isolated; may 
be confluent, 
especially on the 
trunk and face
May be scattered 
and isolated; 
often confluent
Usually extensive 
involvement 
with widespread 
confluence
Involved skin
<10%
10–30%
>30%
Biopsy features More interface 
dermatitis
Significant 
interface 
dermatitis + 
necrolysis
Predominantly 
necrolysis
Mucosal 
changes
Prominent
Prominent
May be less than 
in SJS
Systemic 
involvement
Often present
Always present
Always present
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric 
Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:478, Table 20.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1013
CHAPTER 53  Fever and Rash
plaques usually are raised from the skin surface, which gives the rash 
its characteristic feature of “palpable purpura.” Associated findings that 
are variably present include arthralgias and arthritis; edema of the feet, 
hands, face, scrotum, and scalp; melena, which may accompany intus­
susception; and an abnormal UA that demonstrates hematuria and 
proteinuria. Fever, if present, is low grade and not a dominant feature 
of HSP. Laboratory testing is not necessary but can be of use to the 
clinician in excluding the infectious or hematologic causes of purpura 
if the patient does not present with classic features. Specifically, the 
results of both the platelet count and the coagulation profile are nor­
mal, and blood cultures are sterile. A Gram stain of the lesion is not 
usually needed, but the results are negative. Skin biopsy demonstrates 
the characteristic leukocytoclastic vasculitis involving the vessels in the 
dermis with IgA deposition.
Other Disorders
The diagnosis of other disorders manifesting with fever and rash is 
also based on formal syndromic criteria. SJIA (see Chapter 44), acute 
rheumatic fever (see Chapter 9), HLH (see Chapter 54), and SLE are 
examples. Representative diagnoses usually necessitating tissue con­
firmation are sarcoidosis and other vasculitides, such as polyarteritis 
nodosa or Wegener granulomatosis.
Management of Fever and Rash
Treatment of patients with fever and rash includes both anticipatory 
guidance and specific interventions. Anticipatory guidance alone usually 
suffices for patients who have a clearly identifiable, acute, self-­limited, 
and noninvasive infectious or hypersensitivity disorder. Parents should 
be informed of the probable duration of illness, the expected evolution 
of clinical manifestations, potential complications and how to recognize 
them, and when to recontact the physician (see Tables 53.5 and 53.6).
The use of antipyretics as supportive therapy for patients with fever 
remains controversial. Arguments in favor of such therapy include 
decreasing symptomatic discomfort associated with the febrile state 
and reducing the undesirable metabolic and cardiopulmonary effects. 
Inadvertent overdose or unwanted side effects of over-­the-­counter 
antipyretics argue against their routine use.
Empirical therapy with antibiotics is an appropriate strategy for 
patients with focal cutaneous infection, such as cellulitis and erythema 
migrans; for patients with petechial or purpuric rash who are thought 
to have invasive infectious disorders; or for patients who appear toxic 
or manifest signs of cardiovascular instability. If epidemiologic evi­
dence or clinical features are suggestive of rickettsial infection, the 
antimicrobial regimen should include doxycycline, even for children 
younger than 8 years. Suspected neonatal HSV infection should be 
treated with parenteral acyclovir.
Patients for whom a diagnosis is established by pattern recog­
nition, case finding, syndromic aggregation, biopsy, or exclusion of 
other disorders may receive definitive interventions, as available, if the 
treatment benefits outweigh the risks. SSSS should be treated with an 
intravenous antistaphylococcal antibiotic. Staphylococcal TSS should 
be treated by removing vaginal foreign material if present, or other­
wise effectively draining the source of the infection, and administer­
ing intravenous vancomycin; toxin and cytokine production should 
be curtailed with a bacterial protein synthesis inhibitor such as clin­
damycin. If methicillin-­sensitive S. aureus is confirmed by vaginal 
or other culture, an antistaphylococcal penicillin plus clindamycin is 
appropriate. Streptococcal TSS should be treated with surgical debride­
ment if indicated, and parenteral penicillin and clindamycin. Intrave­
nous immune globulin (IVIG) may be used as adjunctive therapy for 
streptococcal TSS to neutralize bacterial exotoxins. Treatment of acute 
rheumatic fever is directed at group A streptococcus with treatment-­
dose penicillin followed by prophylactic doses of penicillin to decrease 
the risk of recurrent rheumatic fever. Diseases caused by drug toxicity 
are treated by discontinuing the offending medication. SJS and TEN 
are treated with supportive care, often in a burn center; meticulous skin 
and ophthalmologic care; and IVIG.
Fig. 53.23  Serum sickness–like reaction. Urticarial wheals occurred 2 
weeks after exposure to cefaclor. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. 
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:475, Fig. 20.13.)
A
B
Fig. 53.24  A, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. Palpable purpuric papules and 
plaques. B, Palpable purpura of the buttocks, a classic site of involve­
ment in Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. 
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:497, Figs. 21.3, 21.5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1014
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Infections with HSV or varicella-­zoster virus may be treated with 
oral or intravenous acyclovir. Intravenous therapy is particularly 
appropriate for immunocompromised patients. The benefits of acy­
clovir therapy for HSV or varicella-­zoster virus in immunocompetent 
hosts are less clear but traditionally utilized as it appears to shorten 
the duration of symptoms, particularly if given early in the course of 
infection.
Pharmacologic interventions in the systemic inflammatory dis­
orders include antiinflammatory agents such as the nonsteroidal 
agents, corticosteroids, and immunosuppressant or modulating agents. 
Administration of IVIG is a definitive intervention in all patients 
with KD to reduce coronary aneurysm formation. The most effective 
treatment regimen for patients with KD of <10 days’ duration is one 
dose of IVIG (2 g/kg) given over 12 hours with adjunctive aspirin ther­
apy for at least 6–8 weeks to prevent thrombotic complications. Because 
10% of patients may have persistent fever (>48 hours) or recrudescence 
of fever after the one-­dose IVIG regimen, repeated treatment with 
IVIG is often necessary. Treatment of IVIG nonresponders is more 
controversial and may consist of corticosteroids, infliximab, or other 
immunosuppressant agents.
Patients with MIS-­C often require admission to an intensive care 
unit and require organ-­specific support for heart, kidney, or lung dys­
function in addition to IVIG, methylprednisolone, and anticoagulant 
therapy.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Most childhood episodes of fever and rash represent benign, self-­
limited viral illnesses with little or no sequelae. Diseases with poten­
tially significant sequelae, such as meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, acute rheumatic fever, KD, SJS, DRESS, MIS-­C, TSS, 
and SSSS, require efficient evaluation and timely treatment. Red flags 
include toxic appearance, unstable vital signs, meningismus, or fever 
with petechiae or purpura.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1014.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Academy of Pediatrics. Lyme Disease. Report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. 31st ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2018:515–523.
American Academy of Pediatrics. Rickettsial Disease. Report of the Committee 
on Infectious Diseases. 31st ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2018:693–696.
Avner JR. Acute fever. Pediatr Rev. 2009;30(1):5–13.
Baker RC, Seguin JH, Leslie N, et al. Fever and petechiae in children. 
Pediatrics. 1989;84(6):1051–1055.
Bialecki C, Feder Jr HM, Grant-­Kels JM. The six classic childhood exanthems: 
a review and update. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989;21(5 Pt 1):891–903.
Biesbroeck L, Sidbury R. Viral exanthems: an update. Dermatol Ther. 
2013;26(6):433–438.
Biggs HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley KK, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other 
spotted fever group rickettsioses, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis – United 
States. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65(RR-­2):1–44.
Bolognia J, Schaffer JV, Duncan KO, et al. Fever and rash. In: Bolognia J, 
Schaffer JV, Duncan KO, et al., eds. Dermatology Essentials. Oxford: 
Saunders/Elsevier; 2014:28–38.
Burns JC, Wiggins Jr JW, Toews WH, et al. Clinical spectrum of 
Kawasaki disease in infants younger than 6 months of age. J Pediatr. 
1986;109(5):759–763.
Chang FY, Hwang B, Chen SJ, et al. Characteristics of Kawasaki disease 
in infants younger than six months of age. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2006;25(3):241–244.
French LE, Prins C. Erythema multiforme, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Bolognia J, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, eds. 
Dermatology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:319–333.
Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the 
diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of doppler echocardiography: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2015;131(20):1806–1818.
Goodyear HM, Laidler PW, Price EH, et al. Acute infectious erythemas in 
children: a clinico-­microbiological study. Br J Dermatol. 1991;124(5):433–438.
Gowdie PJ, Tse SM. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2012;59(2):301–327.
Gubbay JB, McIntyre PB, Gilmour RE. Cellulitis in childhood invasive 
pneumococcal disease: a population-­based study. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2006;42(6):354–358.
Husain Z, Reddy BY, Schwartz RA. DRESS syndrome: part I. Clinical 
perspectives. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;68(5):693.e1–693.e14. Quiz 706–708.
Husain Z, Reddy BY, Schwartz RA. DRESS syndrome: part II. Management and 
therapeutics. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;68(5):709.e1–709.e9. Quiz 18–20.
Kang JH. Febrile illness with skin rashes. Infect Chemother. 2015l;47(3):155–
166.
Kaye ET, Kaye KM. Fever and rash. In: Kasper D, Fauci A, Hauser S, et al., eds. 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 
2015.
Klassen TP, Hartling L, Wiebe N, et al. Acyclovir for treating varicella in 
otherwise healthy children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2005;4:Cd002980.
Ladisch S. Histiocytosis syndromes of childhood. In: Kliegman R, Stanton 
B, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2484–2489.
Lee Y-­C, Kuo H-­C, Chang J-­S, et al. Two new susceptibility loci for Kawasaki 
disease identified through genome-­wide association analysis. Nat Genet. 
2012;44(5):522–525.
Macias ES, Pereira FA, Rietkerk W, et al. Superantigens in dermatology. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(3):455–472.
Mandl KD, Stack AM, Fleisher GR. Incidence of bacteremia in infants and 
children with fever and petechiae. J Pediatr. 1997;131(3):398–404.
Markowitz M, Kaplan EL. Reappearance of rheumatic fever. Adv Pediatr. 
1989;36:39–65.
Mathur AN, Mathes EF. Urticaria mimickers in children. Dermatol Ther. 
2013;26(6):467–475.
Miller HC, Stephan M. Hemorrhagic varicella: A case report and review of the 
complications of varicella in children. Am J Emerg Med. 1993;11(6):633–638.
Miller JM, Binnicker MJ, Campbell S, et al. A guide to utilization of the 
microbiology laboratory for diagnosis of infectious diseases: 2018 update 
by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American Society 
for Microbiology. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;67(6):e1–e94.
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-­C). Available from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/mis-­c/hcp/index.html.
Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Gerber MA, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and 
long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a statement for health 
professionals from the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis 
and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2004;110(17):2747–2771.
Noguera-­Morel L, Hernández-­Martín Á, Torrelo A. Cutaneous drug reactions 
in the pediatric population. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2014;61(2):403–426.
Onouchi Y. Genetics of Kawasaki disease: what we know and don’t know. Circ 
J. 2012;76(7):1581–1586.
Rose HM. The clinical manifestations and laboratory diagnosis of 
rickettsialpox. Ann Intern Med. 1949;31(5):871–883.
Scuccimarri R. Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2012;59(2):425–445.
Sidoroff A. Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. Chem Immunol 
Allergy. 2012;97:139–148.
Solomon AR, Rasmussen JE, Varani J, et al. The Tzanck smear in the diagnosis 
of cutaneous herpes simplex. JAMA. 1984;251(5):633–635.
Southern tick-­associated rash illness. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/
stari/index.html.
Streptococcal toxic-­shock syndrome (STSS) (Streptococcus pyogenes) 2010 
case definition. Available from: http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/
streptococcal-­toxic-­shock-­syndrome/case-­definition/2010/.
Thompson MJ, Ninis N, Perera R, et al. Clinical recognition of meningococcal 
disease in children and adolescents. Lancet. 2006;367(9508):397.
Toxic shock syndrome (other than streptococcal) (TSS) 2011 case definition. 
Available from: http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/toxic-­shock-­
syndrome-­other-­than-­streptococcal/case-­definition/2011/.
Ye Q, Shao WX, Shang SQ, et al. A comprehensive assessment of the value of 
laboratory indices in diagnosing Kawasaki disease. Arthritis Rheumatol. 
2015;67(7):1943–1950.
Yellen ES, Gauvreau K, Takahashi M, et al. Performance of 2004 American 
Heart Association recommendations for treatment of Kawasaki disease. 
Pediatrics. 2010;125(2):e234–e241.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
