661
DEFINITIONS
Tone is defined as resistance to passive stretch while a patient is attempt­
ing to maintain a relaxed state of muscle activity. Tone can be divided 
into postural tone, which represents the steady flexion or extension 
of a joint caused by the uniform resistance of muscle to passive move­
ment, and phasic tone, which represents the catch when an extremity 
is rapidly flexed or extended. Hypertonia describes unusually elevated 
tone, typically the result of an upper motor neuron disease. Hypertonia 
itself has three different clinical subtypes that may exist individually or 
in combination (Table 38.1):
Spasticity: hypertonia in which one or both of the following signs 
are present: (1) resistance to externally imposed movement 
increases with increasing speed of stretch and varies with the 
direction of joint movement, and/or (2) resistance to externally 
imposed movement rises rapidly above a threshold speed or 
joint angle.
Dystonia: movement disorder in which involuntary, sustained, or 
intermittent muscle contractions cause twisting and repetitive 
movements, abnormal posture, or both. The muscle contrac­
tions are the hypertonic component.
Rigidity: hypertonia in which all of the following are true: (1) the 
resistance to externally imposed joint movement is present at 
very low speeds of movement, does not depend on imposed 
speed, and does not exhibit a speed or angle threshold; (2) 
simultaneous co-­contraction of agonists and antagonists may 
occur, and this is reflected in an immediate resistance to a rever­
sal of the direction of movement about a joint; (3) the limb does 
not tend to return toward a particular fixed posture or extreme 
joint angle; and (4) voluntary activity in distant muscle groups 
does not lead to involuntary movements about the rigid joints, 
although rigidity may worsen.
The term motor syndrome is an alternative term inclusive of the 
different types of clinical hypertonia as well as other neurologic defi­
cits. A motor syndrome caused by an injury before the age of 2 years is 
often labeled cerebral palsy (CP), whereas motor syndromes caused by 
injuries sustained after that age are described by terminology typically 
related to the etiology.
CP (see Chapter 27) and dystonia syndromes (see Chapter 40) are 
the two most common etiologies of hypertonia in children.
HISTORY
Elements of the history that should be collected include:
 • Onset of increased tone
 • Preceding illnesses, traumas, surgeries, or any events prior to the 
onset of increased tone
 • Course of hypertonia including worsening, improvement, or no 
changes over time since the onset
 • Limbs or body parts affected including the part most prominently 
affected
 • Any times of the day when hypertonia is most or least noticeable
 • Abnormal posture or movements
 • Abnormal gait
 • Worsening and alleviating factors
 • History of brain or spinal cord injuries
 • Drug or toxin exposure
 • Pregnancy and birth
 • Other medical or surgical conditions
 • Family history of any neuromuscular disorders
 • Environmental or medical allergies
Physical Examination
A general physical examination includes head and neck, cardiopulmo­
nary, abdominal, skin, and genital examinations. Findings on any of 
these areas may indicate a syndromic or genetic pathology. Addition­
ally, abnormalities in these systems may have implications on treat­
ment options for hypertonicity.
The neurologic examination includes the following components:
Mental state: This is age dependent and can range from observ­
ing the patient interacting with their environment and people 
around them in the first few years of life to formal mental state 
testing in the older cooperative child.
Cranial nerves examination includes pupillary reflexes, external 
eye movements, facial sensation, face symmetry, hearing, tongue 
and uvula on the midline, neck movements, and shoulder shrug.
A fundoscopic examination should be performed whenever pos­
sible. Abnormal findings in the retina can be signs of a genetic 
or systemic pathology or an intracranial pathology leading to 
increased intracranial pressure.
The motor examination is the main tool to assess a patient with 
hypertonia. Components of the motor exam include:
Strength: The ability to examine strength is also dependent on the 
patient’s age and cooperation and ranges from observing the 
child moving their limbs against gravity and the examiner’s 
resistance to the more detailed exam of different muscle groups 
in the child who is able to follow commands. Strength is typi­
cally graded as follows: 0: no contraction or movement; 1: mus­
cle contraction but no movement; 2: movement at the level of 
the bed but not against gravity; 3: movement against gravity but 
not against resistance; 4: some movement against resistance but 
not at the expected full level for age; and 5: normal movements 
against resistance.
Muscle bulk is assessed by inspection and palpation to detect any 
subtle muscle wasting, fasciculations, or hypertrophy.
Tone: It is important to take a thorough look at the whole mus­
culoskeletal system in a child presenting with increased tone, 
including the parts that are reportedly unaffected. This allows 
Hypertonicity
Ahmad Marashly
38
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
662
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
for comparison and detection of any unreported abnormalities 
by history. Inspection will look for size of the muscles, abnormal 
posture, and abnormal movements.
The child should be relaxed as much as possible and the body part 
examined supported against gravity. The head should be maintained in 
the midline to avoid contributions to tone from the tonic neck reflex. 
The following steps are then performed:
	1.	 Palpate muscles to look for contraction at rest.
	2.	 Measure resistance to movement of the affected joint with the child 
supine, seated, and standing.
	3.	 Measure passive range of motion at very slow (3 seconds to com­
plete the movement), intermediate (0.5 second to complete the 
movement), and fast (as rapidly as possible) speeds. Note the resis­
tance at the onset of movement, the presence or absence of a “catch” 
occurring at some time after the onset of movement, and the joint 
angle at which the catch occurs.
	4.	 Perform sudden reversal in the direction of movement at slow, 
intermediate, and fast speeds, and note the presence or absence 
of increased resistance immediately on reversal (suggesting co-­
contraction) or at some time after (suggesting a spastic catch), as 
well as any velocity dependence.
	5.	 Ask the child to move the same joint on the contralateral side and 
observe for involuntary movement, and then test for a change in resis­
tance to slow, passive movement. Instruct the child to move a distant 
and unrelated joint (e.g., by opening and closing one fist) on the con­
tralateral side and then the ipsilateral side and observe for involuntary 
movement or a change in resistance to passive movement.
Reflexes: The main reflexes examined are the biceps, triceps, bra­
chioradials, ankles, and knees.
Gait: When applicable, gait can aid in the determination of the dif­
ferent deficit patterns related to weakness, hypertonia, or movement 
disorders affecting the lower limbs.
Different scaling systems have been developed to measure hyperto­
nia including the Ashworth, modified Ashworth, and pendulum tests. 
These tests do not distinguish between the different clinical types of 
hypertonia but do measure severity. The Tardieu Scale compares the 
occurrence of a catch at low and high speeds and is effective in mea­
suring the velocity-­dependent component of hypertonia (Table 38.2). 
Other scales are designed to specifically measure dystonia and rigidity 
such as the Barry-­Albright Dystonia Scale. The Hypertonia Assessment 
Tool (HAT) is a 7-­item scaling system designed to assess all three dif­
ferent types of hypertonia for each extremity and has been shown to 
have good reliability, validity, and inter-­rater agreement in identifying 
spasticity and the absence of rigidity, and moderate findings for identi­
fying dystonia (Table 38.3).
Etiology
Hypertonia is a result of a pathology to the upper motor neuron path­
ways in the cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, brainstem, 
central white matter, or spinal cord. Hypertonia is not considered to be 
a sign of a peripheral nerve or muscle pathology.
Hypertonia is a component of many motor disorders. Clinically, 
motor disorders are often divided into pyramidal and extrapyramidal 
groups. However, it is increasingly recognized that the pyramidal and 
extrapyramidal motor systems are highly interconnected and a clear 
distinction is not always possible; rather, pathology affecting both sys­
tems usually exists in the same patient.
Pyramidal motor disorders result from injury to the cortical 
projections to the brainstem (corticobulbar) and spinal cord (corti­
cospinal) at any point along their tract resulting in a combination of 
weakness and increased tendon reflexes.
Extrapyramidal motor disorders result from injury to the basal 
ganglia, cerebellum, or nonprimary motor cortical areas resulting 
in abnormal motor control without weakness or changes in tendon 
reflexes.
The coexistence of pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs can make 
determination of contributions of these systems complex because dif­
ferent clinical types of hypertonia (spasticity, dystonia, and rigidity) 
often coexist in the same patient to variable degrees.
Furthermore, the ongoing growth, maturation, and prominent plas­
ticity of the central nervous system in children add to the complexity of 
motor syndromes, which can lead a static injury to the central nervous 
system to manifest with a dynamically changing clinical picture.
CEREBRAL PALSY
The most common disorder manifesting primarily with hypertonia in 
children is CP, resulting from an injury to the developing brain before 
the age of 2 years.
The different subtypes of spastic CP reflect the different variables 
involved in determining the clinical picture including age, location, 
and type of injury (Table 38.4).
The overall prevalence of CP is ∼2 per 1,000 live births, with much 
higher prevalence in preterm compared with term infants and decreas­
ing gestational age (GA) and birthweight (BW).
TABLE 38.2  Comparison of Ashworth and 
Tardieu Hypertonia Scales
Ashworth Scale
Tardieu Scale
0
No increased tone
No resistance
1
Slight increase in muscle tone, manifested 
by a catch and release or by minimal 
resistance at the end of the range of 
motion when the affected part is moved 
in flexion or extension
Slight resistance
2
More marked increase in muscle tone 
through most of the range of motion, but 
affected part(s) easily moved
Catch followed by a 
release
3
Considerable increase in muscle tone, 
passive movement difficult
Fatigable clonus 
(<10 sec)
4
Affected part(s) rigid in flexion or extension
Infatigable clonus 
(>10 sec)
TABLE 38.1  Clinical Findings of the 
Different Hypertonia Subtypes
Clinical Finding
Spasticity
Dystonia
Rigidity
Change in resistance with 
increasing speed of passive 
movement
Increases
No effect
No effect
Change in resistance with rapid 
reversal of direction
Delayed
Immediate
Immediate
Fixed posture
Only in severe 
cases
Yes
No
Effect of voluntary activity on 
pattern of activated muscles
Minimal
Yes
Minimal
Effect of behavioral task and 
emotional state pattern of 
activated muscles
Minimal
Yes
Minimal
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
663
CHAPTER 38  Hypertonicity
Although infants born preterm are at higher risk of developing CP, 
most CP cases are in infants born after 36 weeks’ GA. Of the overall CP 
cases, ∼25% are very preterm (GA <32 weeks), ∼10–20% moderately 
preterm or late preterm (GA 32–36 weeks), and ∼60% term (GA >36 
weeks).
An approach to neonatal hypertonia is noted in Figure 38.1.
There are a number of genetic and metabolic disorders that present 
with clinical features of CP (Tables 38.5 and 38.6). Hereditary spastic 
paraplegia is discussed in Chapter 27.
Testing
The diagnostic approach to evaluating a child with hypertonia includes 
excluding the disorders in Tables 38.5 and 38.6 and the approach noted 
in Figures 38.1 and 38.2.
Management
Management of hypertonia depends on the clinical type and is typically 
a combination of physical, medical, and surgical interventions deliv­
ered through a multidisciplinary team of pediatricians, neurologists, 
physical medicine and rehab specialists, and orthopedic surgeons. 
Goals and extent of management also differ based on the pathology, 
functionality, and other comorbidities as not all cases of hypertonia 
need to be treated. In general, the following principles are observed 
when formulating a plan for treatment:
 1. Distinguish type of clinical hypertonia and how it influences 
­function.
 2. For intramuscular injections, identify muscles to be injected. Not 
all spastic muscles need to be treated, because some patients rely on 
their hypertonia to maintain certain functions.
TABLE 38.3  Hypertonia Assessment Tool (HAT) with a Description of the Administration 
Procedure for Each Item
Items (in Order of 
Administration)
Type of 
Hypertonia
Administration of Item
Scoring (Fill Each Box with 0 
[Negative] or 1 [Positive])
Increased involuntary movements or 
postures of the designated limb with 
tactile stimulus of a distant body part
Dystonia
With the child at rest, observe involuntary movements 
of the designated limb as you gently rub a distant 
body part such as the shin or forearm
Dystonia is present if more involuntary 
movements or postures are observed 
in the designated limb with the tactile 
stimulus
Increased involuntary movements or 
postures with purposeful movement 
of a distant body part
Dystonia
Observe movements of the designated limb as the 
child carries out purposeful movements*
Dystonia is present if more involuntary 
movements or postures are observed 
in the designated limb with purposeful 
movement
Velocity-­dependent resistance to stretch
Spasticity
Move the limb as described below† and assess for a 
change in muscle resistance between the slow and 
the fast stretch
Spasticity is present if there is an increase 
in resistance between the fast stretch 
compared with the slow stretch
Presence of spastic catch
Spasticity
Note the presence of a rapid rise (spastic catch) in 
resistance at a particular joint angle when moving 
the limb as described during the fast stretch†
Spasticity is present if a spastic catch is 
noted
Equal resistance to passive stretch during 
bidirectional movement of a joint
Rigidity
Assess this item during the fast stretch of the muscle†
Rigidity is present if the resistance felt is 
equal with movement in both directions
Increased tone with movement of a 
distant body part
Dystonia
Perform two additional fast stretches.† During the 
second stretch ask the child to do a purposeful 
movement* and assess for an increase in tone
Dystonia is present if greater tone is 
noticed when child is carrying out the 
purposeful movements
Maintenance of limb position after 
passive movement
Rigidity
For the arm, note the original position of the elbow; 
move the elbow by 45 degrees into either flexion 
or extension and observe if the elbow returns to 
its original position. For the leg, note the original 
position of the ankle; move the ankle into 45-­degree 
further dorsiflexion or plantarflexion and observe if 
the ankle returns to its original position
Rigidity is present if the limb remains in 
the final position of stretch rather than 
returning (partially or fully) to the limb’s 
original position
Before administering the HAT, the child should be supine on the examining table. The child should be as comfortable as possible by having appropri­
ate caregivers present, a roll placed under the knees, a comfortable room temperature, and unrestrictive clothing. Complete all items for the involved 
extremity being examined before moving on to the next involved extremity.
*Based on the child’s ability, ask the child to carry out two of the following for a 10-­second period: (1) count to 10 slowly; (2) open and close one hand 
(into a fist) repeatedly (choose the hand that is not being examined); (3) open and close eyes (tight blinking) repeatedly; (4) reach for an object placed 
at least 1 foot away; and (5) visually track a brightly colored object (e.g., red-­tipped pen) or light source (e.g., flashlight).
†Support the limb against gravity. Move the joints of the limb through the child’s full range starting with the joint in full flexion or adduction, moving 
to full extension or abduction, and then returning to flexion or adduction, twice slowly and twice as quickly as possible. Upper extremity: shoulder 
adduction and abduction—begin with shoulder in full adduction; elbow flexion and extension—begin with elbow in full flexion; forearm pronation 
and supination—begin with forearm in full pronation; wrist flexion and extension—begin with wrist in full flexion. Lower extremity: hip adduction and 
abduction—begin with hip in full adduction; knee flexion and extension—begin with knee flexed with the hip in 90-­degree flexion; ankle dorsiflexion 
and plantarflexion—begin with ankle in full plantarflexion.
From Jethwa A, Mink J, Macarthus C, et al. Development of the hypertonia assessment tool (HAT): a discriminative tool for hypertonia in children. 
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2010,52:e83–e87 (Appendix I, p. e87).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
664
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
 3. Outcome of treatment depends on clear communication of goals of 
treatment between the clinician and the patient/family.
	4.	 Regular assessment and evaluation are needed as the clinical picture 
and effect of treatment may change over time requiring adjusting 
the treatment regimen, especially in growing children with ever-­
changing functionality levels and demands.
	5.	 Physical and occupational therapies are the main modality of man­
agement for children with hypertonia.
HEREDITARY HYPEREKPLEXIA
Hyperekplexia (HPX), also known as stiff baby syndrome or startle dis­
ease, is an inherited disorder (Table 38.7) due to dysfunction of the gly­
cinergic neuronal receptor (see also Chapter 40). HPX manifests with 
exaggerated startle responses to various stimuli (visual, auditory, and 
most often tactile) leading to myoclonic jerks and stiffness. Onset is 
often in neonates, but ambulatory children may fall if an episode occurs 
while sitting or standing. Consciousness is retained. The head retraction 
reflex is elicited by gently tapping the nose, glabella, lip, or chin. In addi­
tion to the exaggerated startle reflexes, patients may present with gen­
eralized stiffness after birth or following a startle response. The stiffness 
resolves during sleep. Patients have normal development and a normal 
EEG and MRI. The differential diagnosis of other disorders manifesting 
with an abnormal startle response is noted in Table 38.8.
STIFF PERSON SYNDROME
Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is most commonly reported in adults as an 
autoimmune or paraneoplastic disorder that manifests with sensitivity 
to external stimuli, progressive truncal muscle (paraspinal) rigidity, 
and muscle spasms.
Variants of adult SPS include:
 • SPS associated with myoclonus
 • SPS associated with epilepsy and dystonia
 • SPS with neuro-­ophthalmologic findings
 • SPS with progressive rigidity and encephalomyelitis
 • SPS cerebellar variant
In children, the disorder is usually associated with immunoglobulin 
G (IgG) anti–glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies or anti–glycine 
receptor antibodies and other coexisting autoimmune diseases includ­
ing diabetes mellitus, Graves disease, autoimmune thyroiditis, vitiligo, 
and celiac disease.
TABLE 38.4  Clinical Features of Spastic Cerebral Palsy (CP) Subtypes
CP Subtype
Location of 
Hypertonia
Common Causes and 
Location of Injury
Age Group
Clinical Features
Spastic diplegic
Both lower limbs 
and upper limbs 
­relatively or com­
pletely ­preserved
Periventricular leukomalacia
Deep white matter
Preterm infants
Hypotonia of the lower limbs for the first 6 mo of life
Spasticity evolves by 6 mo of age
Flexion, adduction, and internal rotation of the hips with 
contractures of the hip flexors and hamstring muscles and 
to a lesser extent knees and elbows
Reduced limb length and muscle bulk in lower extremities
Spastic hemiplegic
Hemibody including 
upper and lower 
limbs
Neonatal stroke, congenital 
malformations
Cerebral cortex
Term infants of 
­normal birthweight
Weakened and abnormal posturing on one body side
Early hand dominance
During first 1–2 yr, movement and tone on the affected 
side typically decrease before tone and tendon reflexes 
abnormally increase
The arm is typically more affected than the leg
Typical posture appears by 2 yr of age
Arm is adducted at the shoulder and flexed at the elbow, 
the forearm is pronated, and the wrist and fingers are 
flexed with the hand closed
Hip is partially flexed and adducted, and the knee and ankle 
are flexed; the foot may remain in the equinovarus or 
calcaneovalgus position
Independent walking usually occurs at the appropriate age 
or is only slightly delayed
Spastic quadriplegic
All limbs affected
Congenital infections, congen­
ital malformations, ischemic 
hypoxic encephalopathy
Diffuse, cortical, and white 
matter injury
Most commonly term 
SGA infants, but 
can also occur in 
preterm infants
Moderate or severe psychomotor delay
All limbs are affected
Poor head control
Early spasticity by 2–3 mo of age
Adduction of the thighs results in typical scissoring of 
the legs
By 9–10 mo of age, unable to flex the legs with poor truncal 
balance
Upper limbs equally or more involved than lower limbs
Severe comorbidities including feeding difficulties, chronic 
respiratory insufficiency, and epilepsy are common
SGA, small for gestational age.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
665
CHAPTER 38  Hypertonicity
Presenting manifestations include gait disturbances due to lower 
extremity stiffness or spasms, lumbar lordosis from paraspinal mus­
cle involvement, and an exaggerated startle response precipitated by 
anxiety-­provoking activities. The classic SPS phenotype is the most 
prevalent type; variants noted in adults may also occur in children. The 
differential diagnosis includes hyperekplexia, dystonias, progressive 
encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus (PERM), and heredi­
tary spastic paraplegia.
History points:
• Detailed family history including learning difficulties, seizures, cataracts
• Maternal ethnicity, recent travel, tetanus vaccination status, and infection status
• Pregnancy history including evidence of chorioamnionitis / maternal sepsis
• Maternal cocaine use during pregnancy
• Birth history
• Resuscitation history
• Other signs of central causes - stupor, seizures, other organ dysfunction
Examination points:
• Alert level (reduced suggesting central cause)
• Dysmorphia (suggesting genetic condition)
• Signs of sepsis / meningitis (photophobia, Kernig sign, neck stiffness)
• Fontanel appearance / level (bulging suggesting raised intracranial pressure / meningitis)
• Head circumference (microcephaly suggesting genetic cause, macrocephaly suggesting possibly raised
   intracranial pressure)
• Contractures
• Jaw rigidity (suggesting tetanus)
• Peripheral reflexes including cross overflow and jaw jerk (raised suggesting central origin, reduced or absent
  suggesting peripheral origin)
• Startle including on nose tapping (suggestive of hyperekplexia)
• Myotonia
• Eye movement abnormalities (hydrocephalus, AGS, sepiapterin reductase deficiency)
• Paroxysmal episodes suggestive of epileptic seizures
Parental examination
• Myotonia / myokymia
• Maternal Chvostek sign (hypocalcemia / hypomagnesemia)
History and examination
Neonatal hypertonia
Presentation within 24 h
Central
Unlikely to be HIE if persistent
Initial possible investigations:
• Neuroimaging (cranial ultrasound first,
  then MRI) to look for
  hydrocephalus, intracranial hemorrhage,
  tumor
• ECG for seizure activity
• Serum calcium, magnesium, biotinidase
• Serum lactate and amino acids
• Lumbar puncture for lactate, amino acids,
  neurotransmitters, infection screen
• Congenital infection screen (if suspected)
• Genetics referral (if dysmorphic or family
   history)
• Trial of benzodiazepines if startles to
   glabellar tap (hyperekplexia)
Consider starting antibiotics if infective etiology
possible.
Peripheral
• EMG
• Serum potassium, calcium,
  magnesium
• Skeletal survey (if dysplasia
  suspected)
• Genetics review
• Trial of carbamazepine or
  phenytoin
Central
If clear history of HIE, MRI only may be
indicated. Ensure serum lactate normalizes.
If not, consider metabolic condition
First line, where diagnosis unclear:
If no diagnosis
found, consider
Presentation after 24 h
Acute onset
Subacute / gradual onset
• MRI (if intracranial calcification likely,
  consider CT in addition)
• Serum magnesium, calcium, lactate, liver
  function (including bilirubin), clotting, renal
  function
• aEEG and, if abnormal, 12-lead EEG
• Congenital viral screen
• Urine organic acids and Guthrie test for
  maple syrup urine disease
Possible second-line tests, depending on
differential:
• Paired serum and CSF lactate
• Paired serum and CSF serine
• CSF neurotransmitters
• Muscle biopsy for histopathology and
  respiratory chain enzymes
• Skin biopsy for culture and assessment of
  pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
• CGH microarray
• Genetic review
• Gene test of hyperekplexia
• Gene tests for mitochondrial disease
• Ophthalmology review
• Trial of L-DOPA
• Trial pyridoxal phosphate / biotin / folinic
  acid if refractory seizures present
Fig. 38.1  A suggested algorithm for the investigation of neonatal hypertonia. AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syn­
drome; aEEG, amplitude integrated EEG; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; 
EMG, electromyography; HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy. (From Hart AR, Sharma R, Rittey CD, et al. 
Neonatal hypertonia – a diagnostic challenge. Dev Med Child. 2015;57:600–610 [Fig. 2, p. 608].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
666
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TETANUS
Tetanus is caused by toxin produced by the spore-­forming bacteria 
Clostridium tetani and develops after a cutaneous wound in older chil­
dren or in neonates secondary to umbilical cord infection. Puncture 
wounds are a high risk and include nails, splinters, intramuscular injec­
tions, body piercing, tattoos, and bites (insect, animal, human). Burns, 
dental abscesses, and compound fractures are additional risks for tet­
anus. In some patients, the source of tetanus is unknown. The incu­
bation period is ∼3–21 days. Risk factors other than wounds include 
unimmunized status, intravenous drug users, immunosuppressed 
patients, or neonates born to unimmunized mothers with septic cut­
ting or contamination of the umbilical cord.
Manifestations include risus sardonicus, painful muscle spasms, 
opisthotonic posturing, and trismus (Tables 38.9 and 38.10). Compli­
cations include vocal cord paralysis, autonomic storming, fractures, 
hernias, and aspiration pneumonia. The differential diagnosis includes 
strychnine poisoning and dystonic drug reactions.
MYOGENIC ETIOLOGIES OF HYPERTONICITY
Myotonia congenita is either an autosomal dominant (Thomsen dis­
ease) or autosomal recessive (Becker disease) disorder and is charac­
terized by generalized stiffness (myotonia, delayed relaxations) after 
muscle contractions (Table 38.11). Pathologic variants in the chloride 
channel gene (CLCN1) are responsible for both forms of myotonia 
congenita. Both forms are associated with muscle hypertrophy (legs); 
myotonia can be demonstrated with hand contraction or eye closure. 
Transient muscle weakness occurs during exercise but with repeated 
efforts muscle strength returns to normal (warm-­up phenomenon).
Paramyotonic congenita (PMC) presents with myotonia affecting 
the facial muscles and those of the neck and hands, although all skeletal 
muscles are involved. PMC is due to pathologic variants in SCN4A. 
Myotonia is exacerbated by exercise and cold exposure. Paradoxical 
myotonia occurs with repeated muscle contraction because PMC does 
not demonstrate a warm-­up phenomenon.
Hyperkalemic period paralysis is an autosomal dominant dis­
order (SCN4A) and manifests with episodes of weakness or paral­
ysis but may also demonstrate muscle stiffness between attacks of 
weakness. Hypertonicity may also be present but may instead be 
myotonia.
DRUG-­RELATED HYPERTONICITY
Serotonin syndrome is characterized by mental status changes 
(agitation, confusion, hypomania, coma), autonomic hyperactivity 
(tachycardia, labile blood pressure, diaphoresis, diarrhea), and neu­
romuscular dysfunction (myoclonus, hyperreflexia, clonus, rigidity, 
tremor, shivering, mydriasis) following exposure to an inciting drug 
(Tables 38.12 and 38.13).
A simplified diagnostic approach requires any of the following:
 • Tremor and hyperreflexia
 • Spontaneous clonus
 • Muscle rigidity, temperature >38oC, and either ocular clonus or 
inducible clonus
 • Ocular clonus and either agitation or diaphoresis
 • Inducible clonus and either agitation or diaphoresis
TABLE 38.5  Brain MRI Findings Suggestive 
of Selected Genetic Cerebral Palsy Mimics
Finding
Selected Conditions
Hypomyelination
PLP1-­related dysmyelinating disorders
H-­ABC (TUBB4A variant)
AGS (may also have basal ganglia and WM 
calcification)
GM1 gangliosidosis
Demyelination
Krabbe disease
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Thin corpus callosum
HSP (i.e., SPG4, SPG11, SPG15, and others)
Globus pallidus lesions
T2 hypointense: NBIA (SN also involved in BPAN, 
MPAN), fucosidosis
T2 hyperintense: MMA, PDH deficiency, creatine 
deficiency syndromes
Focal atrophy or 
­hypoplasia
Glutaric aciduria type 1 (frontotemporal)
H-­ABC (cerebellum ± putamen)
Joubert syndrome (cerebellum)
AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; BPAN, β-­propeller protein-­associated 
neurodegeneration; H-­ABC, hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal 
ganglia and cerebellum; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; MMA, meth­
ylmalonic aciduria; MPAN, mitochondrial membrane protein-­associated 
neurodegeneration; NBIA, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumula­
tion; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; WM, white matter.
Adapted from Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of 
cerebral palsy. Mov Disord. 2019;34(5):625–636.
TABLE 38.6  Differential Diagnoses in 
Spastic Paraplegia
Childhood Onset
Diplegic cerebral palsy
Structural (Chiari malformation, atlantoaxial subluxation)
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Leukodystrophy (e.g., Krabbe)
Metabolic (arginase deficiency, abetalipoproteinemia)
Levodopa-­responsive dystonia
Infection (myelitis)
Multiple sclerosis
Adolescent Onset
Cervical spine degenerative disease
Multiple sclerosis
Motor neuron disease
Neoplasm (primary/secondary spinal tumor, parasagittal meningioma)
Infection (myelitis)
Dural arteriovenous malformation
Chiari malformation
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Spinocerebellar ataxias
Vitamin deficiency (B12 and E)
Lathyrism
Levodopa-­responsive dystonia
Infection (syphilis, human T-­cell leukemia virus 1, HIV)
Copper deficiency
From Salinas S, Proukakis C, Crosby A, et al. Hereditary spastic para­
plegia: clinical features and pathogenetic mechanisms. Lancet Neurol. 
2008;7:1127–1138 (Panel, p. 1128).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
667
CHAPTER 38  Hypertonicity
History/exam inconsistent with CP
due to perinatal brain injury
MRI brain +/– spinal cord
Consider multi-gene panel or WES based on
phenotype, clinical and family history
Infantile developmental delay,
mixed motor syndrome
• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum amino acids
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Urine organic acids
• CSF studies
• SNP-CGH microarray
Spasticity
• Serum ammonia
• Serum lactate
• Serum amino acids
  (including arginine, serine)
• Urine organic acids
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Genetic testing for HSP
• SNP-CGH microarray
Dystonia/chorea
• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Urine organic acids
• Urine purines, pyrimidines
• Urine creatine, GAA
• CSF studies
• Genetic testing for NKX2.1
• SNP-CGH microarray
Ataxia
• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum biotinidase
  activity
• Urine organic acids
• Mitochondrial genetic
  analysis, CoQ10 level
• SNP-CGH microarray
Initial biochemical and genetic studies to consider
Directed genetic testing
based on specific findings
Abnormal
Normal/nonspecific
Fig. 38.2  General diagnostic approach to the patient with an infantile-­onset, apparently nonprogressive motor 
disorder. Studies are grouped by predominant clinical presentation; it may be appropriate to consider investi­
gations from more than one group depending on the specific clinical context. CSF studies: glucose (+serum 
glucose), lactate, pyruvate, neurotransmitter metabolites (biogenic amines + γ-­aminobutyric acid [GABA]), 
pterins, 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate. AFP, α-­fetoprotein; CP, cerebral palsy; CGH, comparative genomic hybrid­
ization; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GAA, α-­glucosidase; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; SNP, single nucleo­
tide protein; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; WES, whole-­exome sequencing. (From Pearson TS, Pons R, 
Ghaoi R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Mov Disord. 2019;34[5]:625–634 [Fig. 1, p. 627].)
TABLE 38.7  GLRA1, GLRB, and SLC6A5-­Related Hereditary Hyperekplexia (HPX): Modes of 
Inheritance and Methods of Variant Detection
Gene
Proportion of HPX 
Attributed to 
Variant of Gene
MOI*
PROPORTION OF PROBANDS WITH A 
­PATHOGENIC VARIANT DETECTABLE BY METHOD†
Sequence Analysis‡
Gene-­Targeted Deletion/
Duplication Analysis§
GLRA1
61–63%
AD and AR
∼95%
See footnote||
GLRB
12–14%
AD and AR
11/12
1/12 
SLC6A5
25%
AR (rarely AD)
24/24
None reported
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; MOI, mode of inheritance; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
*∼85% were AR and ∼15% were AD.
†Additional affected individuals have been reported, many as case studies. For additional reported variants, see the Human Genome Mutation Data­
base.
‡Sequence analysis detects variants that are benign, likely benign, of uncertain significance, likely pathogenic, or pathogenic. Variants may include 
small intragenic deletions/insertions and missense, nonsense, and splice site variants; typically, exon or whole-­gene deletions/duplications are not 
detected.
§Gene-­targeted deletion/duplication analysis detects intragenic deletions or duplications. Methods used may include quantitative PCR, long-­range 
PCR, multiplex ligation-­dependent probe amplification (MLPA), and a gene-­targeted microarray designed to detect single-­exon deletions or duplica­
tions.
||Deletion of exons 1–7 is common in the Turkish population. Deletion of exons 1–6 and of 4–7 have also been reported.
From Balint B, Thomas R. Hereditary hyperekplexia overview 2007 Jul 21 (Updated 2019 Dec 19). In: Adan MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. 
GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington; 1993–2021, Table 2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
668
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 38.8  Complex Genetic Neurodevelopmental Disorders with an Excessive Startle 
Response
Gene
Disorder
MOI
Distinguishing Clinical Features
Reference*
ARHGEF9
Early-­infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy 8
XL
 • Severe ID
 • Epilepsy (often intractable focal seizures or febrile seizures)
 • Dysmorphic features
OMIM 300607
ASNS
Asparagine synthetase 
deficiency
AR
 • Profound DD and progressive ­encephalopathy
 • Microcephaly
 • Hypotonia followed by spastic ­quadriplegia
 • Seizures
Asparagine synthetase defi­
ciency
CACNA1A
Early-­infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy 42
AD
 • Epileptic encephalopathy with myoclonic epilepsy
 • Myoclonic seizures provoked by tactile stimuli and spontaneous and 
reflex seizures to noise and touch
OMIM 617106
CLPB
CLPB deficiency 
(3-­methylglutaconic 
aciduria)
AR
 • Congenital or infantile cataracts
 • Neutropenia
 • Other neurologic signs: hypotonia, spasticity, ataxia, dystonia, 
epilepsy, or ID
CLPB deficiency
CRLF1
Crisponi syndrome
AR
 • Dysmorphic features, camptodactyly
 • Facial and bulbar weakness
Cold-­induced sweating syndrome 
including Crisponi syndrome
CTNNB1
CTNNB1-­related syndrome
AD
 • Hyperekplexia is rare in this entity (single case report)
 • Later onset of hyperekplexia (not congenital but in childhood) and 
atypical pattern (no generalized stiffness induced by startle)
 • No congenital stiffness
 • Progressive neurologic involvement with additional signs (ID, ataxia, 
spasticity)
 • Microcephaly
Winczewska-­Wiktor et al. (2016)
GPHN
Molybdenum cofactor 
­deficiency, complemen­
tation group C
AR
 • Intractable seizures
 • Severe psychomotor retardation
 • Hypotonia combined w/hyperreflexia
 • Usually lethal in infancy
OMIM 615501
HEXA
Tay-­Sachs disease
AR
 • DD or regression
 • Visual impairment
 • Epilepsy
 • Later: macrocephaly, decerebrate posturing, dysphagia, progression 
to unresponsive vegetative state
Hexosaminidase A deficiency
RPS6KA3
Coffin-­Lowry syndrome
XL
 • ID
 • Facial dysmorphism, tapering digits, and skeletal deformity
 • Besides hyperekplexia, there may be other types of stimulus-­induced 
drop attacks (e.g., cataplexy-­like episodes)
Coffin-­Lowry syndrome
SCN8A
Early-­infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy 13
AD
Epileptic encephalopathy with DD and ID
SCN8A-­related epilepsy with 
encephalopathy
SLC6A9
GLYT1 encephalopathy
AR
 • Hypotonia > hypertonicity
 • Arthrogryposis
 • Respiratory failure
 • Dysmorphic features
 • Encephalopathy
GLYT1 encephalopathy
SUOX
Isolated sulfite oxidase 
deficiency
AR
 • Progressive epileptic encephalopathy
 • Other neurologic features: opisthotonus, spastic quadriplegia, 
­pyramidal signs
 • Microcephaly, dysmorphic features
Isolated sulfite oxidase defi­
ciency
TRAK1
Early-­infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy 68
AR
 • Hypotonia
 • Progressive epileptic encephalopathy
OMIM 618201
TSEN54
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia 
type 2
AR
 • Generalized clonus (“jitteriness”)
 • Delayed developmental (motor and cognitive) milestones
 • Other neurologic signs: spasticity, chorea, visual impairment, epilepsy
TSEN54-­related pontocerebellar 
hypoplasia
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; DD, developmental delay; ID, intellectual disability; MOI, mode of inheritance; XL, X-­linked.
*OMIM phenotype entry or citation is provided if a related GeneReview is not available.
From Balint B, Thomas R. Hereditary hyperekplexia overview 2007 Jul 21 (Updated 2019 Dec 19). In: Adan MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. 
GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington; 1993–2021.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
669
CHAPTER 38  Hypertonicity
TABLE 38.9  Presenting Features on 
Admission to Hospital for Non-­neonatal 
Tetanus
 • Trismus (93–98%)
 • Generalized muscle tension (94–95%)
 • Muscle stiffness (96%)
 • Dysphagia (83%)
 • Dyspnea (7%)
 • Muscle spasms (46–80%)
 • Body temperature >38.4°C (76%)
 • Pulse ≥120 beats/min (34%)
From Yen LM, Thwaites CL. Tetanus. Lancet. 2019;393:1657–1666 
(Panel 3, p. 1661).
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) occurs rapidly after exposure to an 
inhaled anesthetic agent or succinylcholine and is characterized by tachy­
pnea, tachycardia, lactic acidosis, muscle rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, and 
fever. The earliest sign of MH is a rapid rise of end-­tidal co2. Susceptibil­
ity to MH is associated with autosomal dominant pathologic variants on 
RYR1; CACNA1S is an uncommon but reported gene. MH has also been 
reported in patients with scoliosis and various congenital muscle disorders.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is similar to MH and follows 
the administration of neuroleptic antipsychotic agents; fever, muscle 
rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, autonomic dysfunction, and neutral states 
changes are also present.
OPISTHOTONUS
Opisthotonus manifests with acute or chronic spastic arching of the neck 
and back due to tonic contraction of the extensor muscles of the neck, 
back, and legs. The hyperextension can resemble decerebrate posturing. 
There are many etiologies that may also be age related (Table 38.14).
TABLE 38.11  Chloride Channel Myotonias
Clinical Features
Autosomal Dominant Myotonia Congenita 
of Thomsen
Autosomal Recessive Generalized Myotonia 
of Becker
Inheritance
Dominant
Recessive
Gene defect
Chromosome 7; variant in skeletal muscle chloride channel
Chromosome 7; variant in skeletal muscle chloride channel
Age of onset
Infancy to early childhood
Late childhood, occasionally starts earlier or begins in teens
Myopathy
Muscle hypertrophy frequent; no myopathy, although ­variants 
uncommonly develop weakness
Occasional muscle wasting and weakness can occur late; 
­hypertrophy of muscles frequently occurs in legs
Myotonia
Generalized stiffness, especially after rest; improves with 
­exercise; prominent myotonia of eye closure, but not 
­paradoxical myotonia
Generalized stiffness, especially after rest; transient weak­
ness is prominent after complete relaxation for several 
minutes; ­myotonia occurs in eyes; no paradoxical myotonia
Provocative stimuli
Prolonged rest or maintenance of the posture
Prolonged rest or maintenance of the same posture
Therapy for symptoms
Exercise; antimyotonia therapy (e.g., mexiletine); Achilles ­tendon 
stretching helps prevent need for heel cord–­lengthening 
surgery
Exercise; especially avoiding prolonged rest; antimyotonia 
therapy (e.g., mexiletine); transient weakness does not 
improve after mexiletine
From Swaiman KF, Ashwal A, Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:1151, Table 151-­3.
TABLE 38.10  Classification of Tetanus Severity
Grade 1: Mild
 • Mild to moderate trismus
 • Generalized spasticity
 • No respiratory compromise
 • No spasms
 • Little or no dysphagia
Grade 2: Moderate
 • Moderate trismus
 • Marked rigidity
 • Mild to moderate but short spasms
 • Moderate respiratory compromise with an increased respiratory rate 
(>30 breaths/min)
 • Mild dysphagia
Grade 3: Severe
 • Severe trismus
 • Generalized spasticity
 • Reflex prolonged spasms
 • Increased respiratory rate (>40 breaths/min)
 • Apneic spells
 • Severe dysphagia
 • Tachycardia (>120 beats/min)
Grade 4: Very Severe
 • Clinical features of grade 3 tetanus
 • Violent autonomic disturbances involving the cardiovascular system
 • Severe hypertension and tachycardia alternating with relative hypotension 
and bradycardia (either of which might be persistent)
From Yen LM, Thwaites CL. Tetanus. Lancet. 2019;393:1657–1666 (Panel 2, p. 1660).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
670
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 38.12  Classes of Medications That 
Produce Serotonin Syndrome in Psychiatric 
Patients
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Atypical antipsychotics
Heterocyclic antidepressants
Trazodone
Dual-­uptake inhibitors
Psychostimulants
Buspirone
Mood stabilizers
Analgesics
Antiemetics
Cough suppressants
Dietary supplements
From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2594, Table 406-­5.
TABLE 38.13  Signs and Symptoms of Serotonin Syndrome (Review of 100 Cases)
Sign/Symptom
Frequency (%)
Cognitive-­Behavioral 
Symptoms
51
Confusion/disorientation
34
Agitation/irritability
29
Coma/unresponsiveness
15
Anxiety
14
Euphoria/hypomania
13
Headache
13
Drowsiness
12
Seizures
11
Insomnia
6
Hallucinations (visual and auditory)
5
Autonomic Nervous System
Hyperthermia
45
Diaphoresis
45
Sinus tachycardia
36
Hypertension
35
Dilated pupils
28
Tachypnea
26
Nausea
23
Unreactive pupils
20
Flushing
16
Hypotension
15
Diarrhea
8
Ventricular tachycardia
6
Cyanosis
5
Abdominal cramps
4
Salivation
4
Sign/Symptom
Frequency (%)
Neuromuscular
Myoclonus
58
Hyperreflexia
52
Muscle rigidity
51
Restlessness/hyperactivity
48
Tremor
43
Ataxia/incoordination
40
Clonus
23
Babinski sign (bilateral)
16
Nystagmus
15
Trismus
7
Teeth chattering
6
Opisthotonos
6
Paresthesias
6
From Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose. 4th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2007:571, Table 29-­3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
671
CHAPTER 38  Hypertonicity
   	 R E D  F L A G S
In the pediatric population, hypertonia is typically thought of in the 
context of static, nonprogressive diseases caused by an early one-­time 
insult in life. With this concept in mind, any clinical features that sug­
gest a progressive process should be considered as red flags and prompt 
further work-­up for rare yet potentially serious pathologies (see 
­Chapter 28).
Such red flags include developmental regression or loss of already 
acquired milestones; evolving/worsening focal deficits such as 
weakness, spasticity, vision, or hearing; marked cranial nerve involve­
ment; extraneurologic system involvement (hepatic or kidney disease, 
progressive skin rashes); and family history of progressive neurologic 
diseases.
Some progressive causes of hypertonia in children include 
childhood-­onset Parkinson disease, Wilson disease, leukodystrophies, 
demyelinating diseases (Alexander disease, Canavan disease, Krabbe 
disease), mitochondrial disorders, and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 38.14  Etiologies of Opisthotonus
Infections
Tetanus
Meningitis
Metabolic
Gaucher disease
Krabbe disease
Kernicterus
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
Glutaric aciduria
Maple syrup urine disease
Dopa-­responsive dystonia
Toxin/Drug
Strychnine
Phenothiazines
Haloperidol
Cyanide
Metoclopramide
Infant alcohol withdrawal
Anatomic
Arnold-­Chiari malformation
Brain tumor
Brain hemorrhage
Hydrocephalus
Traumatic brain injury
Dandy-­Walker malformations
Other
Cerebral palsy
Stiff person syndrome
Conversion disorder
Anoxic injury
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
671.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Definition
Cans C. Surveillance of cerebral palsy in Europe: a collaboration of cerebral 
palsy surveys and registers. Surveillance of Cerebral Palsy in Europe 
(SCPE). Dev Med Child Neurol. 2000;42:816–824.
Fink JK. Hereditary spastic paraplegia. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2006;6:65–76.
Jan MSM. Misdiagnoses in children with dopa-­responsive dystonia. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2004;31(4):298–303.
Powers RK, Campbell DL, Rymer WZ. Stretch reflex dynamics in spastic elbow 
flexor muscles. Ann Neurol. 1989;25:32–42.
Sanger TD, Chen D, Delgado MR, et al. Definition and classification of nega­
tive motor signs in childhood. Pediatrics. 2006;118:2159–2167.
Sanger TD, Chen D, Fehlings DL, et al. Definition and classification of hyper­
kinetic movements in childhood. Mov Disord. 2010;25:1538–49.
Sanger TD, Delgado MR, Gaebler-­Spira D, et al. Task force on childhood mo­
tor disorders. Classification and definition of disorders causing hypertonia 
in childhood. Pediatrics. 2003;111(1):e89–e97.
Shortland AP. Muscle tone is not a well-­defined term. Dev Med Child Neurol. 
2018;60:637.
History
Evans SH, Cameron MW, Burton JM. Hypertonia. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc 
Health Care. 2017;47(7):161–166.
Lumsden DE, Cadwgan J. Fifteen-­minute consultation: a clinical approach to 
the management of the child with hypertonia. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract 
Ed. 2020;105(5):276–281.
Physical Exam
Ashworth B. Preliminary trial of carisoprodol in multiple sclerosis. ­Practitioner. 
1964;192:540–542.
Barry MJ, VanSwearingen JM, Albright AL. Reliability and responsiveness of 
the Barry-Albright Dystonia Scale. Dev Med Child Neurol 999;41:404–411.
Haas BM, Bergstrom E, Jamous A, et al. The inter rater reliability of the origi­
nal and of the modified Ashworth scale for the assessment of spasticity in 
patients with spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord. 1996;34:560–564.
Haugh AB, Pandyan AD, Johnson GR. A systematic review of the Tardieu Scale 
for the measurement of spasticity. Disabil Rehabil. 2006;28(15):899–907.
Jethwa A, Mink J, MacArthur C, et al. Development of the Hypertonia 
­Assessment Tool (HAT): a discriminative tool for hypertonia in children. 
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2010;52:e83–e87.
Hinderer SR, Dixon K. Physiologic and clinical monitoring of spastic 
­hypertonia. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2001;12(4):733–746.
Marsico P, Frontzek-­Weps V, Balzer J, et al. Hypertonia assessment tool. J 
Child Neurol. 2017;32(1):132–138.
Monbaliu E, Ortibus E, Roelens F, et al. Rating scales for dystonia in cerebral 
palsy: reliability and validity. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2010;52:570–575.
Sanger TD, Delgado MR, Gaebler-­Spira D, et al. Task Force on Childhood Mo­
tor Disorders. Classification and definition of disorders causing hypertonia 
in childhood. Pediatrics. 2003;111(1):e89–e97.
Sheean G, McGuire JR. Spastic hypertonia and movement disorders: patho­
physiology, clinical presentation, and quantification. Pharm Manag PM R. 
2009;1(9):827–833.
Red Flags
Evans SH, Cameron MW, Burton JM. Hypertonia. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc 
Health Care. 2017;47(7):161–166.
Potulska-­Chromik A, Hoffman-­Zacharska D, Łukawska M, et al. Dopa-­
responsive dystonia or early-­onset Parkinson disease—genotype-­
phenotype correlation. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2017;51(1):1–6.
Sanger TD, Chen D, Delgado MR, et al. Definition and classification of nega­
tive motor signs in childhood. Pediatrics. 2006;118:2159–2167.
Schüle R, Wiethoff S, Martus P, et al. Hereditary spastic paraplegia: clinicoge­
netic lessons from 608 patients. Ann Neurol. 2016;79:646.
van der Knaap MS, Bugiani M. Leukodystrophies: a proposed classification 
system based on pathological changes and pathogenetic mechanisms. Acta 
­Neuropathol. 2017;134(3):351–382.
Pathophysiology and Etiology
Hafström M, Källén K, Serenius F, et al. Cerebral palsy in extremely preterm 
infants. Pediatrics. 2018;141:e20171433.
Hankins GD, Speer M. Defining the pathogenesis and ­pathophysiology 
of neonatal encephalopathy and cerebral palsy. Obstet Gynecol. 
2003;102:628.
Himmelmann K, Ahlin K, Jacobsson B, et al. Risk factors for cerebral palsy in 
children born at term. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2011;90:1070.
Hirvonen M, Ojala R, Korhonen P, et al. Cerebral palsy among children born 
moderately and late preterm. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e1584.
Huang CY, Wang CH, Hwang IS. Characterization of the mechanical 
and ­neural components of spastic hypertonia with modified H reflex. 
J ­Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2006;16(4):384–391.
Linsell L, Malouf R, Morris J, et al. Prognostic factors for cerebral palsy and 
motor impairment in children born very preterm or very low birthweight: 
a systematic review. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016;58:554.
Meythaler JM. Concept of spastic hypertonia. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 
2001;12(4):725–732.
Nelson KB. The epidemiology of cerebral palsy in term infants. Ment Retard 
Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2002;8:146.
O’Dwyer NJ, Ada L. Reflex hyperexcitability and muscle contracture in relation 
to spastic hypertonia. Curr Opin Neurol. 1996;9:451–455.
Oskoui M, Coutinho F, Dykeman J, et al. An update on the prevalence of 
­cerebral palsy: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Dev Med Child 
Neurol. 2013;55:509.
Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Special 
Issue: Childhood Onset‐Move Disord. 2019;34(5):625–636.
Sanger TD, Chen D, Delgado MR, et al. Definition and classification of 
­negative motor signs in childhood. Pediatrics. 2006;118:2159–2167.
Sellier E, Platt MJ, Andersen GL, et al. Decreasing prevalence in cerebral palsy: 
a multi-­site European population-­based study, 1980 to 2003. Dev Med 
Child Neurol. 2016;58:85.
Sheean G, McGuire JR. Spastic hypertonia and movement disorders: patho­
physiology, clinical presentation, and quantification. Pharm Manag PM R. 
2009;1(9):827–833.
Sheean G. The pathophysiology of spasticity. Eur J Neurol. 2002;9(suppl 
1):3–9.
Van Naarden Braun K, Doernberg N, Schieve L, et al. Birth prevalence of cere­
bral palsy: a population-­based study. Pediatrics. 2016;137:1–9.
Wu YW, Croen LA, Shah SJ, et al. Cerebral palsy in a term population: risk 
factors and neuroimaging findings. Pediatrics. 2006;118:690.
Wu YW, Colford Jr JM. Chorioamnionitis as a risk factor for cerebral palsy: a 
meta-­analysis. J Am Med Assoc. 2000;284:1417.
Other Disorders
Bae C, Bourget D. Tetanus. 2020 May 28. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure 
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021. PMID: 29083804 Bookshelf 
ID: NBK459217.
Clardy SL, Lennon VA, McKeon A. Childhood onset of stiff-­man syndrome. 
JAMA Neurol. 2013;70(12):1531–1536.
Cook TM, Protheroe RT, Handel JM. Tetanus: a review of the literature. Br 
J Anesthesia. 2001;87(3):477–487.
Jethwa A, Mink J, Macarthus C, et al. Development of the Hypertonia Assess­
ment Tool (HAT): a discriminative tool for hypertonia in children. Dev 
Med Child Neurol. 2010;52:e83–e87.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. Myotonia congenita. https://raredis­
eases.info.nih.gov/diseases/12301/myotonia-­congenita.
Rakocevic G, Floeter MK. Autoimmune stiff person syndrome and related 
myelopathies: understanding of electrophysiological and immunological 
processes. Muscle Nerve. 2012;45(5):623–634.
Shahade A, De Jesus O. Opisthotonus. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure 
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021. PMID: 32644596. Bookshelf ID: 
NBK559170.
Yen LM, Thwaites CL. Tetanus. Lancet. 2019;393:1657–1666.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
