85
Earache (otalgia) is pain that arises from a pathologic process in the 
external, middle, or inner ear or that is referred to the ear from another 
structure. Acute otitis media (AOM) is the most common cause of 
otalgia in children (Table 5.1). At least 80% of children will experience 
one or more episodes of AOM in the first 3 years of life. The second 
most common cause of ear pain is otitis externa, followed by dermatitis 
and infections of the pinna (Table 5.2). Other causes of otalgia are rare 
(Table 5.3). A careful examination of the pinna, external auditory canal, 
and tympanic membrane can identify most causes of ear pain. When 
the findings are normal, referred pain should be considered (Table 5.4).
HISTORY
Older, verbal children with ear pain are often able to localize and 
accurately describe their symptoms. Younger children often cannot 
localize their pain and may present with a variety of nonspecific symp­
toms, including fever, irritability, emesis, rhinorrhea from an associ­
ated upper respiratory tract illness (URI), and ear rubbing or pulling. 
Even though ear pulling is associated with ear pain, it is neither specific 
nor sensitive in the diagnosis of ear disease. In addition, infants with 
AOM may occasionally be afebrile and present with various degrees of 
irritability, such as sleep disturbances and/or eating or drinking inad­
equately. Ear disease should be considered in infants during the first 
year of life or in any preschool child with fever, irritability, or a URI.
In taking a history from a child who presents with ear pain, true ear 
pain must be distinguished from the sensation of fullness and discom­
fort that children experience when they have an effusion or retracted 
tympanic membrane secondary to a dysfunctional eustachian tube. 
The clinician should review the child’s history for factors placing the 
child at risk for infection such as craniofacial abnormalities (e.g., cleft 
palate), immunodeficiencies, autoimmune disease, diabetes, previous 
ear infections, placement of tympanostomy tubes, and recent dental 
procedures, trauma, and air travel. Immunization status should also be 
reviewed. A careful review of systems should elicit associated fevers, 
sore throat, reflux symptoms, otorrhea, neurologic symptoms, and 
symptoms of sinusitis. Children with a middle ear effusion may have 
decreased hearing acuity.
Acute otitis media presents with abrupt onset of otalgia associ­
ated with middle ear fluid, signs and symptoms of inflammation, and 
local or systemic infection. Risk factors for AOM include a family or 
personal history of recurrent AOM, trisomy 21, household cigarette 
smoke exposure, lack of breast-­feeding, lower socioeconomic status, 
males, cleft palate, immunodeficiency, and group daycare attendance 
or siblings in the household. Children with otitis externa (“swim­
mer’s ear”) present with either ear pain, purulent otorrhea, or both 
as well as ear fullness, localized ear pain with mastication, and ear 
itching. Relapsing polychondritis is a rare multisystemic inflam­
matory disorder that targets cartilaginous structures throughout the 
body. If the external ears are involved, symptoms may include epi­
sodic swelling and redness of the pinnae that is usually bilateral and 
recurrent. Other cartilaginous structures are often affected, though 
if findings are unilateral and subtle, the disorder may mimic otitis 
externa and the diagnosis may remain elusive until symptoms recur. 
With referred ear pain, such as from tooth decay or teething, there 
are often additional symptoms associated with the respective head 
and neck structures (see Table 5.4). Patients with ear pain secondary 
to maxillary sinusitis may also complain of headaches and purulent 
rhinorrhea.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
In a child presenting with a chief complaint of ear pain, the general 
examination includes the temperature, the respiratory rate, and a 
determination of whether the infant or child has a toxic appearance. 
Then the clinician proceeds with the complete head, eyes, ears, nose, 
oral cavity, and throat examination and with an appropriately focused 
physical examination of other pertinent systems.
The examination of the ear begins with the less symptomatic 
ear. The clinician should inspect the pinna and adjacent tissues for 
dermatitis, redness, and edema. The mastoid process and the pinna, 
including its cartilaginous portions, are palpated for any tenderness. 
Erythema, swelling, and tenderness over the posterior auricular 
mastoid process suggest mastoiditis, whereas localization of these 
findings to the external auditory canal and the pinna suggests otitis 
externa. In both conditions, the swelling may be so severe that the 
pinna is laterally displaced. The opening of the external ear canal is 
also examined for the presence of discharge or exudate. Manipulating 
the tragus and pinna causes extreme pain with otitis externa. Most 
disorders of the external ear can be detected through this examina­
tion (see Tables 5.2 and 5.3).
Otoscopy provides an opportunity to indirectly view the middle ear 
through the tympanic membrane. The middle ear is normally an air-­
filled cavity that transmits sound from the eardrum to the ossicle and 
then into the internal ear (Fig. 5.1). Otoscopy begins by properly posi­
tioning and, if necessary, gently restraining the patient. Both shoulders 
and hips need to be stabilized so that the patient cannot roll during 
the examination. Infants are best examined on an examining table in 
the prone position, with a parent or an attendant firmly holding the 
patient’s shoulders, thus preventing the patient from moving. Tod­
dlers should sit on a parent’s lap, with the examiner sitting in a chair 
opposite them. The child is held against the parent’s chest, with one 
of the parent’s hands and arms holding the child’s arms and the other 
around the child’s head so that one ear is exposed. To avoid trauma 
with movement, the otoscope should be held in the examiner’s hand 
making direct contact with the patient’s head, allowing the otoscope to 
move with the head.
Earache
Brittany Player
5
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
86
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Cerumen (ear wax) is a waxy substance consisting of glandular 
discharge from cells in the outer external canal mixing with exfoliated 
epithelial cells. Cerumen can both obscure visualization of the ear­
drum leading to diagnostic errors and be a cause of otalgia if impaction 
occurs. To view the eardrum properly, the examiner should remove 
the wax by irrigating the ear canal gently with lukewarm water, lifting 
the wax out with a blunt curette, or dissolving the wax by placing 1–2 
drops of docusate sodium liquid in the canal for 10–15 minutes. Con­
traindications for irrigation or use of a cerumenolytic solution are the 
presence of a tympanostomy tube, a perforated tympanic membrane, 
or an organic foreign body (e.g., legumes swell in contact with fluids).
During the insertion of the speculum, the clinician should note any 
redness, edema, tenderness, exudate, furuncles, or vesicles that may be 
present in the external auditory canal. In some illnesses such as otitis 
externa, the ear canal may be so edematous that the speculum cannot 
be inserted, and the eardrum cannot be seen. In addition, in neonates 
and in some children with craniofacial anomalies such as trisomy 21 
or Goldenhar syndrome, the external canal may be so small that it pre­
cludes an accurate assessment of the tympanic membrane.
Pneumatic otoscopy allows evaluation of the tympanic membrane’s 
mobility. Because it is more accurate than otoscopy alone in detecting 
middle ear effusion, pneumatic otoscopy should be part of every ear 
examination. In performing pneumatic otoscopy, the examiner should 
select a speculum that fits snugly in the external auditory canal. The 
examiner then partially depresses the rubber bulb of the pneumatic 
otoscope and inserts the otoscope into the ear canal (Fig. 5.2). Once the 
eardrum is seen, the examiner should observe the color, appearance, 
position, bony landmarks, and mobility of the tympanic membrane 
(Table 5.5 and Fig. 5.3). If the eardrum is not perforated, the clinician 
observes its mobility by alternating positive and negative pressure by 
gently depressing and releasing the bulb of the pneumatic otoscope. 
Poor mobility of the eardrum may be secondary to middle ear effusion, 
a perforated tympanic membrane, or lack of an airtight seal (Fig. 5.4).
In neonates and young infants, the eardrum is less perpendicular 
to the observer, the bony landmarks are less distinct, and the eardrum 
is less mobile than in older infants and children. Failure to appreciate 
these normal otoscopic findings may lead to the overdiagnosis of mid­
dle ear effusion.
In the first few hours of AOM, the middle ear cavity may not yet 
be filled with fluid, and the mobility may be normal. By the time the 
patient is examined, though, the middle ear is usually filled with fluid, 
and the eardrum is opaque and bulging with decreased mobility (see 
Fig. 5.4). A reddened eardrum may indicate inflammation of the tym­
panic membrane (TM), but this physical finding is not specific because 
crying alone can induce diffuse redness of the eardrum. In addition, 
differentiation of color is highly variable among observers, which 
may in part result from the intensity and type of light source used in 
otoscopy.
TABLE 5.1  Differential Diagnosis of Painful 
Middle Ear Disorders
Disorder
Clinical Features
Acute otitis media
Immobile tympanic membrane that may appear 
bulging, red, and/or opaque
Bullous myringitis
Hemorrhagic or serous bullae on the tympanic 
membrane; more severe pain than acute otitis 
media
Mastoiditis
Tenderness and erythema over mastoid with 
periostitis process; no destruction of bone 
trabeculae
Acute mastoid osteitis
Destruction of bone trabeculae; tenderness and 
erythema over mastoid process coupled with 
outward displacement of pinna
Granulomatosis
Severe necrotizing vasculitis; ulcerative and 
destructive granulomatous lesions of upper and 
lower respiratory tract with polyangiitis
Langerhans cell histio­
cytosis
Pituitary dysfunction, exophthalmos, seborrheic 
dermatitis, and bone lesions; if bone lesions 
involve the ear, patient presents with mastoid 
tenderness and otorrhea
TABLE 5.2  Differential Diagnoses of Painful 
External Ear and Auditory Canal Disorders
Disorder
Clinical Features
Acute otitis externa
Diffuse redness, swelling, and pain of the canal 
with greenish to whitish exudate; often very 
tender pinna
Necrotizing (malignant) 
otitis externa (± skull 
base osteomyelitis)
Rapidly progressive, severe swelling and redness 
of pinna; pinna may be laterally displaced; risk 
factors include diabetes mellitus, congenital or 
acquired immunodeficiency, severe neutropenia
Dermatitis
  Eczema
History of atopy, presence of lesions elsewhere; 
lesions are scaly, red, pruritic, and weeping
  Contact
History of cosmetic use or irritant exposure; 
lesions are scaly, red, pruritic, and weeping
  Seborrhea
Scaly, red, papular dermatitis; scalp may have 
thick, yellow scales
  Psoriasis
History or presence of psoriasis elsewhere; 
erythematous papules that coalesce into thick, 
white plaques
Cellulitis
Diffuse redness, tenderness, and swelling of the 
pinna
Furuncles
Red, tender papules in areas with hair follicles 
(distal third of the ear canal)
Infected periauricular 
cyst
Discrete, palpable lesions; history of previous 
swelling at same site; cellulitis may develop, 
obscuring cystic structure
Insect bites
History of exposure; lesions are red, tender papules
Herpes zoster oticus
Painful, vesicular lesions in the ear canal and 
tympanic membrane, hearing loss, vestibulitis; 
with addition of seventh cranial nerve palsy—
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Perichondritis
Inflammation of the cartilage, usually secondary 
to cellulitis
Relapsing polychondritis
Recurrent episodes, involves other cartilage sites 
(nose)
Granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis
Fever, weight loss, respiratory and/or renal 
manifestations
Tumors including 
Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis
Palpable mass, destruction of surrounding 
structures
Foreign body
Foreign body may cause secondary trauma to the 
ear canal or become a nidus for an infection of 
the ear canal
Trauma
Bruising and swelling of external ear; there may 
be signs of basilar skull fracture (cerebrospinal 
fluid otorrhea, hemotympanum)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
87
CHAPTER 5  Earache
In otitis media with effusion (OME), also known as serous otitis 
media, the cardinal sign is decreased mobility of the eardrum. The ear­
drum may be opaque, but not bulging or grossly inflamed (see Fig. 5.5 
and Table 5.5). A challenge for the clinician is the child with symptoms 
consistent with AOM (ear pain) but with the physical findings of OME. 
In such cases, it is difficult to decide whether there is an acute infection 
of the middle ear or whether it is OME with an illness at another site 
causing the symptoms.
When the external ear and tympanic membrane are normal in a 
child with an earache, the clinician must consider the possibility of 
referred pain (see Table 5.4). Innervation of the external and mid­
dle ear includes pain fibers of the trigeminal, glossopharyngeal, and 
vagus nerves and, to a lesser extent, the facial nerve and upper cervical 
nerves. The clinician should examine the neck, parotid gland, thyroid, 
mouth, tongue, teeth, temporomandibular joint, tonsils, and throat. In 
children, the cause of referred pain is usually infectious rather than 
noninfectious (e.g., a tumor).
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Bacterial Cultures
Routine cultures of middle or external ear fluid are not required because 
most infections are self-­limited and respond to empiric antimicrobial 
therapy. In selected instances (e.g., persistent treatment failure, severe 
pain, an immunocompromised host, a neonate), culture of otorrhea 
from the external auditory canal or cultures of middle ear fluid by tym­
panocentesis may guide therapy. In a child with AOM, the offending 
pathogen is usually also present in the nasopharynx. Unfortunately, 
nasopharyngeal cultures are not helpful in directing therapy because 
multiple pathogens are typically isolated, and it is unclear which organ­
ism is actually causing the middle ear infection. With the emergence 
of strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae that are resistant to commonly 
used antibacterials, the incidence of treatment failures may increase. 
This increasing rate of treatment failure may necessitate a greater reli­
ance on tympanocentesis for culture of middle ear fluid to determine 
the appropriate antimicrobial agent.
Tympanometry
Tympanometry is an objective, painless method for detecting the pres­
ence of middle ear effusion by providing information about tympanic 
membrane compliance. A soft plastic probe is inserted into the exter­
nal auditory canal to obtain an airtight seal. The tympanometer mea­
sures the flow of sound energy into the middle ear under conditions of 
changing air pressure. When the air pressure is equal on both sides of 
an intact eardrum, with the drum in neutral position, the transmission 
of sound energy through the tympanic membrane is at its maximum. 
The peak on the tympanogram represents the pressure at which the 
flow of sound energy is maximal. For example, in a normal air-­filled 
TABLE 5.3  Causes of Otalgia and Sources for Referred Pain
Intrinsic
	I.	 External Ear
External otitis
Cerumen impaction
Foreign body
Perichondritis
Preauricular cyst or sinus
Impacted insects
Myringitis
Trauma
Tumor
Infection
	II.	Middle Ear, Eustachian Tube, and Mastoid
Barotrauma
Middle ear effusion
Negative intratympanic pressure (eustachian tube dysfunction)
Acute otitis media
Mastoiditis
Gradenigo syndrome (eye pain, otorrhea, cranial nerve VI weakness ± 
petrositis)
Aditus block
Complication of otitis media
Tumor
Eosinophilic granuloma
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Extrinsic
	 I.	 Trigeminal Nerve
Dental
Jaw
Temporomandibular joint
Oral cavity (tongue)
Infratemporal fossa tumors
	 II.	 Facial Nerve
Bell palsy
Tumors
Herpes zoster
	III.	 Glossopharyngeal Nerve
Tonsil
Oropharynx
Nasopharynx
	IV.	 Vagus Nerve
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Gastroesophageal reflux
Thyroid
	V.	 Cervical Nerves
Lymph nodes
Cysts
Cervical spine
Neck infections
	VI.	Miscellaneous
Migraine
Neuralgias
Paranasal sinuses
Central nervous system
Drug induced (mesalazine, sulfasalazine)
Factitious disorder by proxy
From Bluestone CD, Stool SE, Alper CM, et al. Pediatric Otolaryngology. 4th ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:288.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
88
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
middle ear cavity, the peak occurs at ambient atmospheric pressure 
(Fig. 5.6A). With eustachian tube dysfunction (a retracted eardrum 
but no middle ear effusion), the peak occurs in the negative pressure 
range on the recording (Fig. 5.6C). With middle ear effusion, the sound 
energy flowing into the middle ear is reduced, which produces a flat 
tympanogram (Fig. 5.6B). A flat tympanogram may also result from 
cerumen, a foreign body, or occlusion of the opening of the probe by 
the wall of the external auditory canal. In these circumstances, the tym­
panogram is flat and the estimated volume of the ear canal is lower 
than anticipated. In a perforated eardrum, the sound energy is read­
ily transmitted through the hole in the drum throughout the entire 
pressure range, resulting in a flat tympanogram with a higher-­than-­
anticipated ear canal volume.
The use of tympanometry can be limited by patient age and coop­
eration with testing, cerumen impaction, and the skill of the individual 
performing the testing. When performed by experts, tympanometry 
and pneumatic otoscopy have equivalent sensitivity (approximately 
90%) and specificity (70–80%). Tympanometry is neither more accu­
rate nor more convenient than is properly performed pneumatic otos­
copy. Some tympanometers do not perform well in infants younger 
than 6 months of age. Tympanometry is advantageous if the clinician 
is unsure of the otoscopic findings. Tympanometry can only indicate 
presence of middle ear effusion but cannot distinguish between AOM and 
OME.
Acoustic Reflectometry
Acoustic reflectometers are used to detect middle ear effusion. The 
device directs sonar-­like sound waves of varying frequency toward the 
tympanic membrane and measures the intensity of reflected sound. 
This hand-­held instrument is similar in size to an otoscope. The tip 
of the reflectometer is inserted into the ear canal. In contrast to tym­
panometry, an airtight seal is not required. The frequency of maximal 
reflected sound depends on the distance of the probe from the ear­
drum. Middle ear effusion is detected not by the frequency but by the 
magnitude of maximal reflected sound. When middle ear effusion is 
present, reflectance is increased in comparison with that in the air-­
filled middle ear.
Improvements in technology have been made such that reflectome­
try includes spectral gradient analysis. Reflectometry is easily learned, 
quick, convenient, and useful in a crying child. It has a lower sensi­
tivity and specificity than properly performed pneumatic otoscopy in 
detecting middle ear effusion. Because the accuracy of current mod­
els decreases in infants younger than 1 year, this technique should not 
be used in infants younger than 6 months of age. Like tympanometry, 
reflectometry can reveal only whether middle ear effusion is present 
and cannot reveal whether the effusion is secondary to AOM or OME. 
Reflectometry is useful if otoscopic findings are indeterminate.
Diagnostic Imaging
Radiologic techniques are rarely required in the evaluation of external 
or middle ear disease, but may be useful in the assessment of intra­
temporal and intracranial complications of otitis media or mastoiditis. 
Opacification of the normally aerated mastoid air cells is usually seen 
in AOM because the mastoid air cells communicate with the middle 
ear space. By definition, this is acute mastoiditis; however, this opaci­
fication resolves concomitantly with the successful treatment of AOM. 
In contrast, in acute mastoid osteitis, also called acute coalescent mas­
toiditis, there is destruction of bone trabeculations in the mastoid air 
cells. CT scan is the preferred imaging modality to aid in this diag­
nosis. Imaging studies can be useful in evaluating a patient for other 
intracranial complications of AOM. CT scans of the head can evalu­
ate for suspected cholesteatomas. MRI should be used for diagnosing 
intracranial mass lesions (e.g., brain abscess) and soft tissue sequelae 
of infection, while magnetic resonance venography may identify dural 
sinus thrombosis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Most disorders of the external and middle ear are readily apparent after 
the examination of the ear (see Tables 5.1 to 5.3). If examination find­
ings are unremarkable, the clinician should consider referred pain (see 
Table 5.4). Most cases of otitis media are uncomplicated; however, the 
clinician should be alert to the complications and sequelae of AOM 
(Table 5.6).
OTITIS EXTERNA
Otitis externa is mainly an inflammation of the external ear canal 
with or without involvement of the pinna or tympanic membrane, 
typically secondary to acute bacterial infection. Excessive moisture 
may cause small abrasions in the protective lipid layer of skin in the 
external canal, making it vulnerable to infection by normal external 
TABLE 5.4  Causes of Referred Ear Pain
Neck
Cervical lymphadenitis
Infected cervical cysts
Subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint (torticollis and otalgia)
Salivary Glands
Parotitis
Thyroid
Thyroiditis
Teeth and Gums
Dental caries
Dental abscess
Impacted teeth
Gingivitis
Temporomandibular Joint
Temporomandibular disorder
Arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Spasm from bruxism or dental malocclusion
Tonsils
Tonsillitis
Peritonsillar abscess
Post-­tonsillectomy neuralgia
Pharynx
Pharyngitis
Paranasal Sinuses
Maxillary sinusitis
Other
Herpes zoster (Ramsay Hunt syndrome: postherpetic neuralgia)
Bell palsy
Migraine
Tumors (e.g., of facial nerve)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
89
CHAPTER 5  Earache
ear flora or pathogenic bacteria. Dryness or presence of underlying 
skin conditions (such as eczema) and trauma (including cotton ear 
swabs) can also predispose the external canal to infection. Less com­
monly, otorrhea draining from a perforated tympanic membrane 
secondary to otitis media may cause otitis externa. Cerumen has 
protective effects by decreasing the pH, thereby inhibiting infection; 
removal of cerumen alters this pH, leaving the canal vulnerable. 
Additionally, cerumen impaction can trap water and bacteria in the 
external canal, leading to infection.
The presenting symptoms are often rapid onset of intense pain 
(especially with manipulation of the pinna, pressure on the tragus, or 
jaw movement), erythema, and otorrhea. On physical examination, 
the ear canal will be red, edematous, and tender. Occasionally, the 
edema and pain may be so severe as to prevent complete examination 
of the entire canal and tympanic membrane. Otorrhea may be pres­
ent in the external canal. While otitis externa can occur at all ages, 
occurrence peaks between 7 and 12 years of age, with 10% of people 
having an episode in their lifetime. Otitis externa is rarely bilateral 
in nature.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the predominant organism causing 
otitis externa and is isolated in up to 60% of microbiologically con­
firmed cases, but staphylococcal (Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-­
negative staphylococci) and streptococcal species have been isolated. 
Gram-­negative organisms, such as Enterobacter, Proteus, and Klebsiella 
species, and fungal organisms, such as Candida and Aspergillus species, 
have also been isolated.
Treatment consists of a topical suspension, commonly ofloxacin or 
ciprofloxacin combined with hydrocortisone or dexamethasone. The 
addition of the topical steroid is associated with improvement in pain. 
Most patients respond within a few days. If there is marked edema of 
the canal, antibacterials may not reach the site of infection. In this case, 
the canal should be cleaned with gentle suction, and a cotton wick 
should be inserted into the auditory canal. Antibacterial suspension is 
then dripped into the wick, which allows the medication to diffuse far­
ther into the ear canal. In some cases, daily cleaning and replacement 
of the wick are necessary. If the infection progresses and/or the patient 
has associated fever and lymphadenitis, the patient may need oral or 
A
B
Helix
Antihelix
Triangular
fossa
Root 
of helix
Tragus
Clavum
conchae
Antitragus
Lobule
Intertragal
notch
Auricle
Ossicles
Malleus Incus Stapes
Semicircular canals
External
auditory
canal
Mastoid
bone
Cranial nerve VII
Tympanic membrane
Cochlea
Cochlea
Eustachian tube
Cranial
nerve
VIII
Facial nerve
(VII)
Fig. 5.1  Anatomy of the ear. A, A normal external ear (auricle or pinna) is shown, with its various landmarks 
labeled. It is helpful to refer to such a diagram in assessing congenital anomalies. B, This coronal section 
shows the various structures of the hearing and vestibular apparatus. The three main regions are the external 
ear, middle ear, and inner ear. The eustachian tube connects the middle ear and the nasopharynx and serves 
to drain and ventilate the middle ear. (From Yellon R, Chi D. Otolaryngology. In: Zitelli B, ed. Atlas of Pediatric 
Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:869.)
Fig. 5.2  Technique for pneumatic otoscopy. (From Bluestone CD, Klein 
JO. Otitis Media in Infants and Children. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saun­
ders; 1995:92.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
90
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
parenteral antimicrobials and consultation with an otolaryngologist. 
Prevention should be aimed at keeping the ear canal dry and maintain­
ing healthy skin within the canal.
Chondritis is a potential complication of severe otitis externa and 
occurs when the infection progresses into the cartilaginous structures 
of the ear canal. This complication is rare without a history of previous 
trauma (including ear piercing) or surgery. The most common patho­
gens are Pseudomonas and S. aureus. Treatment requires systemic anti­
bacterials, removal of foreign bodies such as earrings, and, if necessary, 
surgical debridement of tissue.
Furunculosis is an infection of a hair follicle in the outer third of 
the external ear that can mimic acute external otitis. The causative 
organism is typically S. aureus. Symptoms include a focal area of ery­
thema, swelling, and pain. Draining the abscess and antistaphylococcal 
antibiotics provide appropriate treatment.
NECROTIZING (MALIGNANT) OTITIS EXTERNA
Necrotizing otitis externa is an extension of infection to the tempo­
ral bone and skull base causing extensive tissue destruction (skull base 
osteomyelitis). The illness may result in chondritis and osteitis of both 
the middle and inner ears. This condition is rare in pediatrics, occur­
ring primarily in neutropenic or other immunocompromised patients. 
In adults, diabetes mellitus is a common predisposing condition, 
though it is not a common comorbidity in children with diabetes. Pre­
senting symptoms include a markedly swollen and laterally displaced 
pinna associated with fever, malaise, and persistent, deep-­seated otal­
gia out of proportion to findings on examination. Occasionally, facial 
nerve paralysis, vertigo, and sensorineural hearing loss may be noted. 
Diagnosis is supported by radiologic imaging, including CT scan and 
MRI, which help to characterize the anatomic extent of disease as well 
as the soft tissue and bone involvement. Aggressive treatment with 
broad-­spectrum parenteral antibiotics is indicated. P. aeruginosa is the 
most commonly isolated pathogen, and coverage should include anti­
bacterials directed against it. Other, less commonly isolated organisms 
include Klebsiella species, S. aureus, Staphylococcus epididymis, and 
Aspergillus. Surgical intervention may be necessary to obtain cultures 
for therapy guidance and provide local tissue debridement.
ACUTE OTITIS MEDIA
Acute otitis media is most commonly a bacterial complication of a pre­
ceding or concurrent viral URI, usually occurring several days after 
the onset of the URI. The viral infection enables pathogenic bacteria in 
the nasopharynx to ascend through the eustachian tube into the mid­
dle ear either by impairing local host defenses or by eustachian tube 
dysfunction. The bacterial pathogens then cause a secondary infection.
A diagnosis of AOM should be made in children presenting with 
the following:
 • Moderate to severe bulging of the TM or new onset of otorrhea not 
due to acute otitis externa
 • Mild bulging of the TM and recent (<48 hours) onset of significant 
TM erythema or ear pain (Fig. 5.7; see Table 5.5)
Erythema of the TM is not specific and therefore should be consid­
ered a characteristic of AOM only if associated with bulging of the TM.
Microbiology
The leading bacterial pathogens isolated from middle ear fluid in chil­
dren with AOM are S. pneumoniae, nontypable Haemophilus influ­
enzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. S. aureus and group A streptococci 
are uncommon pathogens, though S. aureus should be considered in 
patients with persistent otorrhea after tympanostomy tube placement. 
In the first month of life (especially the first 2 weeks), gram-­negative 
enteric bacteria (e.g., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae) or group 
B streptococcus may also be isolated. Otitis media associated with an 
TABLE 5.5  The Tympanic Membrane in Acute Otitis Media and Otitis Media with Effusion
Characteristic
Normal Findings
Acute Otitis Media
Otitis Media with Effusion
Comments
Color
Gray to pink
Often red from inflammation; yellow to 
white from purulent fluid behind tympanic 
membrane
Usually gray to pink, but may still be 
yellow or white; not red
Interobserver variation of color 
is high; redness can occur 
from crying alone
Appearance
Translucent
Opaque
Translucent or opaque
Opacity is caused by opaque 
fluid or by scarring of tym­
panic membrane
Position
Neutral
Fluid under pressure produces bulging of 
tympanic membrane; bony landmarks 
may be distorted and the light reflex lost
Not bulging; may be retracted
Mobility
Tympanic membrane 
moves freely
Mobility to positive and negative pressure 
reduced
Mobility to positive and negative 
pressure reduced
Other findings
Perforation with otorrhea
Short process
Handle of
malleus
Umbo
Light reflex
Fig. 5.3  Normal tympanic membrane with normal landmarks identified. 
(From Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds. Feigin and Cherry’s 
Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2019:154, Fig. 16.7.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
91
CHAPTER 5  Earache
erythematous ipsilateral conjunctivitis with purulent exudate is often 
caused by nontypable H. influenzae.
The pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) 7 was introduced in 
2000, covering serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F of S. pneu­
moniae. Widespread use of this vaccine resulted in a 29% reduction 
in AOM caused by all pneumococcal strains in children prior to 24 
months of age. There was also a reduction in tympanostomy tube 
placement. In the first few years following introduction of PCV7, 
a shift from S. pneumoniae to nontypable H. influenzae as the lead­
ing pathogen causing AOM was noted. Shortly thereafter, there was 
a shift to non-­PCV7 S. pneumoniae isolates as the primary patho­
gen of AOM, including multiresistant serotype 19A, which was 
responsible for more cases of AOM and for more severe and invasive 
infections. Licensing and widespread use of the PCV13 vaccination 
began in 2010 in the United States, adding coverage for an additional 
NORMAL 
Position—neutral
Color—normal
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—moves briskly with
   slight positive and negative
   pressure
A
B
C
D
E
F
NEGATIVE MIDDLE EAR
   PRESSURE
Position—retracted
Color—normal
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—moves only with
   applied negative pressure
ACUTE OTITIS MEDIA
Position—full to bulging
Color—red (can be pink,
   white, or yellow)
Translucency—opaque
Mobility—poor when both
   positive and negative
   pressures are applied
FLUID LEVEL
Position—retracted
Color—yellow or amber
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—same as with high
   negative pressure, but fluid
   level and bubbles change with
   applied pressure
OTITIS MEDIA WITH
   EFFUSION
Position—usually retracted
Color—white (or yellow or blue)
Translucency—opaque (may be
 translucent)
Mobility—poor when both
   positive and negative
   pressures are applied
PERFORATION (OR PATENT
   TYMPANOSTOMY TUBE)
Position—neutral or retracted
Color—white, pink, red, or
   normal
Translucency—translucent or 
   opaque
Mobility—none
Fig. 5.4  A–F, Common conditions of the middle ear, as assessed with the otoscope. (From Bluestone C, Klein 
J. Otitis Media in Infants and Children. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:131.)
Fig. 5.5  Tympanic membrane in otitis media with effusion. (From Ker­
schner J, Preciado D. Otitis media. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2020:3421.)
5
400
0
200
 400
0
200
 400
0
200
10
Air pressure (mm H2O)
5
10
5
10
Compliance
 100
A
B
C
Fig. 5.6  A, A normal tympanogram with a peak at atmospheric pressure, 
indicating an air-­filled middle ear with normal (atmospheric) pressure. B, 
A “flat” tympanogram, indicating middle ear effusion. C, A tympanogram 
with a negative peak pressure, indicating eustachian tube obstruction.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
92
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
six serotypes of S. pneumoniae (serotypes included in the PCV7 vac­
cination plus serotypes 1, 3, 5, 6A, 7F, and 19A). Subsequently, there 
has been emergence of nonvaccine strains of S. pneumoniae, though 
there has been an overall decrease in S. pneumoniae as the cause of 
AOM.
Viruses also have an important etiologic role. It is not clear 
whether the virus alone or a combination of virus and bacteria are 
involved in the pathogenesis. Several studies have documented the 
presence of viruses (in up to 44% of cases, with or without bacteria) 
in the middle ear fluid of children with otitis media. URIs second­
ary to respiratory syncytial virus, influenza, and adenovirus have 
been associated with up to 40% of AOM cases in children attending 
daycare. To a lesser degree, URIs secondary to parainfluenza, rhi­
novirus, and enteroviruses have also been associated with AOM. 
Viruses enhance bacterial adherence and colonization in the naso­
pharynx, impair local host immune defenses, and cause eustachian 
tube dysfunction.
Strains of S. pneumoniae have emerged with altered penicillin-­
binding proteins on the bacterial cell wall, which makes them less 
susceptible to β-­lactam drugs such as penicillins and cephalosporins. 
In addition, because resistance genes are frequently linked, organisms 
with resistance to β-­lactam drugs are more likely to be resistant to 
sulfa antibacterials and to the macrolide class. Nonetheless, high-­dose 
amoxicillin remains the best oral antibiotic available for drug-­resistant 
S. pneumoniae. Approximately 40% of H. influenzae strains and nearly 
all strains of M. catarrhalis produce β-­lactamase enzymes, which 
hydrolyze penicillins and some cephalosporins, making them resistant 
to beta-lactam antibiotics. Use of β-­lactamase inhibitors such as clavu­
lanate can overcome this resistance.
Treatment
The goals of treatment in AOM are to relieve discomfort and to prevent 
infectious complications (Fig. 5.8). Evaluating the treatment of otitis 
media is complicated by the high rate of spontaneous resolution of the 
TABLE 5.6  Manifestations of the Sequelae and Complications of Otitis Media
Complication
Clinical Features
Acute
Perforation with otorrhea
Immobile tympanic membrane secondary to visible perforation, exudate in ear canal
Acute mastoiditis with periostitis
Tenderness and erythema over mastoid process, no destruction of bony trabeculae
Acute mastoid osteitis
Destruction of bony trabeculae; tenderness and erythema over mastoid process coupled with outward displacement of pinna
Petrositis
Infection of perilabyrinthine cells; may present with otitis, paralysis of lateral rectus, and ipsilateral orbital or facial pain 
(Gradenigo syndrome)
Facial nerve palsy
Peripheral cranial nerve VII paralysis
Labyrinthitis
Vertigo, fever, ear pain, nystagmus, hearing loss, tinnitus, nausea and vomiting
Lateral sinus thrombosis
Headache, fever, seizures, altered states of consciousness, septic emboli
Meningitis
Fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Extradural empyema
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Subdural empyema
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Brain abscess
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness, focal neurologic examination
Nonacute
Chronic perforation
Immobile tympanic membrane secondary to perforation
Otitis media with effusion (OME)
Immobile, opaque tympanic membrane
Adhesive otitis
Irreversible conductive hearing loss secondary to chronic OME
Tympanosclerosis
Thickened white plaques, may cause conductive hearing loss
Chronic suppurative otitis media
Following acute otitis media with perforation, secondary infection with Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, or 
anaerobes develops, causing chronic otorrhea
Cholesteatoma
White, pearl-­like destructive tumor with otorrhea arising near or within tympanic membrane; may be secondary to chronic 
negative middle ear pressure
Otitic hydrocephalus
Increased intracranial pressure secondary to acute otitis media; signs and symptoms include severe headaches, blurred vision, 
nausea, vomiting, papilledema, diplopia (abducens paralysis)
Fig. 5.7  Tympanic membrane in acute otitis media. (From Kerschner J, 
Preciado D. Otitis media. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum 
NJ, et  al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3419.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
93
CHAPTER 5  Earache
infection: In children with AOM, up to 19% with S. pneumoniae and 48% 
with H. influenzae cultured on initial tympanocentesis are culture nega­
tive within 1 week without antibacterial therapy. Despite M. catarrhalis 
resistance to amoxicillin, approximately 75% of children infected with 
that organism demonstrated cure when treated with amoxicillin. The 
emergence of drug-­resistant S. pneumoniae strains and concerns about 
treating a disease with a high rate of spontaneous resolution have led 
to change in the recommended treatment for otitis media (see Fig. 5.8).
Yes
Yes
1
2
3
5
6
9
10
11
8
7
12
13
No
No
No
Yes
Child aged 2 mo through 12
yr with uncomplicated AOM
presents to office.
A diagnosis of acute otitis media requires:
1) History of acute onset of signs and symptoms
2) The presence of middle ear effusion (MEE)
3) Signs and symptoms of middle ear inflammation
a) moderate to severe bulging of the TM or new
onset of otorrhea not due to otitis externa
b) mild bulging of the TM and recent (48 hr)
onset of ear pain or intense TM erythema
A diagnosis of AOM should not be made in
children without MEE.
The clinician
assesses pain.
Is pain
present?
Clinician recommends 
treatment to reduce
pain.
Is observation an
appropriate initial
treatment option?*
Does the child
have fever
39C and/or moderate
or severe otalgia?
Amoxicillin at a dose of
90 mg/kg/day is the
initial antibacterial of
choice for most children.
Child is observed for 48 to
72 hr with assurance of
appropriate follow-up.
Child managed with
appropriate
antibacterial therapy.
Go to Box 6.
Go to Box 14.
Go to Box 14.
Go to Box 14.
Criteria for antibacterial treatment or observation
in children with nonsevere illness:* 
1) 6 mo: antibacterial treatment
2) 6 mo to 2 yr: antibacterial treatment with cer-
tain diagnosis or severe illness or observation with
uncertain diagnosis and nonsevere illness
3) 2 yr and older: antibacterial treatment if severe
illness or observe with nonsevere illness with certain
diagnosis; observation for uncertain diagnosis
*Caregiver is informed and agrees to the option of 
observation.
Caregiver is able to monitor child and return should
condition worsen.
Systems are in place for ready communication with
the clinician, re-evaluation, and obtaining medication
if necessary.
4
14
15
17
19
18
16
No
No
Yes
Yes
Clinician reassesses
and confirms
diagnosis of AOM.
Is diagnosis
of AOM
confirmed?
Assess for other causes
of illness and manage
appropriately.
Clinician should initiate
antibacterial treatment for children
initially managed with observation
or change antibacterial treatment
for patients initially managed with
antibacterial therapy.
Antibacterial choice
should be based on the 
likely pathogen(s)
present and on clinical
experience.
Did patient respond
to initial treatment
intervention (either
antibacterial
treatment or 
observation)?
Patient follow-up
as appropriate.
Fig. 5.8  Management of acute otitis media (AOM). TM, tympanic membrane. (From Kerschner J, Preciado D. 
Otitis media. In: Kliegman R, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3424.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
94
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
Withholding antibacterials in children at low risk for complications 
may be appropriate under certain circumstances. In the Netherlands, 
antibacterial therapy is commonly delayed for 48–72 hours following 
diagnosis to determine whether there is spontaneous resolution. While 
antibacterial use is lower, rates of acute mastoiditis may be higher, 
emphasizing the need for close follow-­up of patients in whom a watch­
ful waiting approach is employed. There are specific guidelines on the 
use of watchful waiting and patients for whom its use may be appro­
priate (Table 5.7). However, the key to observation prior to antibacte­
rial initiation is close follow-­up for assessment of worsening symptoms 
or spontaneous resolution. Additionally, adequate analgesia, includ­
ing acetaminophen and/or ibuprofen, should be provided during the 
observation period. While watchful waiting is appropriate for certain 
populations, the benefits of antibacterial treatment are most clearly seen 
in children younger than 2 years.
When an antibacterial is used, efficacy against S. pneumoniae is the 
most important consideration. In addition, the clinician must consider 
the drug safety, convenience, palatability, and cost. High-­dose amox­
icillin (90 mg/kg/day given in two divided doses) is the appropriate 
initial therapy for most cases (Table 5.8). Because otitis media is usu­
ally a self-­limited illness, the use of broad-­spectrum antibacterials for 
the initial treatment should be discouraged because of high cost, the 
increased risk of adverse reactions, and the increased likelihood of the 
development of resistant strains.
The dose of amoxicillin depends on the risk for the presence of 
drug-­resistant pneumococci. Risk factors for drug resistance include 
age younger than 2 years, daycare attendance, recent antibacterial expo­
sure, and cigarette smoke exposure. In addition, clinicians should con­
sider community resistance patterns. In penicillin-­allergic patients, the 
cross-­reactivity between penicillins and cephalosporins is likely lower 
than previously reported. Cephalosporins are therefore an alternative 
therapy option in patients without severe and/or recent allergic reac­
tion to penicillins (see Table 5.8). Clindamycin is not effective against 
H. influenzae but may be effective against some penicillin-­resistant 
strains of S. pneumoniae. Macrolides (i.e., erythromycin, azithromy­
cin) are minimally effective against S. pneumoniae or H. influenzae and 
therefore not appropriate alternatives.
Patients with Persistent Symptoms
After 48–72 hours of antibacterial therapy, most patients are either 
asymptomatic or improving. Beyond this time period, many patients 
with ongoing symptoms may have an active viral infection, whereas 
TABLE 5.7  Recommendations for Initial Management for Uncomplicated Acute Otitis Media 
(AOM)*
Age
Otorrhea with AOM
Unilateral or Bilateral AOM with 
Severe Symptoms†
Bilateral AOM Without 
Otorrhea
Unilateral AOM Without 
Otorrhea
6 mo–2 yr
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotic therapy or additional 
observation
≥2 yr
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotic therapy or additional 
observation
Antibiotic therapy or additional 
observation‡
*Applies only to children with well-­documented AOM with high certainty of diagnosis (see Fig. 5.8).
†A toxic-­appearing child, persistent otalgia more than 48 hr, temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F) in the past 48 hr, or if there is uncertain access to follow-­up 
after the visit.
‡This plan of initial management provides an opportunity for shared decision-­making with the child’s family for those categories appropriate for 
additional observation. If observation is offered, a mechanism must be in place to ensure follow-­up and begin antibiotics if the child worsens or fails 
to improve within 48–72 hr of AOM onset.
From Lieberthal A, Carroll A, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e976.
TABLE 5.8  Recommended Antibacterials for (Initial or Delayed) Treatment and for Patients Who 
Have Failed Initial Antibacterial Treatment
INITIAL IMMEDIATE OR DELAYED ANTIBIOTIC TREAT­
MENT
ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT AFTER 48–72 HR OF FAILURE OF 
INITIAL ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT
Recommended First-­Line 
Treatment
Alternative Treatment (if 
Penicillin Allergy)
Recommended First-­
Line Treatment
Alternative Treatment
Amoxicillin (90 mg/kg/day divided b.i.d.) 
or 
Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (90 mg/kg/day 
of amoxicillin divided b.i.d.) 
or 
Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/day IM or IV for 
1–3 days)
Cefdinir (14 mg/kg/day once daily or 
divided b.i.d.) 
or 
Cefpodoxime (10 mg/kg/day divided b.i.d.) 
or 
Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/day IM or IV for 
1–3 days)
Amoxicillin-­clavulanate 
(90 mg/kg/day of amoxicillin 
divided b.i.d.)
Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/day daily IM or IV for 1–3 days 
or 
Clindamycin (30–40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses)
Failure of second antibiotic:
Clindamycin (30–40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses)
Tympanocentesis*
Consultation with otolaryngology†
*May be considered in patients in whom response to therapy has been inadequate or when identification of the causative organism and susceptibility 
profile are necessary.
†Consultation with a specialist (i.e., otolaryngology) to perform a tympanocentesis.
b.i.d., twice daily; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
Adapted from Lieberthal A, Carroll A, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2014:133:347; Molloy 
L, Barron S, Khan N, et al. Oral B-­lactam antibiotics for pediatric otitis media, rhinosinusitis, and pneumonia. J Pediatr Health Care. 2020;34(3):291–
300. Kerschner J, Preciado D. Otitis media. In: Kliegman R, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3418–3431.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
95
CHAPTER 5  Earache
others may have a persistent inflammatory reaction despite elimination 
of viable bacteria. Studies are conflicting regarding continued presence 
of bacteria in the middle ear of persistently symptomatic patients, with 
some finding ongoing bacterial presence while others report sterile 
bacterial cultures of middle ear fluid in up to 50% of patients with per­
sistent symptoms. Therefore, in children with mild persistent symp­
toms, a clinician should consider analgesic-­antipyretic medications for 
relief of symptoms while addressing any issues of drug nonadherence, 
including palatability and dosing interval. In children with more severe, 
persistent signs of AOM without otologic improvement, prescribing an 
alternative antibiotic effective against possible resistant S. pneumoniae 
and β-­lactamase–producing H. influenzae and M. catarrhalis such as 
amoxicillin-­clavulanate (90 mg/kg/day of the amoxicillin component) 
or 3 days of intramuscular ceftriaxone should be considered (see Table 
5.8). With the emergence of S. pneumoniae resistance, tympanocentesis 
with culture of middle ear effusion should be considered for bacterio­
logic diagnosis and susceptibility testing.
Recurrent Acute Otitis Media
Recurrent otitis media is defined as three episodes of AOM in a 
6-­month period or four episodes in a 12-­month period with at least 
one episode in the preceding 6 months. Risk factors for recurrent AOM 
include the following:
 • Onset of AOM in the first year of life, especially if the first episode 
is before the patient is 6 months of age
 • Males
 • A sibling’s history of recurrent AOM
 • Cleft palate
 • Craniofacial anomalies
 • Trisomy 21
 • Daycare attendance
 • Household cigarette smoke exposure
 • HIV infection
 • Lack of breast-­feeding
 • History of atopy/allergies
Children with recurrent otitis media present a particular challenge 
with regard to treatment options. Long-­term, low-­dose antibacterial 
agents have been used as a method of prophylaxis in children with 
recurrent AOM in attempts to prevent additional episodes. While 
there is some evidence of decreased episodes of AOM, this benefit only 
occurred while receiving the prophylactic antibacterial, without ben­
efits after discontinuation of the antibacterial. Other studies have not 
demonstrated a difference in recurrence of AOM among children with 
or without prophylactic antibacterials. Given the risks of emergence of 
antibacterial resistance, side effects of antibacterials, and cost of ther­
apy weighed against the questionable benefits of long-­term antibacte­
rial use, prophylaxis is not recommended.
The benefits of placing tympanostomy tubes for recurrent AOM or 
OME include improving hearing, decreasing effusion burden, decreas­
ing episodes of acute otitis media, and improving quality of life for 
children that suffer from recurrent AOM or chronic effusion. As with 
any surgical procedure, the benefits must be weighed against the risks, 
including cost of the procedure and risks of anesthesia. Tympanos­
tomy tubes are eventually extruded from the eardrum by the normal 
process of epithelial growth. Recurrent episodes of otitis media may 
then resume. Long-­term consequences of tympanostomy tubes include 
focal atrophy, tympanosclerosis, and chronic perforation at the site of 
tube insertion.
OTITIS MEDIA WITH EFFUSION
Otitis media with effusion, also known as “glue ear,” may occur 
after an acute episode of otitis media or because of eustachian tube 
obstruction resulting from another cause, most commonly URI. 
OME differs from AOM in that there is middle ear effusion present 
without signs or symptoms of acute infection (Fig. 5.9). The most 
common presenting complaint with OME is decreased hearing. 
Middle ear fluid can persist for weeks after AOM. Two weeks after 
AOM, approximately 75% of children will have persistent effusion. 
The percentage drops to 50% at 1 month and 10–25% at 3 months 
post-­AOM. Because most cases of OME resolve without treatment, a 
period of observation is the most appropriate initial strategy. If effu­
sion persists for 3 months or longer, or if at any time there is concern 
for language delay, learning difficulties, or significant hearing loss, 
hearing testing should be performed.
The guideline for affected children between 2 months and 12 years 
distinguishes between children with OME at risk for speech, language, 
or learning problems and children not at risk for such problems. The 
clinician should document laterality, duration, and severity of effusion 
with pneumatic otoscopy and confirmation of effusion by tympanom­
etry when pneumatic otoscopy is inconclusive. Based on the updated 
guidelines, use of decongestants, steroids (intranasal or systemic), anti­
histamines, and/or antibacterial agents are not recommended in the 
management of persistent OME. Antihistamines, decongestants, and 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents do not promote the resolution 
of middle ear effusion and should not be used. With systemic cortico­
steroids (prednisone), the effusion may resolve initially, but it recurs 
within a few weeks of steroid discontinuation. Additionally, the side 
effect profile of systemic steroids precludes its use in children with 
OME. Although bacteria may be present in some cases, antibacterial 
therapy has only a minimal effect on the resolution of effusion and does 
not demonstrate long-­term benefit. A period of observation is recom­
mended before surgical intervention is considered.
MASTOIDITIS
Mastoiditis is a potentially serious acute or chronic suppurative com­
plication of otitis media, occurring in approximately 1–4 cases per 
100,000 children younger than 2 years old. Life-­threatening complica­
tions of mastoiditis are related to intracranial extension of the suppu­
rative process. Mastoiditis begins with the development of hyperemia 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5.9  Examples of normal tympanic membrane (A) and of mild bulg­
ing (B), moderate bulging (C), and severe bulging (D) of the tympanic 
membrane from middle ear effusion. (From Kerschner J, Preciado D. 
Otitis media. In: Kliegman R, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3419.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
96
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
and edema of the mastoid process, which then progresses to a suppura­
tive process that may produce demineralization and necrosis of bone, 
abscess formation, and contiguous spread to intracranial or other head 
and neck soft tissue areas. Mastoiditis with periosteitis indicates that 
the infection has spread to the periosteum of the mastoid process and 
manifests most commonly in children younger than 2 years, although 
children of any age may be affected. Diagnosis typically relies on history 
and physical examination findings. Otalgia, posterior ear pain, fever, 
and otorrhea are frequent symptoms. Posterior auricular tenderness 
and erythema, anterior-­inferior pinna protrusion, loss of the posterior 
auricular crease, middle ear effusion, a bulging or perforated tympanic 
membrane, and sagging of the posterior auditory canal wall are observ­
able signs. Acute mastoid osteitis designates further spread of infection 
causing bony trabeculae destruction. Mastoiditis may result in trans­
verse sinus thrombosis (Fig. 5.10), hearing loss, and labyrinthitis.
Petrositis occurs when the infection spreads medially to the petrous 
portion of the temporal bone and manifests as eye pain secondary to 
irritation of the ophthalmic branch of cranial nerve V (Fig. 5.11). Gra­
denigo syndrome is the triad of ipsilateral orbital or facial pain, paral­
ysis of the lateral rectus muscle, and suppurative otitis media. Rarely, 
the infection can spread externally to musculature of the neck resulting 
in a neck abscess (Bezold abscess).
The pathogens responsible for mastoiditis are the same as those of 
AOM, including S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae, though Pseudomo­
nas and group A streptococci are also causative agents (Table 5.9). A 
CT scan is usually diagnostic and reveals various stages of mastoid­
itis, including mastoiditis with periostitis and mastoiditis with osteitis 
with or without subperiosteal abscess. Treatment is based on the stage 
and extent of disease. High-­dose intravenous antibacterials and myrin­
gotomy with or without tympanostomy tube placement are important 
therapeutic (for drainage) and diagnostic (for culture) procedures. If 
there is no improvement after 2 days, mastoidectomy may be indicated. 
Mastoidectomy with myringotomy and tympanostomy tube placement 
is indicated if a subperiosteal abscess is present.
CHOLESTEATOMA
Cholesteatomas are cystlike growths of the middle ear or mastoid 
formed by keratinizing squamous epithelial cells (Fig. 5.12) and can 
be either congenital or acquired. Congenital cholesteatomas likely 
A
D
B
E
C
F
Fig. 5.10  Transverse sinus thrombosis associated with otomastoiditis or middle ear disease. A patient with 
otitis media, headache, and papilledema. Axial noncontrast (A) and contrast-­enhanced (B) CT of the head 
through the level of the posterior fossa, axial magnetization transfer T1 precontrast (C) and postcontrast (D) 
MRI scans, coronal T2 (E) and coronal multiple intensity projection image from a three-­dimensional time-­of-­
flight magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) (F) were obtained. Note the dense appearance within the right 
transverse sinus on the noncontrast CT study (arrow in A), with corresponding lack of contrast filling on the 
postcontrast CT study (arrow in B). Corresponding T1 shortening is seen in the precontrast MRI (arrow in C), 
with corresponding abnormal signal on the postcontrast images in keeping with clot or slow flow within the 
region of the right transverse sinus or sigmoid sinus (arrow in D). Corresponding T2 prolongation is seen on 
the coronal T2 image (arrow in E). Note the striking asymmetry of flow within the right posterior fossa dural 
venous system or internal jugular vein on the right on the three-­dimensional time-­of-­flight MRV (arrows in F). 
(From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:360.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
97
CHAPTER 5  Earache
result from epithelial cells implanted during otologic development 
in utero. Acquired cholesteatomas are potential complications from 
chronic otitis media or secondary to a deep retraction pocket (or 
invagination) in the tympanic membrane. The condition can also 
develop after tympanostomy tube placement. Cholesteatomas can 
cause bony resorption by expansion, often to the mastoid, but occa­
sionally intracranially with potentially life-­threatening consequences. 
This condition should be suspected in children with history of chronic 
otitis media, persistent otorrhea, and a tympanic membrane with a 
retraction pocket or perforation with white debris overlying the area. 
Cholesteatomas commonly present over the superior portion of the 
tympanic membrane. Urgent otolaryngology consultation should be 
obtained as delay in treatment can result in intracranial extension, 
permanent hearing loss, facial nerve injury, and middle and inner 
ear destruction.
INTRACRANIAL COMPLICATIONS
Meningitis, epidural or subdural empyema, brain abscess, and sigmoid 
or lateral sinus thrombosis can develop as complications of acute or 
chronic ear or mastoid infection. If suspected, imaging of the head 
should be done prior to lumbar puncture to evaluate for hydrocephalus 
or mass effect. Meningitis most commonly results from hematogenous 
spread of the infection and is diagnosed by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
analysis and culture. Tympanocentesis should be performed for bacte­
rial culture to aid in diagnosis and management choices. Brain abscess 
can occur from direct extension of acute or chronic otitis media or can 
develop adjacent to petrositis (Fig. 5.13). Clinical signs and symptoms 
should lead one to suspect this complication, and diagnosis can be 
made with CT or MRI. CSF for culture should be obtained to aid in 
Fig. 5.11  Axial T2-­weighted MRI showing left mastoiditis and petrous 
apicitis (arrows) as high signal in mastoid and petrous apex. (From Flint 
PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head 
& Neck Surgery. 5th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010.)
TABLE 5.9  Etiology of Acute Mastoiditis
Bacteria
Frequency
Streptococcus pneumoniae
10–51%
Streptococcus pyogenes
0–12%
Staphylococcus aureus
2–10%
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
∼10%
Haemophilus influenzae
2–3%
No growth
20–40%
From Faria J, Chun R, Kerschner J. Acute mastoiditis. In: Kliegman 
R, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:3432.
S
Fig. 5.12  A retraction-­pocket cholesteatoma of the posterosuperior 
quadrant. The incus long process is eroded, which leaves the drum 
adherent to the stapes head (S). An effusion is present in the middle 
ear, and squamous debris emanates from the attic. (From Isaacson G. 
Diagnosis of pediatric cholesteatoma. Pediatrics. 2007;120:603–608.)
Fig. 5.13  Coronal enhanced T1-­weighted MRI of the patient show­
ing enhancing tissue in left mastoid (white arrow) and temporal lobe 
abscess with enhancing capsule (black arrow). (From Flint PW, Haughey 
BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head & Neck Sur­
gery. 5th ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010:1995.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
98
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
directing therapy; culture may be negative depending on the location 
and loculation of the abscess. Lateral sinus thrombosis, also known 
as sigmoid sinus thrombosis, forms when infection from the adjacent 
mastoid contacts and penetrates the venous wall and forms a thrombus. 
Embolization of the thrombus can cause distal disease. These intracra­
nial complications require broad-­spectrum antibacterials and con­
sultation with otolaryngology and neurosurgery for possible surgical 
interventions.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
A careful examination of the pinna, external auditory canal, and tym­
panic membrane can identify most causes of ear pain. If findings are 
normal, the clinician should consider pain referred from another 
source (see Table 5.3). Because young children may have trouble local­
izing their pain, clinicians should be highly suspicious of ear disease in 
any infant or preschool child with fever, irritability, or URI.
Even though most conditions causing ear pain respond readily to 
therapy, the clinician must be aware of the following red flags associ­
ated with these conditions:
 • Laterally displaced pinna (malignant otitis externa, mastoid oste­
itis)
 • Mastoid tenderness (mastoid osteitis)
 • Perforated tympanic membrane
 • A pearl-­like tumor in the tympanic membrane (cholesteatoma)
 • Subacute headache, meningismus, and altered mental status (brain 
abscess, subdural or epidural empyema)
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
98.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bernius M, Perlin D. Pediatric ear, nose, and throat emergencies. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 2006;53:195–214.
Conover K. Earache. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2013;31:413–442.
Faria J, Chun R, Kerschner J. Acute mastoiditis. In: Kliegman R, ed. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3431–3434.
Haddad J, Dodhia S. General considerations and evaluation of the ear. In: 
Kliegman R, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2020:3408.
Haddad J, Keesecker S. External otitis (otitis externa). In: Kliegman R, ed. Nel­
son Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3414–3417.
Hollis S, Evans K. Management of malignant (necrotizing) otitis externa. J 
Laryngol Otol. 2011;125:1212–1217.
Kaur R, Morris M, Pichichero M. Epidemiology of acute otitis me­
dia in the postpneumococcal conjugate vaccine era. Pediatrics. 
2017;140(3):e20170181.
Kerschner J, Preciado D. Otitis media. In: Kliegman R, ed. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3418–3431.
Lieberthal A, Carroll A, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management 
of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e964–e999.
Molloy L, Barron S, Khan N, et al. Oral B-lactam antibiotics for pediat­
ric otitis media, rhinosinusitis, and pneumonia. J Pediatr Health Care. 
2020;34(3):291–300.
Oliver A, Simpson E, Jerath R. A rare cause of ear pain in a young boy. J Pedi­
atr. 2012;160:350.
Puhakka T, Pulkkinen J, Silvennoinen H, et al. Comparison of spectral gradi­
ent acoustic reflectometry and tympanometry for detection of middle ear 
effusion in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014;33:e183–e186.
Rosenfeld R, Schwartz S, Cannon C, et al. Clinical practice guideline: acute 
otitis externa. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014;150(IS):S1–S24.
Rosenfeld R, Schwartz S, Pynnonen M, et al. Clinical practice guidelines: 
tympanostomy tube in children. Otolaryngology-Head Neck Surg (Tokyo). 
2013;149(IS):S1–S35.
Rosenfeld R, Shin J, Schwartz S, et al. Clinical practice guideline: otitis 
media with effusion (update). Otolaryngology-Head Neck Surg (Tokyo). 
2016;154(IS):S1–S41.
Van Zuijlen D, Schilder A, Van Balen F, et al. National differences in incidence 
of acute mastoiditis: relationship to prescribing patterns of antibiotics for 
acute otitis media? Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2001;20(2):140–144.
Wald E, Conway J. Mastoiditis. In: Long, Prober, and Fischer’s Principles and 
Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:225–230.
Wald E, DeMuri G. Antibiotic recommendations for acute otitis media and 
acute bacterial sinusitis. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2018;37:1255–1257.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
