905
Pallor, a perceptible reduction in the usual color and tone of the skin 
and/or mucosa, is a highly nonspecific finding that may be a manifes­
tation of a diversity of diseases or may be normal for a given individ­
ual. It may result from alterations of cutaneous blood flow, anemia, or 
unknown mechanisms. Under normal circumstances the pink appear­
ance of the lips, mucosa, and skin is influenced by the nature and char­
acter of these tissues, the adequacy of vascular perfusion, and the level 
of hemoglobin. Because pallor is most often associated with anemia, 
parental perception of it frequently generates considerable anxiety. 
However, a broad diagnostic approach is most appropriate (Table 49.1).
Anemia is the condition in which hemoglobin level (or hematocrit) 
is more than 2 standard deviations below the mean for age. Anemia 
is clinically relevant only when the low hemoglobin level results in 
decreased oxygen-­carrying capacity of the blood. By definition, 2.5% of 
the general population has a hemoglobin or hematocrit level below the 
defined limits of normal. This fact must be kept in mind when evaluat­
ing children with mild anemia for which no explanation can be iden­
tified. Hemoglobin level varies considerably with age and sex (Table 
49.2). Newborns have relatively high levels of circulating hemoglobin 
due to intrauterine adaptation to a relatively hypoxic environment. The 
postnatal oxygen rich environment results in decreased erythropoietin 
production, and hemoglobin production markedly diminishes for the 
first 2 months of life until a physiologic nadir occurs. The mean hemo­
globin level rises gradually during childhood equally for both males 
and females until puberty when boys achieve a level approximately 
20% higher than that of females.
Under normal conditions, the body’s red blood cell (RBC) mass 
is maintained at a level appropriate to support tissue oxygen needs 
through the oxygen-­sensing regulatory feedback stimulus of the hor­
mone erythropoietin. Produced in the kidney, erythropoietin stimu­
lates the production of mature RBCs within the bone marrow. Over 
a 3-­ to 5-­day period, RBC precursors mature into reticulocytes that 
are released into the peripheral blood. In 24–48 hours, reticulocytes 
become mature RBCs that circulate in the peripheral blood for approx­
imately 120 days. Senescent RBCs are removed from the circulation by 
reticuloendothelial cells within the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. A 
metabolic by-­product of hemoglobin catabolism is bilirubin. The iron 
from senescent RBCs is efficiently recycled for the production of new 
erythrocytes. Anemia occurs as the result of one or a combination of 
three pathophysiologic mechanisms:
 • Acute blood loss
 • Impaired bone marrow production of RBCs
 • Increased peripheral destruction of RBCs (hemolysis)
HISTORY
There are several important aspects of the history that can assist 
in the evaluation of a patient with pallor and suspected anemia. 
Assessment of sun exposure and familial patterns of complexion are 
crucial because many patients are intrinsically pale, and a child with 
pallor is not necessarily anemic. A careful evaluation of the medical 
history is fundamental in the assessment of a patient with suspected 
pallor (Table 49.3).
A neonatal history of hyperbilirubinemia supports a possible diag­
nosis of congenital hemolytic anemia such as hereditary spherocyto­
sis. This can be further supported by a family history of anemia, blood 
transfusions, splenectomy, and/or cholecystectomy.
Obtaining a dietary history is very important when evaluating a 
patient for anemia. Infants delivered prematurely or exclusively breast-­
fed infants without adequate iron supplementation from infant foods 
in the second half of their first year of life are at risk for iron-­deficiency 
anemia. Toddlers who consume large amounts of cow’s milk and 
children and adolescents who consume little meat are also at risk for 
iron-­deficiency anemia. In addition, patients and breast-­fed infants 
of mothers who follow a strict vegan diet may become deficient in 
­vitamin B12.
Clinical history should also include assessment for blood loss. In 
adolescent females, menstrual history suggestive of abnormal uterine 
bleeding and/or heavy menstrual bleeding increases risk for iron defi­
ciency. All children should be assessed for gastrointestinal (GI) symp­
toms that would be suggestive of occult or gross GI blood loss as well. 
Pulmonary hemorrhage is a rare source of blood loss in children but 
should be considered in a child with iron-­deficiency anemia and recur­
rent pulmonary issues including pneumonia or wheezing.
Medication history is pertinent because certain drugs, including 
antimalarial agents and sulfonamide antibiotics, can induce oxidant-­
associated hemolysis in the patient deficient in glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD), whereas other medications may cause immune 
hemolysis (penicillin) or decreased RBC production (chlorampheni­
col). Travel history may suggest exposure to infections such as malaria.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The general appearance of the child can provide clues to the severity 
and chronicity of the problem. Severe anemia that develops slowly over 
weeks or months is often well tolerated. Vital signs (including ortho­
static blood pressure), height, weight, and growth offer further insight 
into the severity and chronicity of the problem. Isolated pallor in a 
well-­appearing child who does not have evidence of systemic disease 
is less ominous than pallor noted in a child who is ill appearing or 
who has bruising, petechiae, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, 
or abdominal mass. Pallor at any site increases the likelihood of ane­
mia; pallor of the face, nail beds, tongue, palms, and palmar creases and 
conjunctival pallor enhance the likelihood of anemia. Conjunctival rim 
pallor when compared to the usually more fleshlike pallor of the deeper 
posterior region of the palpebral conjunctiva is highly specific in adult 
Pallor and Anemia
Jacquelyn M. Powers and Amanda M. Brandow
49
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
906
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
patients with anemia. Table 49.4 outlines physical examination find­
ings that may provide clues to the underlying cause of anemia.
Prominent cheekbones, dental malocclusion, and frontal bossing 
may occur in patients with chronic hemolytic anemias (i.e., thalassemia 
major) because of the expansion of bone marrow space. Tortuosity of 
conjunctival vessels occurs in sickle cell disease. Splenomegaly is often 
present in children with congenital hemolytic anemia. Lymphadenop­
athy and hepatosplenomegaly may indicate the presence of infiltrative 
disease of the bone marrow and visceral organs such as leukemia. Pur­
pura in the anemic child is suggestive of associated thrombocytopenia 
that may accompany aplastic anemia or leukemia.
Many congenital anomalies and/or dysmorphic features have been 
associated with hematologic conditions, particularly bone marrow 
failure syndromes. Patients with Fanconi anemia are often short and 
have hyperpigmentation, hypoplastic “finger-­like” thumbs, radial bone 
anomalies, and structural renal abnormalities. Patients with Diamond-­
Blackfan anemia are often short and have a “curious, intellectual” facial 
expression.
When pallor and anemia are seen in the context of other signs that 
suggest chronic inflammation, infection, or systemic disease, a dili­
gent general physical examination may yield substantive information. 
Hypertension and short stature may suggest chronic renal disease. 
Joint swelling and/or pain may suggest rheumatologic disorders. Digi­
tal clubbing may suggest advanced cyanotic cardiopulmonary diseases. 
Abdominal pain, diarrhea, and poor growth may suggest an underly­
ing GI disorder such as inflammatory bowel disease. Recurrent pneu­
monia or wheezing may suggest pulmonary hemorrhage.
New onset of pallor is suggestive of anemia. The child who has 
always appeared pale but is otherwise well with normal growth and 
development likely has an intrinsic constitutional characteristic. In 
such instances, the child and other family members often have light 
hair and skin complexion. An unremarkable general medical history 
and physical examination support a physiologic explanation for pal­
lor. Some children may appear pale because of limited sun exposure as 
might occur during the winter in cooler climates.
TABLE 49.1  Causes of Pallor in Children 
Based on Etiologic Mechanism
	 I.	 Anemia
	II.	 Decreased Tendency of the Skin to Pigment
	
A.	 Physiologic (fair-­skinned individuals)
	
B.	 Limited sun exposure
	III.	 Alteration of the Consistency of the Subcutaneous Tissue
	
A.	 Edematous states, increased intravascular hydrostatic pressure 
(e.g., congestive heart failure), decreased intravascular oncotic 
pressure (hypoproteinemia), increased vascular permeability (e.g., 
vasculitis)
	
B.	 Hypothyroidism
	IV.	Decreased Perfusion of the Cutaneous/Mucosal Vasculature
	
A.	 Hypotension, cardiogenic shock (pump failure or rhythm disturbance), 
hypovolemia (blood loss, dehydration), anaphylaxis, sepsis, acute 
adrenal insufficiency, vasovagal syncope
	
B.	 Vasoconstriction, increased sympathetic activity (hypoglycemia, 
pheochromocytoma), neurologic complications (head trauma, 
seizures, migraine)
	
C.	 Frostbite
	V.	 Chronic Conditions
	
A.	 Malignant disease
	
B.	 Atopy
	
C.	 Chronic inflammatory disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
inflammatory bowel disease
	
D.	 Cardiopulmonary disease (including cystic fibrosis)
  E.	 Diabetes mellitus
  F .	Congenital and acquired immunodeficiencies
	
G.	 Ocular cutaneous albinism
	
H.	 Panic attack
	
I.	 Presyncope
	
J.	 Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome
From Reece RM. Manual of Emergency Pediatrics. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992.
TABLE 49.2  Values (Normal Mean and Lower Limits of Normal) for Hemoglobin, Hematocrit, 
and MCV Determination
HEMOGLOBIN (G/DL)
HEMATOCRIT (%)
MCV (FL)
Age (yr)
Mean
Lower Limit
Mean
Lower Limit
Mean
Lower Limit
0.5–1.9
12.5
11.0
37
33
77
70
2–4
12.5
11.0
38
34
79
73
5–7
13.0
11.5
39
35
81
75
8–11
13.5
12.0
40
36
83
76
12–14
Female
13.5
12.0
41
36
85
78
Male
14.0
12.5
43
37
84
77
15–17
Female
14.0
12.0
41
36
87
79
Male
15.0
13.0
46
38
86
78
18–49
Female
14.0
12.0
42
37
90
80
Male
16.0
14.0
47
40
90
89
MCV, mean corpuscular volume.
From Nathan DC, Oski F. Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
907
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
Children with malignant disease or chronic illness (e.g., rheumato­
logic disorders, inflammatory bowel disease, chronic cardiopulmonary 
disorders, diabetes) may have a pale appearance that is unrelated or 
out of proportion to the degree of associated anemia. Atopic children 
often have distinctly pale mucosa related to local edema. Children 
with generalized edema caused by hypoproteinemia, congestive heart 
failure, or vasculitis often appear pale because of excess interstitial fluid 
within the mucosal or cutaneous tissues. Patients with hypothyroidism 
are pale because of myxedematous changes in the skin, subcutaneous 
tissue, and mucosa.
LABORATORY EVALUATION
The initial laboratory test in a child with pallor should be a CBC 
including a manual white blood cell (WBC) differential and reticulo­
cyte count. Significant pallor from anemia usually does not occur until 
the hemoglobin level falls below 8 g/dL. Appropriate sample collec­
tion is important. “False anemia” (resulting from laboratory error or 
sampling difficulty) should be considered when laboratory findings 
are not consistent with clinical impressions. Capillary blood sampling 
can be associated with substantial error, depending on the difficulty in 
performing the procedure and the use of mechanical force necessary 
to promote blood flow. When laboratory or sampling errors are sus­
pected, a venipuncture sample should be obtained for confirmation. 
By definition, 2.5% of the general population has hemoglobin levels 
below the lower limit of normal, which is termed “statistical anemia.” 
This phenomenon should be considered when mild, unexplained nor­
mocytic anemia is identified in a healthy child. Statistical anemia is a 
diagnosis of exclusion and therefore requires that other etiologies of 
normocytic anemia such as undiagnosed kidney disease, hypothyroid­
ism, or underlying inflammation be ruled out.
Most laboratories perform CBCs with automated technology sys­
tems. Hemoglobin concentration (grams per deciliter), RBC count 
(cells per cubic millimeter), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 
(expressed in femtoliters [fL]) are directly measured. Hematocrit 
value, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), and MCH concentra­
tion (MCHC) are derived values and therefore are less accurate. Other 
important information reported includes RBC distribution width 
(RDW), WBC count (cells per cubic millimeter), and platelet count. 
In addition to the hemoglobin values, careful attention should be given 
to the MCV, RDW, RBC morphology, platelet count, WBC count, and 
reticulocyte count.
CLASSIFICATION OF ANEMIA
Reticulocyte Count
The reticulocyte count, reported as a percentage of total RBCs, is essen­
tial in categorizing anemia. An elevated reticulocyte count implies a 
bone marrow response to either increased RBC destruction (hemoly­
sis) or acute or chronic blood loss. In cases of acute blood loss, bone 
marrow response demonstrated by reticulocytosis occurs at an average 
of 3–4 days. Thus, in the setting of acute blood loss, the reticulocyte 
count is most helpful when the bleeding and subsequent anemia have 
been present for more than a few days. Likewise, in patients with nutri­
tional anemias, a reticulocyte count should be checked several days 
after the initiation of therapy (e.g., iron supplementation) to assess 
appropriate response.
Anemias are categorized on the basis of the adequacy of the retic­
ulocyte response. The reticulocyte count is expressed as a percentage 
of the total number of RBCs. In the setting of a normal hemoglobin, 
the reticulocyte count is about 1–2%. In patients with moderate or 
severe anemia, the reticulocyte count may appear elevated, but in 
absolute terms, it may be insufficient for the degree of anemia. There­
fore, the reticulocyte count must be corrected using the following 
formula:
Corrected reticulocyte count = reticulocyte count × hemoglobin
 
 
 
(normal hemoglobin for age)
TABLE 49.3  Historical Clues in Evaluation 
of Anemia
Variable
Comments
Age
Iron deficiency rare in the absence of blood loss before 6 mo 
in term or before doubling birthweight in preterm infants
Neonatal anemia with reticulocytosis suggests hemolysis 
or blood loss; with reticulocytopenia it suggests bone 
marrow failure or rarely severe autosomal recessive 
hereditary spherocytosis
Sickle cell anemia and β-­thalassemia appear as fetal 
hemoglobin disappears (4–8 mo of age)
Nutritional iron deficiency in young children up to 4 yr of age
Iron deficiency due to menstrual blood loss in adolescent 
females 12 to 18 yr of age
Family history 
and genetic 
considerations
X-­linked: G6PD deficiency
Autosomal dominant: spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, 
stomatocytosis, ovalocytosis
Autosomal recessive: sickle cell, Fanconi anemia (most cases)
Family member with early age of cholecystectomy 
(bilirubin stones) or splenectomy: hemolysis
Ethnicity: thalassemia with Mediterranean origin; G6PD 
deficiency in blacks, Greeks, and Sephardic Jews
Race: β-­thalassemia in Whites; α-­thalassemia in Blacks 
and Asians; SC and SS in Blacks
Nutrition
Cow’s milk diet and iron deficiency (young children)
Strict unsupplemented vegetarian and vitamin B12 or iron 
deficiency
Goat’s milk and folate deficiency
Pica: plumbism (lead poisoning) and iron deficiency
Cholestasis: malabsorption and vitamin E deficiency
Drugs
G6PD-­susceptible agents
Immune-­mediated hemolysis (e.g., penicillin)
Bone marrow suppression
Phenytoin: increases folate requirements
Diarrhea
Malabsorption of vitamins B12 and E and iron
Inflammatory bowel disease and anemia of chronic 
disease or blood loss with concomitant iron deficiency
Milk protein allergy colitis–induced blood loss
Intestinal resection and vitamin B12 deficiency
Infection
Giardia and iron malabsorption
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth (blind loop) and vitamin B12 
deficiency
Fish tapeworm and vitamin B12 deficiency
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and bone marrow 
suppression
Mycoplasma and hemolysis
Parvovirus and bone marrow suppression
Chronic infection
Endocarditis
Malaria and hemolysis
Hepatitis and aplastic anemia
G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; SC, sickle cell C disease; 
SS, sickle cell S disease.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
908
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
If the corrected reticulocyte count is >2%, then the bone marrow is 
producing RBCs at an accelerated pace (Fig. 49.1).
Red Blood Cell Size
The MCV is vital to the classification of anemia. High MCV is termed 
macrocytosis, and low MCV is termed microcytosis. MCV in the nor­
mal range is termed normocytic. Normal standards for MCV are age 
related; a simple guideline is that the lower normal limit of MCV for 
children older than 6 months is 70 fL plus the patient’s age in years 
until the adult standard of 80–100 fL is reached (see Table 49.2). The 
MCV must always be interpreted in conjunction with a review of the 
peripheral blood smear, RDW, and reticulocyte count. A varied popu­
lation of both smaller and larger RBCs (e.g., reticulocytes) may yield a 
falsely normal MCV and be diagnostically misleading. A high RDW 
in the setting of a normal MCV is a clue that two populations of RBCs 
exist. Microcytosis (low MCV) is associated with iron deficiency, thal­
assemia, and long-­standing anemia of inflammation (Table 49.5). Mac­
rocytosis (high MCV), an unusual finding in children, is associated 
TABLE 49.4  Physical Findings in the Evaluation of Anemia
System
Observation
Significance
Skin
Hyperpigmentation
Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita
Café-­au-­lait spots
Fanconi anemia
Vitiligo
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Partial oculocutaneous albinism
Chediak-­Higashi syndrome
Jaundice
Hemolysis, hepatitis
Petechiae, purpura
Bone marrow infiltration, autoimmune hemolysis with autoimmune thrombocytopenia, 
hemolytic uremic syndrome
Erythematous rash
Parvovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus
Butterfly rash
SLE
Head
Frontal bossing
Thalassemia major, chronic subdural hematoma
Microcephaly
Fanconi anemia
Eyes
Microphthalmia
Fanconi anemia
Retinopathy
Hemoglobin SS, SC disease
Optic atrophy, blindness
Osteopetrosis
Blocked lacrimal gland
Dyskeratosis congenita
Kayser-­Fleischer ring
Wilson disease
Blue sclera
Iron deficiency
Ears
Deafness
Osteopetrosis
Mouth
Glossitis
Vitamin B12 deficiency; iron deficiency
Angular stomatitis
Iron deficiency
Cleft lip
Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome
Pigmentation
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (intestinal blood loss)
Telangiectasia
Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome (blood loss)
Leukoplakia
Dyskeratosis congenita
Chest
Shield chest or widespread nipples
Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome
Murmur
Endocarditis; prosthetic valve hemolysis
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
Hemolysis, infiltrative tumor, chronic disease, hemangioma, cholecystitis
Splenomegaly
Hemolysis, sickle cell disease (early), thalassemia, malaria, lymphoma Epstein-­Barr 
virus, portal hypertension, hemophagocytic syndromes
Nephromegaly or absent kidney
Fanconi anemia
Extremities
Absent thumbs
Fanconi anemia
Thenar eminence hypoplasia; triphalangeal thumb
Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome
Spoon nails
Iron deficiency
Beau line (nails)
Heavy metal intoxication, severe illness
Mees line (nails)
Heavy metals, severe illness, sickle cell anemia
Dystrophic nails
Dyskeratosis congenita
Edema
Milk-­induced protein-­losing enteropathy with iron deficiency, renal failure
Rectal
Hemorrhoids
Portal hypertension
Heme-­positive stool
Intestinal hemorrhage
Nerves
Irritable, apathy
Iron deficiency
Peripheral neuropathy
Deficiency of vitamins B1 and B12 and lead poisoning
Dementia
Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E
Ataxia, posterior column signs
Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E
Stroke
Sickle cell anemia, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, severe iron-­deficiency anemia
SC, sickle cell C disease; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SS, sickle cell S disease.
Modified from Scott JP. Hematology. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1994:520.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
909
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
with vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, bone marrow failure syndromes 
(e.g., Fanconi anemia, Diamond-­Blackfan anemia), and some cases of 
hypothyroidism (see Table 49.5).
An individual with small RBCs may have a normal or near-­normal 
hemoglobin level if the RBC count is increased as occurs in patients 
with thalassemia minor who often have RBC counts of more than 5 × 
106. The MCHC reflects the level of hemoglobin per cell and would be 
expected to be low in patients with anemias in which RBCs are “under-­
hemoglobinized,” such as the hypochromic anemia of iron deficiency.
The RDW is derived from the histogram of RBC volumes. A nor­
mal RDW (11.5–14.5%) implies a uniform population of RBCs that are 
similar in size. In α-­thalassemia trait or β-­thalassemia trait, a uniform 
population of small cells exists; hence, the MCV is low and the RDW 
is normal or minimally elevated. An elevated RDW is seen in iron 
deficiency where the population of small cells is variably sized; hence, 
the MCV is low and the RDW is elevated. The RDW is often the last 
hematologic parameter to normalize after successful therapy for iron 
deficiency. In some hemolytic anemias the RDW is elevated because of 
the presence of large reticulocytes (Table 49.6). An elevated RDW in 
the setting of a normocytic anemia suggests two populations of RBCs, 
namely large cells (elevated MCV) and small cells (low MCV), and is 
concerning for a combined anemia (e.g., concomitant iron deficiency 
and vitamin B12 or folate deficiency).
Red Blood Cell Morphology
Abnormalities of RBC structure may be readily apparent on inspec­
tion of the peripheral blood smear and provide helpful diagnostic hints 
(Table 49.7 and Fig. 49.2).
Other Laboratory Abnormalities Associated with Anemia
Evaluation of the WBC count, differential, and platelet count is 
imperative in the setting of anemia. Leukopenia, neutropenia, and/or 
thrombocytopenia occurring in a patient with anemia of underpro­
duction are suggestive of aplastic anemia or infiltrative bone marrow 
disease such as leukemia (see Chapter 50). The presence of immature 
leukocytes on a smear associated with either a high or a low WBC 
count is suggestive of leukemia. Mild neutropenia may be seen in 
patients with transient erythroblastopenia of childhood but children 
are otherwise well appearing, in contrast to children with underly­
ing malignancy. Thrombocytosis may be present in patients with iron 
deficiency, blood loss, inflammatory disease, infection, malignancy, 
or asplenia.
Elevated serum indirect bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and uri­
nary urobilinogen levels occur in patients with increased rates of RBC 
destruction (hemolysis). Immune-­mediated hemolytic anemia should 
be suspected when anemia, jaundice, reticulocytosis, splenomegaly, 
and microspherocytes are noted. To investigate the underlying cause 
<2% (anemia of
underproduction)
Corrected Reticulocyte Count
Mean corpuscular volume
Blood loss
≥2%
Normal
Low
Iron deficiency
Thalassemia
Lead
Chronic disease
Sideroblastic anemia
See Table 49.5
High
Vitamin B12/folate
Diamond-Blackfan
Fanconi anemia
See Table 49.5
Isolated anemia
Acute infection
Transient erythroblastopenia
Anemia of chronic disease
Renal disease
Hypothyroidism
Drug induced
Pancytopenia
Aplastic anemia
Leukemia
Drug induced
Hemophagocytic
syndromes
Hemolysis
Intrinsic
Membrane defect*
Enzyme defect†
Hemoglobinopathy
(Sickle cell anemia)
Extrinsic
Immune-autoimmune
Infection
Microangiopathy
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Hemolytic uremic
syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura
Liver disease
Paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria
Hypersplenism
Mechanical injury
Toxins
Nutritional
Metabolic
Wilson disease
Hereditary spherocytosis,
elliptocytosis, pyropoikilocytosis, stomacytosis, or
paroxysomal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, pyruvate
kinase, or glucose
phosphate isomerase
deficiencies 
*
†
Fig. 49.1  Diagnostic approach to anemia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 49.5  Causes of High or Low Mean 
Corpuscular Volume
Low Mean Corpuscular Volume
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease
Copper deficiency
Sideroblastic anemia
Hemoglobin E
Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
High Mean Corpuscular Volume
Normal newborn
Elevated reticulocyte count
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (congenital hypoplastic anemia)
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism (occasionally)
Orotic aciduria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Drugs (zidovudine, chemotherapy)
Chronic liver disease
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia
Myelodysplasias
Dyserythropoietic anemias
TABLE 49.6  Red Blood Cell Distribution 
Width (RDW) in Common Anemias of 
Childhood
Anemia
MCV
Elevated RDW (Nonuniform Population of RBCs)
Hemolytic anemia with elevated reticulocyte count
High
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Low
Anemias due to red blood cell fragmentation: DIC, HUS, TTP
Low
Megaloblastic anemias: vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
High
Normal RDW (Uniform Population of RBCs)
Thalassemias
Low
Acute hemorrhage
Normal
Fanconi anemia
High
Aplastic anemia
High
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HUS, hemolytic uremic 
syndrome; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; RBC, red blood cell; TTP, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
TABLE 49.7  Peripheral Blood Morphologic Findings in Various Anemias
Microcytes
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease
Macrocytes
Newborns
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Liver disease
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Spherocytes
Hereditary spherocytosis
Immune hemolytic anemia (newborn or acquired)
Hypersplenism
Sickled Cells
Sickle cell anemias (SS disease, SC disease, Sβ+thalassemia, 
Sβ0thalassemia)
Elliptocytes
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Iron deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia
Target Cells
Hemoglobinopathies (especially hemoglobin C and SC and thalassemia)
Liver disease
Xerocytosis
Basophil Stippling
Thalassemia
Lead intoxication
Myelodysplasia
Red Blood Cell Fragments, Helmet Cells, Burr Cells
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Waring blender syndrome (artificial heart valve)
Uremia
Liver disease
Hypersegmented Neutrophils
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Blasts
Leukemia (ALL or AML)
Severe infection (rarely)
Leukopenia/Thrombocytopenia
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Leukemia
Hemophagocytic histiocytosis
Howell-­Jolly Bodies
Asplenia, hyposplenia
Severe iron deficiency
Dacrocytes (teardrop cells)
Myelodysplasia
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; SC, sickle cell C disease; SS, sickle cell S disease.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
911
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
of the hemolysis, a direct Coombs test should be performed to detect 
the presence of an autoantibody on the RBC surface. An iron panel, 
ideally drawn when fasting, that demonstrates a low serum iron level, 
elevated total iron-­binding capacity, and a low percentage of iron sat­
uration (% saturation = serum iron/total iron-­binding capacity × 100) 
and/or decreased serum ferritin level is helpful in establishing a diag­
nosis of iron deficiency. Hemoglobin identification via electrophoresis 
or high-­performance liquid chromatography is necessary to identify 
hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia. Assess­
ment of RBC enzyme levels (e.g., G6PD) may be necessary when infec­
tion-­ or medication-­related hemolytic anemia is suspected in a male 
of Mediterranean or African descent. True macrocytic anemia with 
megaloblastic neutrophils should prompt assessment for vitamin B12 
or folate deficiency. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should strongly 
be considered when other cytopenias exist such as thrombocytopenia 
or neutropenia.
DIAGNOSTIC WORK-­UP
From a clinical perspective, it is best to consider the differential diag­
nosis of pallor in the context of the acuity and severity of the clin­
ical findings (Fig. 49.3). The well-­appearing child may only need a 
CBC to confirm normal counts and provide reassurance. The pale 
child who appears mildly or moderately ill requires a CBC and other 
potential studies to detect any suspected underlying disease. The 
pale child who appears seriously ill requires urgent evaluation and 
appropriate therapeutic intervention. A CBC should be obtained for 
all children with other laboratory assessments dictated based on the 
suspected diagnosis. If hemorrhage or severe anemia is suspected, a 
type and cross-­match must be sent to the blood bank, intravenous 
access should be secured, and frequent serial evaluations of hemoglo­
bin, blood pressure, pulse, perfusion, and end-­organ function must 
be performed.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ANEMIA
The differential diagnosis of anemia is presented in Figs. 49.1 and 49.4.
Anemia Secondary to Acute Blood Loss
Significant blood loss on an acute or subacute basis results in ane­
mia. In subacute bleeding, the fall in hemoglobin occurs gradually 
and a period of about 24 hours may be required for full intravas­
cular equi­libration after acute blood loss. When severe acute blood 
loss occurs, intravascular volume depletion is the primary concern, 
which cannot be assessed by hemoglobin level. Therefore, in the 
setting of severe blood loss, blood pressure, heart rate, adequacy 
of peripheral perfusion, and mental status are the best ways to 
assess patients. In most instances, an obvious history of blood loss 
is apparent (e.g., epistaxis, heavy menstrual bleeding, hematemesis, 
lower GI bleeding, trauma). In some cases, intraabdominal bleeding 
can occur that is not clinically apparent. Large amounts of blood 
may accumulate in the GI tract before the development of hemate­
mesis, hematochezia, or melena. Intraabdominal bleeding may 
occur after trauma or may result from an ulcer (see Chapter 16) 
and may be associated with progressive anemia in the absence of 
an obvious source of bleeding. The clinical history coupled with the 
physical examination (including rectal examination) and tests for 
occult blood in the stool generally define the source of blood loss. 
Pulmonary hemorrhage may not be readily apparent, especially if 
chronic; thus, evaluation with pulse oximetry and chest X-­ray or 
chest CT scan may be indicated in a child with concerns for blood 
loss without an obvious source.
In anemia associated with blood loss, the RBC size and morphology 
are normal and appropriate reticulocytosis should occur within 3–5 
days from the start of the blood loss. If hemorrhage has ceased, the 
hemoglobin level should gradually increase unless supervening factors 
such as iron deficiency exist.
Severe hemorrhage associated with intravascular volume depletion 
warrants immediate intervention to avoid shock. RBC transfusions are 
necessary until hemorrhage has ceased. Less severe hemorrhage that is 
not associated with intravascular volume depletion will likely manifest 
with moderate to severe anemia. Transfusions may be necessary when 
the oxygen-­carrying capacity of the blood is diminished to the point 
of impending tissue hypoxia. In these cases, the need for transfusion 
therapy is based on clinical symptoms including tachycardia, dyspnea, 
A
B
C
E
D
Fig. 49.2  Morphologic abnormalities of the red blood cell. A, Normal. B, Macrocytes. C, Hypochromic micro­
cytes. D, Target cells. E, Schizocytes. (Courtesy of Dr. E. Schwartz.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
912
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
heart failure, fatigue, or lightheadedness. If hemorrhage has ceased, 
intravascular volume is replete, and if the patient is not manifesting 
signs of cardiorespiratory compromise, transfusion therapy may be 
avoided. In such instances, it is appropriate to supply therapeutic doses 
of iron with close follow-­up to ensure adequacy of the reticulocyte 
response (Table 49.8).
Anemia Secondary to Underproduction
Anemia caused by the underproduction of RBCs (see Figs. 49.1 and 
49.4) is characterized by a suboptimal bone marrow response to the 
anemia reflected by a corrected reticulocyte count of <2%. Associated 
clinical symptoms can provide clues to the etiology of underproduc­
tion, especially for nonhematologic causes of anemia. Common non­
hematologic causes of underproduction include chronic renal disease, 
chronic inflammation, or infection. Hematologic causes of under­
production are outlined in subsequent text. Anemia due to under­
production of RBCs should be evaluated in the context of RBC size: 
microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic.
Microcytic Anemias
Hemoglobin, the chief intracellular component of the RBC, is composed 
of heme (iron and protoporphyrin IX) and globin chains (α and β). Any 
factor that diminishes the availability or utilization of these components 
results in microcytic anemia. The automated MCV represents the mean 
RBC volume and does not address variations in cell size. The RDW, how­
ever, describes variation in RBC size and if normal defines a relatively 
uniform population of cells. Review of the peripheral blood smear also 
provides additional evidence regarding variability in cell size and shape. 
It is important to note that MCV is age related (see Table 49.2). When 
the diagnosis is not immediately apparent, it is helpful to carefully select 
from a variety of available laboratory studies to further differentiate the 
cause of the microcytic anemia (Table 49.9). Hepcidin levels (low in iron 
deficiency; high in anemia of chronic disease) may also be helpful.
Iron-­Deficiency Anemia. Iron deficiency is the most common 
nutritional deficiency that causes anemia. Iron deficiency occurs due to 
either insufficient nutritional intake to meet demands associated with 
growth or excessive blood loss. Iron is a key component of the hemoglobin 
molecule; its deficiency leads to anemia associated with reduced 
hemoglobin production (hypochromia) and small RBCs (microcytosis). 
Infants are at particular risk for the development of iron deficiency since 
their rapid growth and expanding blood volume impose considerable iron 
demands. Premature infants are at the highest risk because most in utero 
iron is transferred from the mother to the fetus during the last trimester 
of pregnancy and postnatal growth rate is rapid. In addition, exclusively 
breast-­fed infants are also susceptible to iron deficiency in the second 
half of their first year of life if adequate supplemental iron via solid food 
intake is not provided. Toddlers are at high risk for the development of iron 
deficiency due to excessive cow’s milk intake leading to decreased intake 
of dietary sources of iron, and GI blood loss from milk protein sensitivity. 
Thus, appropriate counseling should be provided to the family to ensure 
that cow’s milk is limited to no more than 24 oz/day. Unsupplemented 
vegans are also at risk for iron deficiency. Adolescent females are at very 
high risk due to menstrual blood loss and poor nutrition. Risk for iron 
deficiency is high in adolescent females especially during the first year 
PALLOR
ACUTELY ILL
 Urgent evaluation (vital signs
  and focused history and
  physical exam)
 Urgent labs—CBC, others
 Consider:
  Hypotension, hypovolemia,
   sepsis, anaphylaxis, cardiac
   failure, adrenal insufficiency,
   vasovagal, hemorrhage
  Hypoglycemia
  Severe anemia
  Neurologic complications
   (head trauma or seizure)
MILD OR CHRONICALLY ILL-APPEARING
 Complete history and
  physical exam
 Labs: CBC, other
 Consider:
  Anemia
  Chronic medical conditions
   Malignancy
   Atopy
   Edematous status: renal disease,
   
  
   Gastrointestinal loss/malabsorption
           Inflammatory diseases
           Cardiopulmonary
           Diabetes
           Pheochromocytoma
           Others
WELL
 Complete history
  and physical
  exam; CBC
 Consider:
  Anemia
  Physiologic-familial
NOT ACUTELY ILL
congestive heart failure,
hypothyroidism, vasculitis
Fig. 49.3  Approach to the pale child.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
913
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
after menarche. When iron deficiency occurs outside of the setting of infancy, 
toddlers, or adolescent females (i.e., school-­age children or adolescent males), 
a pathologic source of blood loss must be strongly considered and occult GI 
bleeding is an important source to consider as iron-­deficiency anemia can be 
the first clue to the presence of inflammatory bowel disease or other GI disease.
Nutritional sources of iron include iron-­fortified infant formula (12 
mg/L), iron-­fortified infant cereal, beef, fish, and fowl. Ascorbic acid 
(vitamin C) may enhance the absorption of iron. The American Acad­
emy of Pediatrics recommends iron-­fortified infant formula or breast 
milk until the age of 1 year and the introduction of iron-­rich foods after 
6 months of age. Cow’s milk is a very poor source of nutritional iron and 
should not be given to infants younger than 1 year of age. After 1 year 
of age, infants should consume no more than 24 oz/day. Iron supple­
mentation is necessary for preterm infants, many adolescent females, 
vegans, and pregnant women and should be strongly considered for all 
exclusively breast-­fed infants regardless of diet. Iron deficiency must 
be viewed as a systemic deficiency disorder, only one manifestation of 
which is anemia (Table 49.10).
Iron-­deficiency anemia may be detected by routine hemoglobin 
screening. This should be performed initially in children between 9 and 
12 months of age. It is recommended again between 18 and 24 months 
of age as toddlers become especially vulnerable to iron deficiency after 
transition from formula to cow’s milk at 12 months of age. Adolescent 
females should be screened 1–2 years after menarche. Laboratory con­
firmatory studies are necessary when iron-­deficiency anemia is sus­
pected in patients who are not at high risk for nutritional deficiency 
or in those in whom anemia is moderately severe (see Table 49.9). 
A serum ferritin level of <15 ng/dL or an iron saturation of <15% con­
firms the diagnosis.
I. Acute blood loss with hemodilution
 II. Anemia of RBC underproduction (i.e., inadequate reticulocyte count)
 
 
Microcytic
 
1. Iron deficiency
 
2. Lead intoxication
 
3. Thalassemia syndromes
 
4. Anemia of chronic diseases
III. Anemia due to increased destruction  hemolysis (i.e., adequate
 reticulocyte count)
 
Intrinsic RBC defect
1. Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell anemia, unstable hemoglobins)
2. Membrane defects (hereditary spherocytosis, elliptocytosis)
3. Enzymopathies (G6PD, pyruvate kinase deficiency)
 
Extrinsic defects
1. Immune hemolysis
2. Infection (bacterial, viral, other)
3. Microangiopathy (disseminated intravascular coagulation,
 hemolytic uremic syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
 purpura)
4. Liver disease
5. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
6. Hypersplenism
7. Mechanical injury (e.g., burns)
8. Toxins
9. Nutritional (vitamin E deficiency)
10. Metabolic (galactosemia)
11. Wilson disease
 
Normocytic
Aplastic anemia
Malignant disease
 (bone marrow infiltration)
Anemia of acute
 inflammation/infection
Transient erythroblastopenia
 of childhood
Isolated anemia
 (Diamond-Blackfan)
Pancytopenia-Fanconi
 or aplastic anemia
Renal failure
Hypothyroidism
Macrocytic
Vitamin B12/folate deficiency
“Stress erythropoiesis”
With pancytopenia
Isolated anemia
Fig. 49.4  Differential diagnosis of anemia. G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell.
TABLE 49.8  Therapy for Iron Deficiency
Infants and Children
3 mg/kg of elemental iron given as a single daily dose (ideally before 
breakfast)
Adolescents
65–130 mg of elemental iron given in a single daily dose
Duration of Prescription
Continue therapeutic dose of iron for 2–3 mo after hemoglobin level has 
been corrected (to replete stores), after which both maintenance nutritional 
needs and underlying etiology (i.e., control of blood loss, if present) must 
be met
TABLE 49.9  Laboratory Findings in 
Microcytic Anemia
Fe
TIBC
Pb
HbA2 Ferritin sTfR
RDW
Iron deficiency
↓
↑
nl
nl
↓
↑↑
↑
α-­Thalassemia 
(Bart hemoglobin)
nl
nl
nl
nl
nl
↑
↓
β-­Thalassemia 
(homozygous)
nl
nl
nl
↑
nl
↑
↑
Lead poisoning
nl
nl
↑
nl
nl
nl*
nl*
Anemia of chronic 
disease
↓
↓
nl
nl
nl or ↑
nl*
nl*
*Unless iron deficient.
Fe, iron; HbA2, hemoglobin A2; nl, normal; Pb, lead; RDW, red blood 
cell distribution width; sTfR, serum transferrin free receptor; TIBC, total 
iron-­binding capacity.
TABLE 49.10  Nonhematologic 
Consequences of Iron Deficiency
Impairment of cognitive development
Pica
Epithelial abnormalities (gastrointestinal mucosal lesions, glossitis; spoon-­
shaped nails)
Exercise intolerance (muscle weakness)
Behavioral manifestations
Poor growth
Impaired collagen synthesis (blue sclera)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
914
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Symptomatic iron deficiency in young children is infrequent, but 
when it occurs, it is generally noted in infants who consume large 
amounts of cow’s milk and have intestinal blood loss as a result of 
asymptomatic milk protein–induced enterocolitis. Such children may 
have pallor, irritability, fatigue, glossitis, blue sclera, and in extreme 
cases signs and symptoms of high-­output cardiac failure (i.e., dyspnea, 
diaphoresis, pallor, tachycardia, gallop rhythm, and hepatomegaly), 
protein-­losing enteropathy, or stroke. Blood loss may be intermittent; 
a negative stool test for blood does not rule out the diagnosis. Mild 
anemia in otherwise well infants between 6 and 24 months of age, par­
ticularly in association with ingestion of large amounts of cow’s milk, is 
most likely caused by iron deficiency.
When mild anemia is detected in the healthy, menstruating adoles­
cent female, chronic blood loss is usually the etiology. Empirical iron 
therapy is often prescribed in such circumstances (see Table 49.8). If 
the hemoglobin level has normalized after 1 month of therapy, a pre­
sumptive diagnosis has been established and the patient should receive 
an additional 2–3 months of therapeutic doses of iron to replete stores. 
An appropriate response to iron therapy is the diagnostic “gold stan­
dard.” If unrecognized, iron-­deficiency anemia in adolescent females 
can progress to severe anemia resulting in headache, dizziness, restless 
legs, and syncope. Hemostatic evaluation should be performed and 
hormonal therapy strongly considered to minimize ongoing blood loss 
to prevent persistent or recurrent iron-­deficiency anemia.
Recurrent iron-­deficiency anemia in infants and children, despite 
limitation of cow’s milk intake and compliance with supplemental iron, 
should raise the suspicion for blood loss, particularly GI blood loss. 
Rarely, pulmonary hemorrhage can be a source of chronic blood loss. 
This condition is called Heiner syndrome and is due to severe cow’s 
milk protein hypersensitivity. Heiner syndrome should be considered 
when chronic iron-­deficiency anemia exists with associated cough, 
wheeze, or diagnosis of “asthma.” Chest radiograph reveals pulmonary 
infiltrates consistent with hemorrhage. Pulmonary vascular anomalies 
and systemic vasculitis are other causes of pulmonary hemorrhage.
Iron-­refractory iron-­deficiency anemia. Iron deficiency that begins 
early in infancy that is unresponsive to therapeutic doses of oral iron 
may be due to iron-­refractory iron-­deficiency anemia (IRIDA), an 
autosomal recessive disorder due to pathologic variants in TMPRSS6, 
which is involved in iron homeostasis. There is a microcytic hypochro­
mic anemia, low iron levels, and transferrin saturations but normal to 
high ferritin or hepcidin levels. Because of iron malabsorption, oral 
iron is usually ineffective and intravenous iron is indicated. The differ­
ential diagnosis includes celiac disease and Helicobacter pylori or auto­
immune atrophic gastritis.
Standard-­of-­care treatment of iron-­deficiency anemia with oral iron 
is outlined in Table 49.8. Intravenous iron therapy is often useful upfront 
in certain situations (poor compliance, iron malabsorption in patients 
with celiac disease, intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome, inflamma­
tory bowel disease, and genetic causes affecting iron absorption; children 
receiving hemodialysis). It may also be considered in iron-­deficiency 
anemia patients with long-­standing anemia or who have failed oral iron 
therapy for any reason, including nonadherence. The optimal approach 
to iron-­deficiency anemia in infants and children is prevention.
Thalassemia syndromes. The thalassemia syndromes represent 
a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders of decreased globin 
production that lead to microcytic anemia, which can be mistaken for 
iron deficiency. The child with microcytic anemia, without evidence of 
iron deficiency, should be evaluated for thalassemia (Fig. 49.5).
Two genes, one inherited from each parent, code for the produc­
tion of the β-­globin chains of hemoglobin. When one gene is affected 
by the β-­thalassemia gene variant, a moderate diminution in the pro­
duction of the β-­globin chain occurs, resulting in mild microcytic 
anemia of underproduction. β-­Thalassemia occurs most commonly in 
individuals of Mediterranean, Asian, or African descent. Patients with 
β-­thalassemia trait are asymptomatic and the diagnosis is frequently 
made when anemia and microcytosis are noted at the time of routine 
screening for iron deficiency or incidentally when a CBC is obtained 
for the assessment of acute or chronic symptoms. Typically patients 
have mild anemia and a low MCV. For an equivalent degree of anemia, 
the MCV is substantially lower than that seen in iron deficiency.
This phenomenon is reflected in the Mentzer index calculated by 
dividing the MCV by the RBC count (in millions). The RBC count is 
usually elevated in thalassemia. Thus, an index of <13 is suggestive of 
thalassemia trait, whereas an index of >13 is generally suggestive of 
iron-­deficiency anemia. A normal MCV virtually excludes a diagnosis 
of β-­thalassemia. A normal or mildly elevated RDW is usually seen in 
thalassemia and reflects a relatively uniform population of microcytic 
RBCs. This is in contrast to iron deficiency wherein the RDW is uni­
formly elevated reflecting variation in cell size.
The peripheral blood smear demonstrates microcytosis, hypochro­
mia, and target cells. Occasional fragments and basophilic stippling 
may be seen. Newborn hemoglobinopathy screening will be normal 
in patients with β-­thalassemia trait. Hemoglobin analysis performed at 
6 months of age or older will demonstrate an elevation of hemoglobin 
A2. The significance of diagnosing β-­thalassemia trait is twofold: (1) its 
confusion with iron deficiency (hence, patients may be treated unnec­
essarily with repeated courses of iron and undergo repeated unneces­
sary blood studies) and (2) its genetic implications. A child from two 
individuals with β-­thalassemia trait carries a 25% risk per pregnancy 
of being affected with homozygous β-­thalassemia (thalassemia major), 
a severe hematologic disorder. Parents and siblings of a child with a 
diagnosis of β-­thalassemia trait should be appropriately screened and 
counseled. For purposes of screening, a normal, age-­adjusted MCV 
essentially excludes a diagnosis of β-­thalassemia trait.
Homozygous β-­thalassemia, also known as β-­thalassemia major 
or Cooley anemia, results from the inheritance of the β-­thalassemia 
trait variant from each parent. This results in a severe deficiency of 
β-­globin chain production with an excess of α-­globin chains. These 
α-­globin chains precipitate within developing erythroid elements in 
the marrow and lead to brisk intramarrow destruction of developing 
erythroid elements (ineffective erythropoiesis). As a result, patients 
with β-­thalassemia major present during infancy at 6–12 months of 
age with severe anemia and an inadequate reticulocyte count during 
the time when transition from fetal hemoglobin to adult hemoglo­
bin occurs. Children with β-­thalassemia major typically present with 
fatigue, irritability, pallor, jaundice, and marked hepatosplenomegaly 
that is caused by extramedullary hematopoiesis. Frontal bossing and 
prominent cheek bones (maxillary hyperplasia) may be noted and 
result from expansion of the marrow space to compensate for the 
severe anemia. Most patients are of Mediterranean or Asian descent.
Laboratory findings include severe anemia and a decreased age-­
adjusted MCV. The peripheral blood smear is markedly abnormal, 
demonstrating severely under-­hemoglobinized (hypochromic) 
RBCs and target cells and wide variability in cell shape and size 
(increased RDW). Chronic transfusion therapy sufficient to sup­
press ineffective erythropoiesis (maintaining hemoglobin level >10 
g/dL) may be associated with relatively normal growth, develop­
ment, and functional capabilities. Long-­term iron chelation for 
management of iron overload allows for prolonged survival and 
decreases complications of transfusional hemosiderosis (hepatic, 
endocrine, and cardiac dysfunction). Bone marrow transplantation 
is curative and a potential treatment option for younger patients 
who have a human leukocyte antigen–identical healthy sibling or 
matched unrelated donor.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
915
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
Four genes code for the α-­globin chains of hemoglobin: two genes 
on each chromosome 16. Deletions of one, two, three, or four of these 
genes account for the variable laboratory and clinical findings asso­
ciated with the α-­thalassemia syndromes. Decreased α-­globin chain 
production leads to an excess of β-­globin chains, which then precipi­
tate within developing RBCs in the bone marrow, leading to destruc­
tion. Mature RBCs are mildly hypochromic and microcytic and may 
appear to be targeted.
Deletion of one α-­thalassemia gene is known as the “silent carrier” 
state because it is not associated with anemia or microcytosis. This 
occurs in about 30% of individuals of African or Asian descent.
Deletion of two genes represents α-­thalassemia trait. Similar to β-­
thalassemia trait, such patients manifest mild anemia and microcytosis 
with MCVs generally in the mildly decreased range (less microcyto­
sis than is generally seen in β-­thalassemia trait). The presence of Hb 
Barts on newborn screen confirms the diagnosis. Hemoglobin analysis 
beyond the newborn period cannot diagnose α-­thalassemia trait.
A three-­gene deletion leads to hemoglobin H disease, which is 
associated with moderate hemolytic anemia, microcytosis, reticulocy­
tosis, and splenomegaly.
A four-­gene deletion represents α-­thalassemia major or hemo­
globin Bart disease, in which the fetus is unable to produce any α-­
chains. Hence, nearly all in utero hemoglobin is Bart type (composed 
of four β-­chains). Hemoglobin Bart disease has an extremely high 
oxygen affinity and leads to severe tissue hypoxemia and resultant fetal 
hydrops and death. On occasion, babies with hemoglobin Bart disease 
have been saved by extraordinary measures (intrauterine transfusion 
and early delivery), but they are then committed to lifelong transfusion 
support and/or bone marrow transplantation.
Hemoglobin H disease and α-­thalassemia major occur almost 
exclusively in individuals of Asian descent. This is because Asians and 
Africans have different chromosomal arrangements of the abnormal 
genes. When α-­thalassemia minor (two-­gene deletion) occurs in the 
Asian population, deletions may be cis (both genes deleted from the 
same chromosome) or trans (each chromosome missing one gene). In 
individuals of African descent, α-­thalassemia minor (two-­gene dele­
tion) occurs only on the basis of a trans distribution; hence, a child 
from two individuals with the African variety of α-­thalassemia trait is 
affected with only two α genes deleted (α-­thalassemia minor). A child 
from two individuals of Asian descent who have α-­thalassemia minor 
may be affected with all four genes deleted (α-­thalassemia major). The 
implication of a diagnosis of α-­thalassemia trait in individuals of Afri­
can descent usually relates primarily to its confusion with iron defi­
ciency. Individuals of Asian descent must be appropriately counseled 
regarding the potential for transmission of serious hematologic disease 
if two individuals with α-­thalassemia trait have a child.
Lead poisoning. The occurrence of elevated serum and total body 
burdens of lead is a major public health problem. This is of particular 
α-Gene
α-Globin
β-Gene
α mRNA
α2β2
β-Globin
β mRNA
α α α α
α α α α
α α
β β
Hb A
α
α α α
α α α
α
+
Excess α-globin
 Precipitates
of α-globin
Inclusion bodies
in RBC precursors
Membrane damage
Abnormal metabolism
Massive death of RBC
precursors in bone marrow
(ineffective erythropoiesis)
Few surviving RBCs are
highly abnormal,
carry inclusions
Sequestration
in spleen
Bizarre
morphology
Splenomegaly
hypersplenism
Hb catabolism
bilirubin
Jaundice
Gallstones
Leg ulcers
Cirrhosis
Endocrine dysfunction
Cardiomyopathy
Iron overload and
parenchymal
iron deposition
(hemochromatosis)
High-output heart failure,
infection, leg ulcers, pallor,
growth retardation
Transfusion
Profound anemia
Tissue hypoxia
Erythropoietin
released by
kidney
Massive expansion
of bone marrow
Bony deformities, fractures,
extramedullary hematopoiesis
Increased gastrointestinal
iron absorption
Increased blood volume,
secondary folate deficiency,
pathologic bone fractures
1 
     (hypochromia)
2   Massive
     production
3   Shortened RBC survival
mature RBC
Hb per cell produced
Fig. 49.5  Pathophysiology of severe forms of β-­thalassemia. The diagram outlines the pathogenesis of clin­
ical abnormalities resulting from the primary defect in β-­globin chain synthesis. Hb, hemoglobin; RBC, red 
blood cell. (From Chapin J, Giardina PJ. Thalassemia syndromes. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, 
et al., eds. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practices. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:550, Fig. 40-­4.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
916
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
importance for infants and young children from families living in 
old housing with lead-­based paint. Elevated lead levels may decrease 
erythropoiesis because lead inhibits several enzymes along the path of 
protoporphyrin synthesis. Lead may also produce hemolysis.
Anemia is usually seen in association with lead levels of 60–70 μg/
dL or higher. Anemia is mild, variably microcytic, and associated with 
prominent basophilic stippling of RBCs. Coexistent iron deficiency is 
common because iron deficiency promotes increased lead absorption. 
The presence of mild microcytic anemia in children with mild to mod­
erate lead burdens is usually due to concomitant iron deficiency. Lead 
chelation therapy is appropriate when lead levels are higher than 40–45 
μg/dL. Additional features of marked lead toxicity include intestinal 
colic, lead lines in long bone radiographs, behavioral changes, renal 
tubular defects, and lead encephalopathy associated with increased 
intracranial pressure.
Anemia of inflammation. In a wide variety of chronic inflammatory 
or infectious disorders, mild to moderate anemia, termed anemia 
of inflammation (previously known as anemia of chronic disease), 
may be present. The MCV is usually normal to mildly decreased. 
Chronic inflammation or infection impairs the transfer of iron from 
reticuloendothelial cells within the marrow to developing erythroid 
elements. This results in some degree of iron-­restricted erythropoiesis 
despite adequate marrow stores of iron. This impaired transfer of 
iron is due in part to the iron regulatory hormone hepcidin, which is 
elevated during times of inflammation. Often the history and physical 
examination findings point to acute inflammation or chronic illness, 
but occasionally patients have no obvious manifestations of systemic 
disease. The presence of unexplained normocytic or mild microcytic 
anemia should alert the clinician to the possibility of occult systemic 
disease. An elevated ESR or CRP is usually noted in patients with 
chronic inflammatory or infectious states. Anemia of inflammation is 
characterized by no specific abnormalities on peripheral smear other 
than mild hypochromia and microcytosis. Serum ferritin levels are 
elevated in inflammatory states and are thus a poor reflection of iron 
status. Serum iron level and total iron-­binding capacity are generally 
decreased, but the percentage of iron saturation is often within the low 
to normal range, distinguishing it from iron-­deficiency anemia.
Rare causes of microcytic anemia. Sideroblastic anemias are 
a group of very rare congenital (often X-­linked) inherited diseases 
associated with impairment of protoporphyrin synthesis and variable 
microcytic anemia. The bone marrow examination demonstrates 
evidence of developing erythroid cells with excess iron deposited in 
mitochondria that tend to form a circular appearance around the 
nucleus, hence the term ringed sideroblast (Table 49.11). Copper 
deficiency is another rare cause of microcytic anemia. Associated 
features include neutropenia and scurvy-­like bone changes (periosteal 
elevation). Only under unusual circumstances, when prominent 
microcytic anemia is otherwise unexplained, should these rare 
disorders be considered.
Normocytic Anemia Secondary to Underproduction
When normocytic anemia secondary to underproduction is identified 
in a patient, the key issue is whether anemia is occurring in isolation 
or is associated with other cytopenias (see Chapter 50 and Fig. 49.6; 
also see Fig. 49.4). Normocytic anemia with an inadequate reticulocyte 
response and pancytopenia raises the possibility of serious primary or 
secondary bone marrow failure syndromes (see Chapter 50) or malig­
nancy. The history and physical examination findings are often pre­
dictive of the presence of thrombocytopenia (easy bruising, petechiae, 
ecchymosis) and/or neutropenia (fever, signs of infection). Adenopa­
thy and hepatosplenomegaly are suggestive of bone marrow infiltration 
caused by malignancy.
Acquired aplastic anemia is a rare disorder of childhood character­
ized by pancytopenia (neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia) and a 
markedly hypoplastic bone marrow (see Chapter 50). Clinical man­
ifestations may include pallor, fatigue, purpura, bleeding (cutaneous 
petechiae and ecchymosis, epistaxis, gingival oozing), and/or recurrent 
infection. Adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are not features of this 
condition. The cause is often idiopathic but may be related to prior 
infection (hepatitis, Epstein-­Barr virus), toxin exposure (benzene, 
other volatile compounds), or medications (chloramphenicol, anticon­
vulsants). The peripheral blood smear demonstrates normal-­appearing 
RBCs, an absence of polychromasia, and few leukocytes and platelets. 
The MCV may be elevated. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrates hypo­
plasia involving all cell lines.
Disorders associated with bone marrow infiltration including leu­
kemia and metastatic malignancy often manifest with normocytic 
anemia secondary to RBC underproduction, thrombocytopenia, and 
either neutropenia or leukocytosis. Teardrop erythrocytes (dacrocytes) 
may be present in the peripheral smear (see Table 49.7). The MCV may 
be elevated. Many children with leukemia come to medical attention 
because of pallor, fatigue, and purpura. Limping and skeletal pain are 
also common with childhood leukemia. Pallor, purpura, adenopa­
thy, and hepatosplenomegaly are often seen on physical examination. 
Peripheral blood smear usually but not always has leukemic blasts. 
Bone marrow examination findings are diagnostic.
When normocytic anemia secondary to underproduction is iso­
lated without associated thrombocytopenia or neutropenia, sev­
eral diagnostic entities must be considered. Mild anemia commonly 
accompanies acute infections and inflammatory illness. Children are 
TABLE 49.11  Classification of Sideroblastic 
Anemia
Hereditary (Nonsyndromic)
X-­linked
Autosomal dominant or recessive
Acquired
Idiopathic acquired* (refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts)
Associated with previous chemotherapy, irradiation, or in transition 
myelodysplasia or myeloproliferative diseases
Drugs
Alcohol
Isoniazid
Chloramphenicol
Other drugs
Rare Causes
Erythropoietic protoporphyria
Copper deficiency or zinc overload
Hypothermia
Hereditary (Syndromic)
X-­linked sideroblastic anemia with ring sideroblasts and cerebellar ataxia
Myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia
Pearson syndrome
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia
Sideroblastic anemia with immunodeficiency, fevers, and developmental delay
*Trial of pyridoxine indicated.
From Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology: 
Basic Principles and Practices. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:507, 
Table 38-­5.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
917
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
often incidentally found to be anemic several days to a few weeks after 
having childhood infectious illnesses including viral upper respiratory 
tract infections, gastroenteritis, or undifferentiated febrile illnesses. 
Anemia reflects impaired erythrocyte production because of bone 
marrow–suppressive mediators of the immune/inflammatory response 
including interleukins, interferons, and tumor necrosis factor. Cessa­
tion of RBC production leads to a fall in hemoglobin level of about 1 
g/dL/wk. Mild anemia discovered during or shortly after acute illness 
does not necessitate an extensive evaluation; rather, a follow-­up hemo­
globin determination should be obtained several weeks later. Persistent 
anemia necessitates further evaluation.
Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC), occurring 
predominantly in infants and toddlers (85% between 1 and 4 years), 
represents a temporary arrest of erythropoiesis. The underlying mech­
anism is hypothesized to be secondary to immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
antibodies that cross-­react with early erythroid precursor cells. Infec­
tion is thought to be one impetus for the development of this condition. 
Patients may present with pallor and fatigue that occurs gradually over 
several weeks to months. Because of the very gradual fall in hemoglo­
bin, most affected children are remarkably well compensated. Physical 
examination usually shows only marked pallor and mild tachycardia. 
Adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are not present. Congestive 
heart failure occurs only if anemia is very severe. The CBC demon­
strates a normocytic anemia and profound reticulocytopenia. The 
WBC and platelet counts are normal in most patients; however, 25% 
of patients have mild neutropenia at the time of presentation. The 
peripheral blood smear is unremarkable. Recovery is spontaneous, 
and treatment is supportive. Blood transfusion is indicated only for 
patients with severe, symptomatic anemia. TEC may be difficult to 
differentiate from congenital hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan 
anemia), particularly in children younger than 1 year (Table 49.12). 
In Diamond-­Blackfan anemia, a constitutional RBC aplasia syndrome, 
MCV and fetal hemoglobin levels are usually elevated for the patient’s 
age, providing clues to the diagnosis (see Chapter 50). Patients with 
WBC, platelet count
Abnormal
Enlarged liver/spleen/
 lymph nodes
Normal
NO
YES
Aplastic
anemia
or HLH or
Leukemia
Leukemia
Moderate/
 severe anemia
Mild anemia
Normal growth/
 development
Normal past
 medical history
Acute illness
YES
NO
Anemia
 of acute
 infection/
 inflammation
(?) Hypothyroid
NO
Renal insufficiency
YES
Transient
 erythroblastopenia
 of childhood
Fig. 49.6  Diagnostic scheme of normochromocytic anemia of underproduction. HLH, hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis; WBC, white blood cell.
TABLE 49.12  Distinguishing Features 
Between Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia (DBA) and 
Transient Erythroblastopenia of Childhood (TEC)
DBA
TEC
Etiology
Genetic
Acquired
Immune mediated
None
Common
Family history
= 10%
Occasional siblings 
with concurrent TEC
Antecedent history
None
Viral infection
Age at diagnosis
90% by 1 yr
6 mo–4 yr
Physical anomalies
= 50%
None
Neurologic findings
None
Occasional
Transfusion dependence
Yes, if steroid refractory
None
Course
Chronic
Full recovery
Risk of cancer
Increased
Not increased
Risk of MDS or leukemia
Increased
Not increased
Laboratory findings at 
diagnosis:
RBC size
Macrocytic
Normocytic
HbF
Increased
Normal*
i Antigen
Increased
Normal*
RBC enzyme activities
Fetal levels
Adult levels
RBC adenosine 
deaminase
Increased in 40–90%
Normal
*During spontaneous recovery, values may be increased.
HbF, fetal hemoglobin; MDS, myelodysplasia syndrome; RBC, red bood 
cell.
From Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology: 
Basic Principles and Practices. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:377, 
Table 29-­7.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
918
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
TEC are otherwise healthy with no abnormal physical exam findings 
aside from those associated with anemia. Nonetheless, transient neu­
rologic findings may be seen in TEC; these include papilledema, ataxia, 
hemiparesis, and seizures.
A patient with previously undiagnosed chronic hemolytic anemia 
(sickle cell anemia, hereditary spherocytosis) may present with nor­
mocytic anemia and severe reticulocytopenia if transient RBC hypo­
plasia occurs based on a viral infection such as commonly seen with 
parvovirus B19. Because of a shortened RBC life span in patients with 
chronic hemolysis, a transient arrest of RBC production can cause 
severe anemia that evolves over several days. Patients may have a his­
tory of neonatal jaundice and/or intermittent icterus, and they often 
have splenomegaly and an abnormal peripheral smear related to the 
underlying hemolytic disease.
Isolated anemia secondary to underproduction occurs in children 
with chronic renal disease because of erythropoietin deficiency. 
Clinical and laboratory findings often suggest a diagnosis of renal 
insufficiency such as poor growth, hypertension, edema, abnormal 
urinalysis, and elevated serum urea nitrogen and creatinine levels. 
The anemia of chronic renal disease can be successfully treated by 
recombinant human erythropoietin in conjunction with intravenous 
iron therapy.
Macrocytic Anemia (see Figs. 49.1 and 49.4)
Anemia due to bone marrow failure syndromes. Diamond-­Blackfan 
anemia is a constitutional pure RBC aplasia syndrome that manifests 
during the first year of life with isolated severe anemia and reticulocytopenia 
(see Chapter 50). The remainder of the CBC is unremarkable. Because 
synthesis of RBCs containing adult hemoglobin is markedly impaired, 
RBCs generally manifest fetal characteristics, including elevated MCV, 
increased levels of fetal hemoglobin, and the “i” surface antigen. Bone 
marrow aspirate demonstrates pure RBC aplasia.
Fanconi anemia usually manifests with macrocytic anemia second­
ary to underproduction and pancytopenia. It is a constitutional disor­
der frequently associated with physical stigmata in ∼50% of patients 
(see Chapter 50). Most patients do not present with overt hematologic 
manifestations until 4 or 5 years of age. Thumb and radial anoma­
lies should alert the clinician to possible Fanconi anemia even in the 
absence of cytopenias. RBCs tend to have fetal characteristics including 
increased MCV and elevated fetal hemoglobin level. There are at least 
15 genes responsible for Fanconi anemia; sequencing may confirm the 
diagnosis.
Megaloblastic anemia (vitamin B12 deficiency or folate deficiency). 
Megaloblastic anemia, characterized by macrocytic RBCs with variable 
abnormalities of WBCs and platelets, is usually caused by vitamin B12 
deficiency or folate deficiency. Albeit rare in children, it can occur 
secondary to nutritional or congenital etiologies. If severe, associated 
pancytopenia can occur (see Chapter 50). In addition to large ovoid 
RBCs, hypersegmented neutrophils (more than 5 lobes/cell) are often 
seen on the peripheral smear (Fig. 49.7); large platelets can be present. 
It is appropriate to suspect vitamin B12 deficiency or folate deficiency in 
patients with otherwise unexplained macrocytic anemia. Documenting 
the presence of vitamin B12 deficiency or folate deficiency requires 
an assessment of nutrition and GI absorption. Prompt diagnosis of 
vitamin B12 deficiency is imperative due to the associated neurologic 
manifestations that can occur. Importantly, the degree of anemia can 
be inversely proportional to the neurologic symptoms. The diagnosis 
of vitamin B12 deficiency and folate deficiency cannot be made solely 
on the levels of vitamin B12 deficiency or folate. The precursors of 
methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine must also be evaluated 
since normal vitamin B12 levels can still be associated with vitamin B12 
deficiency. Elevated MMA despite normal B12 levels is diagnostic of 
B12 deficiency. RBC folate and not serum folate should be evaluated to 
accurately assess folate levels.
Nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency may occur in breast-­feeding 
infants of mothers on strict vegetarian diets that exclude milk and egg 
products. Congenital pernicious anemia is a rare syndrome associated 
with vitamin B12 malabsorption that is caused by gastric intrinsic factor 
deficiency. Children who have had resection of the terminal ileum, the 
site of absorption of vitamin B12, may develop megaloblastic anemia. 
Vitamin B12 malabsorption may occur in patients affected with auto­
immune gastritis or with inflammatory disease involving the terminal 
ileum such as Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis. Rare congenital dis­
orders that affect vitamin B12 transport, absorption (i.e., Imerslund-­
Grasbeck syndrome), or metabolism can also occur.
Unlike body stores of vitamin B12, which may provide several years’ 
reserve, folate stores are limited to several weeks’ supply. Folate is 
ubiquitous in food sources; hence, nutritional deficiency is unusual. 
Infants fed unsupplemented goat’s milk may develop profound folate 
deficiency. Malabsorption of folate can occur in children who have lim­
ited small bowel absorptive capacity because of surgical resection or 
inflammatory disease.
Anemia Caused by Increased Red Blood Cell Destruction
The hemolytic disorders (see Figs. 49.1 and 49.4) are characterized by 
shortened RBC survival and compensatory reticulocytosis. Normal 
RBCs survive approximately 120 days in the circulation. New RBCs 
are manufactured at a rate equivalent to the destruction of senescent 
RBCs so that under normal circumstances an appropriate hemoglobin 
level is maintained. Intrinsic or extrinsic RBC factors can lead to accel­
erated RBC destruction. Several clinical and laboratory hallmarks are 
associated with hemolysis (Table 49.13). It is imperative that a techni­
cally adequate peripheral blood smear be examined whenever hemo­
lysis is suspected. Although normal RBC structure does not exclude 
a diagnosis of hemolytic anemia, most hemolytic diseases are associ­
ated with morphologic abnormalities (Table 49.14). Depending on the 
cause of the hemolysis, RBCs may be removed from the circulation by 
reticuloendothelial cells (extravascular hemolysis) or may lyse within 
the circulation (intravascular hemolysis). With intravascular hemoly­
sis, hemoglobin is released into the plasma and bound by the serum 
protein haptoglobin. In states of brisk intravascular hemolysis, hapto­
globin may be depleted and free hemoglobin may be filtered by the 
kidney, resulting in a pink appearance of the urine. A urinary dipstick 
test result is positive for blood, but the microscopic examination of the 
urinary sediment does not demonstrate intact RBCs.
Fig. 49.7  Hypersegmented polymorphonuclear leukocyte as seen in 
vitamin B12 deficiency or folate deficiency.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
919
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
Disturbances of any of the three key components of the RBC—the 
membrane, enzymes, and hemoglobin—may lead to ongoing or inter­
mittent hemolysis.
Membrane Defects
The prototypic intrinsic red cell membrane defect is hereditary sphero­
cytosis, which is an inherited disorder that can be inherited as autoso­
mal dominant or autosomal recessive or be a new variant. This disorder 
occurs in approximately 1/5,000 live births. It is seen most typically in 
individuals of Northern European descent but may be identified in any 
population. The basic defect is an abnormality of a membrane protein 
(spectrin, protein 3, or ankyrin) that allows the RBC membrane to lose 
its redundancy and the usual biconcave disk shape resulting in a small, 
dense cell of spheroid configuration (see Fig. 49.2). Hemolysis occurs 
because the spheroid RBCs are far less distensible and are unable to 
successfully traverse the microcirculation of the spleen. Characteristic 
clinical findings include anemia, reticulocytosis, and the presence of 
abundant microspherocytes on peripheral smear. Associated nonspe­
cific findings of chronic hemolysis are often present including pallor, 
icterus, and splenomegaly. In autosomal dominant forms the family 
history is often positive for anemia, splenectomy, or cholecystectomy.
Newborns with hereditary spherocytosis frequently develop 
jaundice within the first 24 hours after birth, necessitating photo­
therapy and occasionally exchange transfusion. Diagnosis may be 
confirmed by an osmotic fragility test reflecting the limited capacity 
of the RBC to expand when incubated in a hypotonic solution. The 
clinical spectrum of disease is broad. Some patients have mild, well-­
compensated hemolysis and the condition is detected during their 
adult years after a diagnosis in one of their children. Other patients 
may have brisk hemolysis during infancy necessitating intermittent 
transfusion support. Most patients have a disease course character­
ized by mild to moderate anemia, reticulocytosis, and splenomegaly. 
Patients are susceptible to exacerbations of anemia because of virus-­
induced hyperhemolysis or transient RBC hypoplasia. Parvovirus 
B19 may cause superimposed transient RBC hypoplasia of about 1 
week’s duration, resulting in moderate to severe anemia that requires 
transfusion.
A severe form of autosomal recessive hereditary spherocyto­
sis due to SPTA1 variants can present with fetal anemia and often 
require intrauterine transfusion support to prevent progression to 
hydrops. At birth, infants have severe anemia with reticulocytopenia 
that can be difficult to distinguish from Diamond-­Blackfan anemia. 
These patients are often transfusion dependent and share many clin­
ical characteristics to patients with ineffective erythropoiesis such as 
thalassemia.
Hereditary elliptocytosis represents a heterogeneous group of 
inherited disorders characterized by variable chronic hemolysis and 
abundant elliptical RBCs on peripheral smear. The clinical and labo­
ratory findings are similar to those seen in hereditary spherocytosis. 
Splenectomy is appropriate in patients with moderate to severe hemo­
lytic disease.
Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis is an autosomal recessive mem­
brane disorder that manifests in the newborn period and is charac­
terized by marked jaundice and anemia, reticulocytosis, and striking 
aberrations of RBC structure (see Table 49.14). Hemolysis lessens with 
advancing age.
Enzyme Defects
The most common RBC enzyme defect is G6PD deficiency. An 
X-­linked disorder, G6PD deficiency occurs most commonly in individ­
uals of African and Mediterranean descent and should always be con­
sidered in the differential diagnosis of acute hemolytic anemia in males 
(though rarely females can be affected). Deficiency of G6PD activity 
renders hemoglobin susceptible to oxidant insult, leading to precipita­
tion of hemoglobin, membrane damage, and ultimately RBC destruc­
tion. Oxidant injury may occur because of intercurrent infection or 
ingestion of various substances, including medications (i.e., classically 
sulfa drugs), toxins, and foods such as fava beans (Table 49.15).
The common African variant of G6PD, termed G6PD deficient vari­
ant A−, is not necessarily associated with chronic hemolysis but usually 
manifests as mild acute hemolytic anemia related to specific precipitat­
ing factors. Rarely is hemolysis sufficiently severe to warrant transfusion 
therapy. Patients are often incidentally found to be anemic with evidence 
of an appropriate reticulocyte response. A peripheral blood smear may 
demonstrate “bite” cells as portions of the RBC (precipitates of hemoglo­
bin) are removed by reticuloendothelial cells (Fig. 49.8). G6PD enzyme 
assay is necessary for the establishment of a diagnosis, but the test must 
be performed on a sample that has been depleted of reticulocytes because 
newly released RBCs have greater amounts of G6PD. The Mediterranean 
variety of G6PD deficiency tends to be more severe and may be asso­
ciated with chronic hemolysis as well as hemolysis with superimposed 
acute events caused by infection or medication leading to symptomatic 
anemia and the occasional need for transfusion therapy.
Although rare, pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is the second 
most common enzyme deficiency after G6PD deficiency. Inheritance 
of PKD is autosomal recessive. PKD is characterized by absence of or 
TABLE 49.13  Clinical and Laboratory 
Features Suggestive of Hemolytic Anemia
Pallor
Icterus
Dark or tea-­colored urine
Splenomegaly
Gallstones
History of neonatal jaundice
Positive family history of anemia, splenectomy, cholecystectomy
↑ Reticulocyte count
↑ RDW (due to ↑ reticulocyte count)
Abnormal RBC morphology
↑ Indirect bilirubin (normal direct bilirubin)
↓ Serum haptoglobin level
↑ Urinary urobilinogen level
Hemoglobinuria (+ dipstick test result for blood; no RBCs in urine)
↑ LDH level
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red blood cell 
distribution width.
TABLE 49.14  Hemolytic Anemia: Diagnostic 
Clues Based on Red Blood Cell Structure
Sickle cells: sickle cell disease
Target cells: hemoglobinopathies (HbC, HbS, thalassemia), liver disease
Schistocytes/burr cells/helmet cells/RBC fragments: microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia—DIC, HUS, TTP
Spherocytes: hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Cigar-­shaped cells: hereditary elliptocytosis
“Bite” cells: G6PD deficiency
Poikilocytosis, microcytosis, fragmented erythrocytes, elliptocytes: hereditary 
pyropoikilocytosis
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase; Hb, hemoglobin; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; 
RBC, red blood cell; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
920
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
significantly reduced levels of the intracellular RBC enzyme pyruvate 
kinase. Lack of this enzyme leads to decreased levels of ATP and sub­
sequent brisk hemolysis. The clinical spectrum of PKD is variable but 
can result in severe chronic hemolytic anemia that is present in utero 
and postnatally. In its most severe form, hemolysis is extremely brisk, 
and it is not uncommon for patients with PKD to maintain reticulo­
cyte counts of 40% or higher. Peripheral blood smear appears relatively 
unremarkable but may demonstrate spiculated RBCs. Specific enzyme 
assay can be performed by specialized laboratories to aid in the diag­
nosis. Patients with PKD usually require lifelong RBC transfusions that 
often result in transfusional iron overload. Splenomegaly is often pres­
ent. Splenectomy is not curative but can ameliorate the condition by 
resulting in an increment in hemoglobin by 1–2 g/dL, thereby reducing 
the number of required transfusions. Following splenectomy, the retic­
ulocyte count increases further. Patients with PKD are also extremely 
susceptible to transient RBC hypoplasia caused by parvovirus B19 
infection.
Hemoglobinopathies
Hemoglobinopathies usually occur because of a single amino acid substi­
tution in α-­ or β-­globin chains. Hemoglobino­pathies are among the most 
common causes of chronic hemolytic disease. α-­ and β-­Thalassemia syn­
dromes were previously discussed. Sickle cell syndromes are the most fre­
quently encountered hemoglobinopathies.
The sickle hemoglobinopathy syndromes are a group of genetically 
inherited disorders encountered most frequently in individuals of African 
descent. Thus, a form of sickle cell disease should be considered in the dif­
ferential diagnosis of anemia in any Black child. These disorders occur less 
frequently in individuals of Mediterranean or Arabic background.
Sickle hemoglobin is characterized by a single amino acid substitu­
tion of valine for glutamic acid in the number 6 position of the β-­globin 
chain. Sickle hemoglobin tends to form insoluble fibers and polymer­
ization within the RBC when deoxygenated. This ultimately leads to 
the formation of the characteristic crescent-­shaped sickled erythro­
cytes (Fig. 49.9). When sickle hemoglobin trait is inherited from both 
parents in an autosomal recessive fashion, the child has homozygous 
hemoglobin SS disease. This is the most severe form of sickle cell dis­
ease. Sickle hemoglobin may also be co-­inherited with other β-­globin 
gene defects such as hemoglobin C or β-­thalassemia and give rise to 
other heterozygous forms of sickle cell disease that can be less severe 
than hemoglobin SS disease. Approximately 1 in 400 African Ameri­
cans has sickle cell disease.
TABLE 49.15  Factors Known to Promote 
Hemolysis in Patients with G6PD Deficiency
Viral or bacterial infection
Fava beans
Vitamin C (large doses)
Mothballs (naphthalene)
Benzene and other volatiles
Medications
Sulfonamides*
Antimalarial drugs†
Nitrofurantoin
Nalidixic acid
Chloramphenicol
Vitamin K analogs
Methylene blue
High-­dose aspirin
Stibophen
Niridazole
Probenecid
Dimercaprol (BAL)
Toluidine blue
Phenylhydrazine
Local anesthetics such as lidocaine, benzocaine
*Sulfanilamide, sulfapyridine, sulfadimidine, sulfacetamide, sulfafura­
zole, salicylazosulfapyridine (Azulfidine), dapsone, sulfoxone, co-trimox­
azole (Septrin).
†Primaquine, pamaquine, chloroquine (use with caution).
G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase.
Fig. 49.8  “Bite” cells and burr cells as seen in glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency hemolysis.
Fig. 49.9  Sickle cell anemia. A, B, Sickled erythrocytes and target cells.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
921
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
Approximately 8% of African Americans are carriers of the hemo­
globin S gene, which is also termed sickle cell trait and results in 
approximately 30–40% of hemoglobin S. Sickle cell trait is rarely asso­
ciated with clinical disease except under states of unusually severe 
arterial hypoxemia. Spontaneous hematuria may occasionally occur 
in sickle trait as a result of the induction of sickling in the extremely 
hypertonic environment of the renal medulla. Patients with sickle cell 
trait are distinctly not anemic and have a normal peripheral blood 
smear.
The diagnosis of sickle cell disease is usually straightforward. 
Children are variably anemic with reticulocytosis. The peripheral 
blood smear demonstrates characteristic sickled erythrocytes (see 
Fig. 49.9). The definitive diagnosis must be established by hemoglo­
bin identification methods (Table 49.16). The hemoglobin solubility 
test (sickle preparation, Sickledex) should not be used to make the 
diagnosis as false-­negative tests can occur. Diagnosis in newborns 
is routinely and accurately performed in most locations within the 
United States as a component of state-­mandated universal neonatal 
screening programs.
Sickle cell disease is a multiorgan system disease. The clinical mani­
festations are extremely broad but generally include (1) chronic hemo­
lytic anemia, (2) vasoocclusion resulting in ischemic injury to tissue, (3) 
susceptibility to infection, (4) acute and chronic pain, (5) cerebrovas­
cular complications (e.g., stroke), (6) cardiopulmonary complications, 
and (7) renal disease (Table 49.17). Infants younger than 4–6 months 
usually show no clinical manifestations because of naturally high levels 
of fetal hemoglobin. By 1–2 years of age, most affected patients have 
had a specific sickle cell–related manifestation.
Patients may appear variably pale and icteric depending on the 
degree of hemolysis. Splenomegaly can be seen in children between 6 
and 36 months of age in patients with hemoglobin SS disease and may 
persist into adolescence in some patients with milder variants (SC dis­
ease, S-­β+-­thalassemia). Autoinfarction from microvascular occlusion 
ultimately leads to fibrosis of splenic tissue by age 3–4 years in most 
patients with hemoglobin SS disease. Gallstones occur regularly and 
may lead to symptoms of cholelithiasis, acute cholecystitis, biliary tract 
obstruction, and/or pancreatitis. Many patients have delayed growth 
and pubertal development but ultimately achieve normal adult height. 
Exacerbation of anemia can occur as a result of infection-­induced 
hyperhemolysis or transient RBC aplasia commonly associated with 
parvovirus B19 infection. Hyperhemolytic episodes may also occur in 
male patients with concomitant G6PD deficiency. RBC transfusions 
are necessary when progressive anemia occurs in the context of splenic 
sequestration or aplastic crises or due to other clinical complications 
such as acute chest syndrome.
Hemoglobin E is seen with considerable frequency among indi­
viduals of Asian descent. Hemoglobin E trait is characterized by mild 
anemia and mild microcytosis. There are no significant clinical impli­
cations. The diagnosis is confirmed by hemoglobin electrophoresis. 
When hemoglobin E occurs in the double heterozygous state with 
β-­thalassemia, patients often have a moderately severe thalassemic 
syndrome; hence, genetic counseling is advisable.
Acquired Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
This condition may occur as a transient, postviral process or in con­
junction with underlying immunologic dysfunction (immunodefi­
ciency, autoimmune disease, HIV infection, lymphoid malignancy). 
TABLE 49.16  Hemoglobin Electrophoresis 
Diagnosis of Sickle Hemoglobinopathy
Disease
Hemoglobin Type
Normal
A
SS, Sβ0 disease
S (no hemoglobin A)
S trait
A > S
SC disease
S + C (about equal proportions)
S-­β-­thalassemia
S > A (S predominant hemoglobin)
TABLE 49.17  Clinical Manifestations of 
Sickle Cell Anemia*
Manifestation
Comments
Anemia
Chronic onset, 3–4 mo of age; hematocrit usually 
18–26%
Aplastic crisis
Parvovirus infection, reticulocytopenia, acute and 
reversible
Sequestration crisis
Massive splenomegaly, shock; treat with transfusion
Hemolytic crisis
May be associated with G6PD deficiency
Dactylitis
Hand-­foot swelling in early infancy
Painful crisis
Microvascular painful vasoocclusive infarctions 
of muscle, bone, bone marrow, lung intestines; 
other etiologies likely contribute that are under 
investigation
Cerebral vascular 
accidents (overt 
and silent)
Large-­ and small-­vessel sickling and thrombosis 
(stroke); necessitates chronic transfusion
Acute chest syndrome
Infection, infarction, hypoventilation, bone marrow 
emboli, severe hypoxemia, infiltrate, dyspnea, 
rales
Chronic lung disease
Pulmonary fibrosis, restrictive lung disease, cor 
pulmonale, pulmonary artery hypertension
Priapism
Causes eventual impotence; treat with transfusion, 
oxygen, or corpora cavernosa to spongiosa shunt, 
local injection of α-­adrenergic agents
Ocular
Retinopathy
Gallbladder disease
Bilirubin stones; cholecystitis
Renal
Hematuria, papillary necrosis, renal-­concentrating 
deficit; nephropathy; chronic renal failure
Cardiomyopathy
Heart failure (fibrosis)
Leg ulceration
Seen in older patients
Infections
Functional asplenia, defects in properdin system; 
pneumococcal bacteremia, meningitis, and 
arthritis; deafness from meningitis, 
Haemophilus influenzae sepsis, Salmonella and 
Staphylococcus aureus osteomyelitis; severe 
Mycoplasma pneumonia; Escherichia coli; urinary 
tract infection
Growth failure, 
delayed puberty
May respond to nutritional supplements
Neurocognitive deficits Poorer school performance
Psychosocial issues
Depression, anxiety, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD)
*Clinical manifestations with sickle cell trait are unusual but include 
renal papillary necrosis (hematuria), sudden death on exertion, intraocu­
lar hyphema extension, and sickling in unpressurized airplanes.
G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase.
Modified from Scott JP. Hematology. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, 
eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saun­
ders; 1994:530.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
922
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Hemolysis is usually brisk; thus, most patients are symptomatic and 
present with pallor, jaundice, tea-­colored urine, fatigue, and tachycar­
dia. Splenomegaly is variably present. The degree of anemia is highly 
variable, and the reticulocyte count is elevated in most patients; how­
ever, a minority of patients present with a low reticulocyte count 
because of immune destruction of reticulocytes. The peripheral smear 
demonstrates microspherocytes. The direct Coombs test is positive, 
confirming the diagnosis. Consideration should be given to evaluating 
immunologic dysfunction, infection, and malignancy (immunoglob­
ulin levels, T and B lymphocyte counts, HIV and Epstein-­Barr virus 
studies, chest radiography). The characteristics of the antibody types 
are noted in Table 49.18. Warm antibodies (usually IgG) may be idio­
pathic or associated with lymphoma, HIV or Epstein-­Barr virus infec­
tions, rheumatologic disorders (lupus), primary immunodeficiency 
diseases, or most likely a nonspecific infectious phenomenon. Cold 
antibodies (usually immunoglobulin M [IgM]) may also be seen in 
response to viral infections and Mycoplasma pneumoniae and syphilis 
infections, or in the context of autoimmune disorders.
Aggressive therapy is recommended because life-­threatening ane­
mia is known to occur. Corticosteroids (prednisone) should be admin­
istered in most patients found to have warm autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia. An exception is patients with EBV-­related autoimmune hemo­
lytic anemia in whom the hemoglobin has stabilized. RBC transfusion 
should be considered based on the degree of the anemia; however, 
cross-­matching blood is likely to be difficult due to the autoantibody. 
Intravenous immunoglobulin and high-­dose steroids (methylprednis­
olone) should be considered in severe cases. Close hemoglobin mon­
itoring and reticulocyte counts should be done to follow the rate of 
hemolysis. The role of steroids in the treatment of cold autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia is less clear and is classically reserved for prolonged 
cases requiring frequent RBC transfusions. Recombinant antibodies 
directed to B lymphocytes such as rituximab have been effective in 
refractory cases.
ANEMIA IN THE NEONATE
Neonatal anemia should be viewed in the context of three possible 
pathophysiologic pathways (Table 49.19): (1) acute blood loss, (2) 
anemia of underproduction, and (3) anemia associated with increased 
destruction. Familial genetic disorders may manifest in the neonatal 
period or any time during infancy (Table 49.20).
The full-­term infant has a normal hemoglobin value (hemoglobin, 
15–21 g/dL; hematocrit, 45–65%) that is substantially higher than that 
in older infants and young children. This finding represents a func­
tional adaptation to the relatively hypoxic in utero environment. The 
reticulocyte count is elevated to about 7–8% during the first 3 days of 
life, after which there is an abrupt cessation of erythropoiesis until 2 
months of age, when a physiologic hemoglobin nadir of about 9.5–10 
g/dL is reached. This physiologic anemia of infancy is exaggerated in 
preterm infants whose hemoglobin levels may fall to approximately 
7 g/dL at about 1–1.5 months of age. This fall in hemoglobin value 
TABLE 49.18  Characteristics of Antibodies in Immune Hemolytic Anemia
Warm-­Antibody
Cold Agglutinin 
Disease
Paroxysmal Cold 
Hemoglobinuria
Drug-­Related 
Immune, Type 1
Drug-­Related 
Immune, Type II
Antibody isotype
IgG (rarely IgA)
IgM
IgG
IgG
IgM, IgG
Optimum temperature of reaction
37°C
0°C
0°C
37°C
37°C
Direct Coombs test
IgG ± C3
C3 only
C3 only
IgG only
C3 only
Agglutination in saline
None (rarely +)
++++
+
0 to +
0 to ++ (with drug)
Lysis by complement in vitro
Rare
Poor
Well
None
Sometimes well
Clinical severity
Mild to very severe
Mild to moderate
Moderate to severe
Mild to moderate
Mild to severe
Response to prednisone
Often
None
Often
If needed
Not needed
Response to splenectomy
Often
Rare
None
Not needed
Not needed
IgA, IgG, and IgM, immunoglobulins A, G, and M; +, strength of agglutination response.
From Rose MG, Berliner N. Disorders of red blood cells. In: Andreoli TE, Carpenter CJ, Bennett JC, et al., eds. Cecil Essentials of Medicine. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997:389.
TABLE 49.19  Anemia in the Neonate
Blood Loss (Common)
Placenta previa
Abruptio placentae
Twin-­twin transfusion
Fetal–maternal hemorrhage (acute vs chronic)
Neonatal hemorrhage
Decreased RBC Production (Unusual)
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
Autosomal recessive hereditary spherocytosis
Congenital leukemia
Transient myeloproliferative syndrome in Down syndrome
Osteopetrosis
Hemolysis
Intrinsic RBC defect (uncommon)
Membrane (hereditary spherocytosis or elliptocytosis)
Enzyme (G6PD, PK)
Hemoglobin (α or γ chain abnormality)
Extrinsic RBC defect
Immune (ABO, Rh, minor group incompatibilities) (common)
Infection (intrauterine infection, bacterial, viral, protozoal)
DIC
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Galactosemia
TTP (ADAMTS13)
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase; PK, pyruvate kinase; RBC, red blood cell; TTP, throm­
botic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
923
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
represents a physiologic response to the oxygen-­rich extrauterine 
environment, which decreases erythropoietin production.
Neonatal Anemia Caused by Blood Loss
Anemia caused by blood loss is often obvious. It occurs in placenta pre­
via, abruptio placentae, or a large cephalohematoma. Other etiologies 
of hemorrhage may be occult and include intracranial and intrahepatic 
hematomas. Internal hemorrhage is much more likely to occur in diffi­
cult deliveries. If twin-­twin transfusion occurs, one infant will develop 
anemia while the other develops polycythemia. Fetal–maternal hem­
orrhage is sufficiently severe to cause anemia in only a small percent­
age of neonates. The Kleihauer-­Betke test may detect the presence of 
fetal RBCs in the maternal circulation but may yield false-­negative 
results, particularly in mothers with type O blood who have antibod­
ies against infant A, B, or AB blood cells. Fetal–maternal hemorrhage 
must always be suspected when otherwise unexplained anemia occurs 
in a newborn.
The time course and extent of blood loss determine the clinical 
presentation. If blood loss is mild or chronic, infants may appear 
normal or have mild pallor and tachycardia. In the event of severe 
acute blood loss, the newborn may present with signs of acute illness 
including lethargy, tachycardia, hypotension, and respiratory distress. 
The hemoglobin value is a poor index of the severity of acute blood 
loss because equilibration of fluid compartments may take 24–36 
hours. Blood loss as a cause of anemia should always be suspected 
in cases of obstetric complications, multiple births, or difficult and 
traumatic deliveries. In cases of severe blood loss, emergency transfu­
sion therapy is appropriate. In the neonate who is hemodynamically 
stable but has experienced significant blood loss, a more conservative 
approach is recommended.
Neonatal Anemia Caused by Decreased Red Blood Cell 
Production
Anemia caused by decreased RBC production in the newborn is unusual. 
Infants with congenital hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan ane­
mia) are usually only mildly anemic during the newborn period. Con­
genital leukemia is a rare disorder characterized by infiltration of the 
bone marrow leading to anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukocytosis 
in association with hepatosplenomegaly and occasionally cutaneous 
leukemic infiltrates manifesting as blue papular lesions (“blueberry 
muffin” spots). Infants with Down syndrome may present with a clinical 
and hematologic picture identical to that of congenital leukemia, which 
is a transient myeloproliferative process that spontaneously remits over 
several months. Infantile osteopetrosis (marble bone disease), a disor­
der characterized by a limited ability to degrade bone, usually does not 
cause pancytopenia until a few months after birth.
TABLE 49.20  Genetic Disorders Associated with Anemia in the Neonate
Syndrome
Genetic Characteristics
Hematologic Phenotype
Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome
Autosomal recessive (AR); sporadic 
variants and autosomal dominant 
(AD) inheritance have been described
Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia after 5 mo of age
Fanconi anemia
AR, probably abnormalities in multiple 
genes (at least five genetic subtypes 
have been identified)
Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic, macrocytic anemia
DNA is hypersensitive to injury
Hereditary spherocytosis
AR (SPTA1 variant)
Present with fetal anemia and reticulocytopenia, often requiring intrauterine 
transfusion
Aase syndrome
AR, possible AD
Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia; macrocytic; improves with age
Pearson syndrome
Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities, X-­linked 
or AR
Hypoplastic sideroblastic anemia unresponsive to pyridoxine
Lethal osteopetrosis
AR, caused by defective resorption of 
immature bone
Hypoplastic anemia due to marrow encroachment
Congenital dyserythropoietic 
anemia (CDA)
AR
Type I: megaloblastoid erythroid and nuclear chromatin bridges between cells
Type II: hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity and positive acidified serum 
test results (HEMPAS)
Type III: erythroblastic multinuclearity and macrocytosis
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome
AD
Iron deficiency, anemia from chronic blood loss
Dyskeratosis congenita
X-­linked recessive, locus on Xq28; some 
cases with AD inheritance
Hypoplastic anemia; usually present between 5 and 15 yr of age
X-­linked α-­thalassemia/intellectual 
disability (ATR-­X and ATR-­16) 
syndromes
ATR-­X: X-­linked recessive, mapped to 
Xq13.3; ATR-­16: mapped to 16p13.3; 
deletions of α-­globin locus
ATR-­X: hypochromic, microcytic anemia, mild form of hemoglobin H disease; 
ATR-­16: more significant hemoglobin H disease and anemia are present
Thrombocytopenia with absent 
radius (TAR) syndrome
AR
Hemorrhagic anemia, possibly hypoplastic anemia as well
Osler hemorrhagic telangiectasia 
syndrome
AD, mapped to 9q33-­34
Hemorrhagic anemia
From Ohls RK. Evaluation and treatment of anemia in the neonate. In: Christensen RD, ed. Hematologic Problems of the Neonate. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2000:153.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
924
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Neonatal Anemia Caused by Increased Red Blood Cell 
Destruction
Anemia caused by increased RBC destruction (hemolytic anemia) 
places the neonate at risk for indirect hyperbilirubinemia because 
of the limited hepatic bilirubin-­conjugating ability during the first 
weeks of life. Even relatively small increases in the rate of RBC 
destruction can lead to marked increases in serum bilirubin level. 
All infants who have elevations of indirect bilirubin levels above 
the normal range during the first 3 days of life should be evaluated 
for possible hemolysis, with a CBC, reticulocyte count, peripheral 
blood smear, maternal and infant blood type assessments, and direct 
Coombs test.
Intrinsic disorders of the erythrocyte may manifest in the neonate. 
Infants with hereditary spherocytosis, pyropoikilocytosis, or ellipto­
cytosis may develop anemia and extreme hyperbilirubinemia that 
necessitate phototherapy and, rarely, exchange transfusion. A periph­
eral blood smear and family history may be helpful in identifying an 
intrinsic RBC membrane defect. A severe form of autosomal reces­
sive hereditary spherocytosis may present with fetal anemia requir­
ing intrauterine transfusion support. At the time of birth infants will 
have severe anemia with reticulocytopenia with or without indirect 
hyperbilirubinemia.
G6PD deficiency can occur in newborn males (rarely females) of 
African or Mediterranean descent. Because of the increased suscep­
tibility of neonatal RBCs to oxidant injury, anemia, reticulocytosis, 
and hyperbilirubinemia may occur without an obvious precipitating 
oxidant insult. Hemoglobinopathies rarely manifest during the neo­
natal period. β-­Globin chain defects such as sickle cell disease and 
thalassemia are not clinically apparent until about 4–6 months of age 
because of the predominance of fetal hemoglobin in the perinatal 
period.
Severe α-­thalassemia, including α-­thalassemia major or hemo­
globin Bart disease, can affect the fetus. Such infants develop 
severe in utero anemia with resultant hydrops fetalis because of 
the limited ability of hemoglobin Bart disease to release oxygen 
to tissues.
Isoimmune hemolytic anemia is the most common cause of 
hemolytic anemia in the newborn. It is caused by incompatibility 
between maternal and fetal blood groups, including Rh, ABO, or 
minor blood group antigens. In Rh incompatibility, the mother is 
Rh negative, and the infant is Rh positive (inherited from the father). 
If the mother has been exposed to Rh-­positive blood cells through 
prior pregnancy, miscarriage, therapeutic abortion, or mismatched 
blood transfusion, IgG antibodies may develop that traverse the 
placenta and cause immune destruction of fetal Rh-­positive cells. 
In such instances hemolysis occurs in utero and in the neonatal 
period. In severe circumstances the fetus may be extremely anemic, 
which results in heart failure, hydrops fetalis, and death. In less seri­
ous instances infants may be born quite anemic and develop brisk 
hyperbilirubinemia, which can lead to kernicterus. The severity of 
Rh immune hemolytic disease increases with successive pregnancies. 
This disorder is uncommon because of the routine practice of admin­
istering Rh immunoglobulin to Rh-­negative mothers who are 28–30 
weeks pregnant and within 72 hours of delivery or after spontaneous 
or therapeutic abortion. Prenatal management of the affected fetus 
may include ultrasonographic assessment of fetal well-­being (vascu­
lar resistance, hydrops) and in high-­risk situations serial fetal hemo­
globin levels obtained by ultrasonographically guided aspiration of 
umbilical cord blood (cordocentesis). When the fetus demonstrates 
progressive in utero severe anemia, intrauterine intravascular blood 
transfusion therapy has been shown to decrease the risk for fetal 
demise. Management of the neonate relates largely to the severity 
of the hemolysis. Hyperbilirubinemia must be treated aggressively 
with phototherapy and, if severe, exchange transfusion. RBC transfu­
sions are appropriate for symptomatic anemia. On occasion, anemia 
is detected several weeks after Rh hemolysis and may be associated 
with a profoundly depressed reticulocyte count. This late anemia is of 
uncertain origin, but inappropriately low erythropoietin levels have 
been noted. Symptomatic infants may require transfusion therapy. 
Affected infants have been successfully treated with human recom­
binant erythropoietin.
Immune incompatibility in the ABO system is common and usu­
ally occurs when mothers with type O blood have newborns whose 
blood type is A or B. The degree of hemolysis is usually much less 
severe than in Rh disease. Fetal hydrops is extremely rare. Most babies 
with ABO incompatibility manifest jaundice from indirect hyperbili­
rubinemia during the first 1–2 days after birth. Hemoglobin levels are 
often within the normal to mildly anemic range, but moderate anemia 
occasionally occurs. The reticulocyte count is usually mildly elevated, 
and the peripheral blood smear may show microspherocytes. Results 
of the Coombs test are usually weakly or moderately positive, but 
false-­negative results do occur. Treatment is generally directed toward 
hyperbilirubinemia and may require phototherapy. Intravenous immu­
noglobulin therapy has been helpful in some patients. Exchange trans­
fusion is rarely necessary. Anemia occasionally necessitates blood 
transfusion. Immune incompatibility may also occur on the basis of 
minor blood group antigens such as the Duffy or Kell antigen systems. 
Clinical and laboratory findings are similar to those in ABO hemo­
lytic disease except that the direct Coombs test result is usually strongly 
positive.
Other causes of hemolytic anemia in the newborn include bacte­
rial sepsis and intrauterine infection (cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, 
herpes, rubella, and syphilis). Intrauterine infectious syndromes can 
cause mild to moderate hemolytic anemia of several months’ duration. 
Such infants may demonstrate physical stigmata including small size 
for gestational age, microcephaly, chorioretinitis, hepatosplenomegaly, 
intracranial calcifications, and “celery stalking” of the long bones on 
radiographic study.
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia can occur in the newborn as 
a result of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). In the neo­
nate, DIC is usually caused by serious infection, hypoxemia resulting 
from respiratory distress syndrome in the preterm infant, or isch­
emic tissue injury related to birth asphyxia. Newborns with hemolysis 
resulting from infection or DIC are often extremely ill and require RBC 
transfusion support.
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and consumptive thrombocy­
topenia can occur in Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome, which is associated 
with cavernous hemangiomas and localized intravascular coagulation. 
Some infants have obvious expansive cutaneous and subcutaneous 
lesions, but occult visceral hemangiomas, particularly in the liver, can 
occur. The peripheral blood smear demonstrates evidence of RBC 
fragments and burr cells. Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome may necessitate 
treatment with plasma and platelet transfusions if consumptive coag­
ulopathy is severe. Corticosteroids and interferon therapy have been 
helpful in some affected infants.
The diagnostic approach to anemia in the neonate requires a care­
ful assessment of maternal, prenatal, and perinatal history as well 
as the clinical status of the neonate (Fig. 49.10). CBC, reticulocyte 
count, peripheral blood smear, maternal and infant blood types, and 
direct Coombs tests are virtually always necessary laboratory studies. 
Other studies must be dictated by the clinical and initial laboratory 
findings.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
925
CHAPTER 49  Pallor and Anemia
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Anemia is a relatively common finding in children. A complete and 
thorough evaluation of clinical findings by a detailed history and phys­
ical examination is the most important element in the establishment of 
a diagnosis and in defining appropriate therapy.
Anemia may be a primary event reflecting intrinsic hematologic 
disease or it may be a manifestation of a wide variety of systemic 
disorders involving any organ system. Anemia must always be fully 
evaluated in view of the potential diagnostic and therapeutic implica­
tions. Patients who appear acutely ill should have a more thorough and 
prompt evaluation because acute blood loss must be treated quickly. If 
acute blood loss is not suspected, acute hemolysis or splenic sequestra­
tion of RBCs must be considered.
Anemia is often a sign of underlying acute or chronic disease. In such 
cases, anemia is not usually an isolated finding. Therefore, symptoms 
such as shortness of breath, extreme pallor, weight loss, fevers, lethargy, 
and fatigue should prompt a thorough evaluation of the patient.
On physical examination, the findings of abnormal vital signs, 
failure to thrive, bleeding or bruising, adenopathy, or organomegaly 
should lead the examiner to suspect that a potentially serious under­
lying disorder is present (Table 49.21). When a CBC is obtained, a low 
hemoglobin value accompanied by any abnormality of MCV, WBC, or 
platelet count should be taken seriously and should be more thoroughly 
investigated. The diagnostic evaluation should be directed accordingly 
based on these abnormal findings.
Normal or elevated reticulocyte count (>5-10%)
Coombs' positive
Coombs' negative
Isoimmunization:
Rh (D antigen)
ABO, C, c, E, G
Duffy, Kell
Other minor group
Drug-induced (PCN)
Blood smear
Specific RBC
dysmorphology
Elliptocytes
Poikilocytes
Stomatocytes
Fragmentation
Basophilic stippling
Spherocytes
Obtain incubated
osmotic fragility test
Obtain 
hemoglobin
electrophoresis,
KB stain
Obtain specific enzyme assay
Infections
Bacterial infections
Parvovirus B19
TORCH infections
Syphylis
Malaria
HIV
Blood cultures,
obtain maternal
serum for IgG,
HIV, RPR/FTA
RBC morphology
Congenital Enzymatic Defects
G6PD
Pyruvate kinase
Hexokinase
Glucose phosphate isomerase
Others
Other
Galactosemia
Alpha or gamma chain hemoglobinopathies
Acidosis
Osteopetrosis
Congenital leukemia
Drugs (valproic acid, oxidizing agents)
Normal RBC morphology
Jaundice
No jaundice
Consider acute blood loss due
to obstetric complications,
external or internal hemorrhage,
DIC/sepsis, bleeding dyscrasias
Chronic fetomaternal bleed
Chronic twin-to-twin transfusion
ATR-X and ATR-16
Alpha-thalassemia trait
Gamma-thalassemia
Low reticulocyte count (0-2%)
Diamond-Blackfan
Aase syndrome
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias
Refractory sideroblastic anemia
Transcobalamin II deficiency
Orotic aciduria
Hypochromic
Microcytic RBCs
Obtain bone marrow
Fig. 49.10  Differential diagnosis of neonatal anemia. The physician first seeks information from the family, 
maternal, and labor and delivery histories and then obtains initial laboratory tests: hemoglobin, reticulocyte 
count, blood type, direct Coombs test, peripheral smear, red blood cell (RBC) indices, and bilirubin concen­
tration. Results are used to navigate the diagnostic flow chart. ATR-­16, α-­thalassemia retardation syndrome, 
chromosome 16–linked; ATR-­X, α-­thalassemia retardation syndrome, X-­linked; DIC, disseminated intravas­
cular coagulation; FTA, fluorescent treponemal antibody test; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; 
KB, Kleihauer-­Betke; PCN, penicillin; RPR, rapid plasma reagin test; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other infections, 
rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex. (From Ohls RK. Evaluation and treatment of anemia in the 
neonate. In: Christensen RD, ed. Hematologic Problems of the Neonate. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:162.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
926
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
TABLE 49.21  Red Flags
Anemia Accompanied by:
Abnormal vital signs (tachycardia, hypotension, hypertension)
Congenital anomalies
Neutropenia and/or thrombocytopenia
High MCV with normal RDW
Blasts on the peripheral smear
Lymphadenopathy (generalized)
Bruising or bleeding
Weight loss, failure to thrive
Shortness of breath, fatigue
Fever
Hypoxia
Hepatosplenomegaly
Edema
Oliguria-­anuria
Bloody diarrhea
Red urine (hemoglobinuria)
Family history of anemia, splenectomy, cholecystectomy, transfusions
MCV, mean corpuscular volume; RDW, red blood cell distribution width.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
926.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Work-­up of Anemia
Bessman JD, Jilmer PR, Gardner FH. Classification of red cell disorders by 
MCV and RDW. Am J Clin Pathol. 1983;80:322.
Hermiston ML, Mentzer WC. A practical approach to the evaluation of the 
anemic child. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2002;49:877.
Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Shattil SJ, et al. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. 
3rd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2000.
Kline NE. A practical approach to the child with anemia. J Pediatr Health Care. 
1996;10:99.
Kohli-­Kumar M. Screening for anemia in children: AAP recommendations—a 
critique. Pediatrics. 2001;108:E56.
Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of 
Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003.
Novak RW. Red blood cell distribution within pediatric microcytic anemias. 
Pediatrics. 1987;80:251.
Segel GB, Hirsh MG, Feig SA. Managing anemia in a pediatric office practice: 
part 1. Pediatr Rev. 2002;23:75.
Segel GB, Hirsh MG, Feig SA. Managing anemia in a pediatric office practice: 
part 2. Pediatr Rev. 2002;23:111.
Walters MC, Abelson HT. Interpretation of the complete blood count. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 1996;43:599.
Anemia with Acute and Chronic Disease
Abshire TC. The anemia of inflammation: a common cause of childhood 
anemia. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1996;43:623.
Cowin HL, Krantz SB. Anemia of the critically ill: “acute” anemia of chronic 
disease. Crit Care Med. 2000;28:3098.
Ganz T. Hepcidic, a key regulator of iron metabolism and mediator of anemia 
of inflammation. Blood. 2003;102:783–788.
Means Jr RT. Advances in the anemia of chronic disease. Int J Hematol. 
1999;70:7.
Nemeth E, Ganz T. Anemia of inflammation. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 
2014;28(4):671–681.
Hemolytic Anemia
Beutler E. Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. N Engl J Med. 
1991;324:169.
Davidson RN, Wall RA. Prevention and management of infections in patients 
without a spleen. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2001;7:657.
Grace RF, Mark Layton D, Barcellini W. How we manage patients with 
pyruvate kinase deficiency. Br J Haematol. 2019;184(5):721–734.
Lynch AM, Kapila R. Overwhelming postsplenectomy infection. Infect Dis Clin 
North Am. 1996;10:693.
Prchal JT, Gregg XT. Red cell enzymes. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ 
Program. 2005:19–23.
Sackey K. Hemolytic anemia: part 1. Pediatr Rev. 1999;20:152.
Sackey K. Hemolytic anemia: part 2. Pediatr Rev. 1999;20:204.
Trivedi DH, Bussel JB. Immunohematologic disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2003;111:S669–S676.
Hypoplastic Anemia
Alter BP. Bone marrow failure syndromes in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2002;49:973.
Cherrick I, Karayalcin G, Lanzkowsky P. Transient erythroblastopenia of 
childhood. Prospective study of fifty patients. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
1994;16:320.
DaCosta L, Thiebant-­Noel W, Fixler J, et al. Diamond-­Blackfan anemia. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 2001;13:10.
Farhi DC, Luebbers EL, Rosenthal NS. Bone marrow biopsy findings 
in childhood anemia: prevalence of transient erythroblastopenia of 
childhood. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1998;122:638.
Krijanovski OI, Sieff CA. Diamond-­Blackfan anemia. Hematol Oncol Clin 
North Am. 1997;11:1061.
van den Akker M, Dror Y, Odame I. Transient erythroblastopenia of 
childhood is an underdiagnosed and self-­limiting disease. Acta Paediatr. 
2014;103:e288–e294.
Iron Deficiency
Abelson HT. Complexities in recognizing and treating iron deficiency anemia. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2001;155:332.
Bogen DL, Duggan AK, Dover GJ, et al. Screening for iron deficiency anemia 
by dietary history in a high-­risk population. Pediatrics. 2000;105:1254.
De Falco L, Sanchez M, Beaumont C. Iron refractory iron deficiency anemia. 
Haematologica. 2013;98(6):845–853.
Hershko C, Camaschella C. How I treat unexplained refractory iron deficiency 
anemia. Blood. 2014;123(2):326–333.
Kwiatkowski JL, West TB, Heidary N, et al. Severe iron deficiency anemia in 
young children. J Pediatr. 1999;135:514.
Lozoff B, Wolf AW, Jimenez E. Iron-­deficiency anemia and infant 
development: effects of extended oral iron therapy. J Pediatr. 1996;129:382.
Nuesslein TG, Teig N, Rieger CH. Pulmonary haemosiderosis in infants and 
children. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2006;7:45–48.
Powers JM, Buchanan GR. Disorders of iron metabolism: new diagnostic and 
treatment approaches to iron deficiency. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 
2019;33(3):393–408.
Powers JM, Buchanan GR, Adix L, et al. Effect of low dose ferrous sulfate 
versus iron polysaccharide complex on hemoglobin concentration in 
young children with nutritional iron deficiency anemia: a randomized 
clinical trial. J Am Med Assoc. 2017;317(22):2297–2304.
Walters T, Pino P, Pizarro F, et al. Prevention of iron deficiency anemia: 
comparison of high and low iron formulas in healthy infants after six 
months of life. J Pediatr. 1998;132:635.
Wang W, Bourgeois T, Klima J, et al. Iron deficiency and fatigue in adolescent 
females with heavy menstrual bleeding. Haemophilia. 2013;19:225–230.
Wharton BA. Iron deficiency in children: detection and prevention. Br J 
Haematol. 1999;106:270.
Macrocytic Anemia
Dobrozsi S, Flood VH, Panepinto J, et al. Vitamin B12 deficiency: the great 
masquerader. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;61:753–755.
Fixler J, Styles L. Sickle cell disease. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2002;49:1193.
Kapadia CR. Vitamin B12 in health and disease: part I–inherited disorders of 
function, absorption, and transport. Gastroenterol. 1995;3(4):329–344.
Hemoglobinopathies
Cancio MI, Helton KJ, Schreiber JE, et al. Silent cerebral infarcts in very young 
children with sickle cell anaemia are associated with a higher risk of stroke. 
Br J Haematol. 2015;171(1):120–129.
DeBaun MR, Gordon M, McKinstry RC, et al. Controlled trial of transfusions 
for silent cerebral infarcts in sickle cell anemia. N Engl J Med. 2014;37:
699–710.
Kassim AA, Galadanci NA, Pruthi S, et al. How I treat and manage strokes in 
sickle cell disease. Blood. 2015;125:3401–3410.
Khandros E, Kwiatkowski JL. Beta thalassemia: monitoring and new treatment 
approaches. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2019;33(3):339–353.
Kinney TR, Sleeper LA, Wang WC, et al. Silent cerebral infarcts in sickle cell 
anemia: a risk factor analysis. The Co-­operative study of sickle cell disease. 
Pediatrics. 1999;103:640.
Quinn CT, Buchanan GR. The acute chest syndrome of sickle cell disease. J 
Pediatr. 1999;135:416.
Rucknagel DL. Progress and prospects for the acute chest syndrome of sickle 
cell anemia. J Pediatr. 2001;138:160.
Schatz J, Brown RT, Pascual JM, et al. Poor school and cognitive functioning 
with silent cerebral infarcts and sickle cell disease. Neurology. 2001;56:1109.
Section on Hematology/Oncology Committee on Genetics, American 
Academy of Pediatrics. Health supervision for children with sickle cell 
disease. Pediatrics. 2002;109:526.
Vichinsky EP, Neumayr LD, Earles AN, et al. Causes and outcomes of 
the acute chest syndrome in sickle cell disease. National Acute Chest 
Syndrome Study Group. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1855.
Walters MC, Storb R, Patience M, et al. Impact of bone marrow transplantation 
for symptomatic sickle cell disease: an interim report. Multicenter 
investigation of bone marrow transplantation for sickle cell disease. Blood. 
2000;95:1998.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
926.e2
Wang W, Enos L, Gallagher D, et al. Neuropsychologic performance in school-­
aged children with sickle cell disease: a report from the cooperative study 
of sickle cell disease. J Pediatr. 2001;139:391.
Wethers DL. Sickle cell disease in childhood: part II. Diagnosis and treatment 
of major complications and recent advances in treatment. Am Fam 
Physician. 2000;62:1309.
Woodard P, Lubin B, Walters CM. New approaches to hematopoietic cell 
transplantation for hematological diseases in children. Pediatr Clin North 
Am. 2002;4:989.
Yaster M, Kost-­Byerly S, Maxwell LG. The management of pain in sickle cell 
disease. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:699.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
