965
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Fever is a common symptom associated with a range of infectious and 
noninfectious etiologies. Two-­thirds of all children visit a physician for 
fever before they reach the age of 2 years. The appropriate evaluation 
for fever depends on age, duration of illness, comorbidities, and asso­
ciated signs and symptoms. The etiology of fever is often revealed with 
careful history and physical examination, though the precise micro­
biologic or genetic etiology for fever may need to be elucidated with 
further diagnostic testing in appropriate situations.
DEFINITIONS
 • Fever without source (FWS): A child with fever of recent onset 
with no obvious historical or physical explanation for the fever is 
said to have FWS. Most patients with FWS, regardless of age, have a 
self-­limited viral illness. Bacterial pathogens account for a small but 
clinically significant number of cases. The challenge is to identify 
which children have fever caused by bacteria or other pathogens 
that would require treatment. Evaluation decisions must balance 
the risk of morbidity and mortality associated with delayed treat­
ment with the risks of testing or treatment when neither is needed. 
The risk of bacterial infection decreases with increasing age and 
is highest for infants younger than 3 months of age, compared to 
infants and toddlers 3–36 months of age, and even lower for chil­
dren over the age of 36 months. High suspicion for serious infec­
tion should also be considered in immunocompromised patients or 
those with indwelling hardware such as central venous access lines 
or ventriculoperitoneal shunts.
 • Fever with localizing signs: Fever in children most commonly 
presents with signs or symptoms that indicate a likely diagnosis. 
Examples include fever accompanied with vomiting and diarrhea 
(gastroenteritis: see Chapter 14), sore throat (pharyngitis: see Chap­
ter 2), or dysuria and flank pain (pyelonephritis: see Chapter 21).
 • Fever of unknown origin (FUO): The term FUO broadly refers to 
prolonged fevers with no etiology found after an initial evaluation. 
Varying specific definitions are found in the literature. In adults, 
classic FUO is defined as an illness lasting more than 3 weeks with 
fever higher than 38.3°C (101°F) on several occasions and uncer­
tainty of diagnosis after a 1-­week study in the hospital. Shorter 
duration of fever (as little as 3 days) may prompt evaluation in cases 
of health care–associated fever or underlying immunodeficiency. 
In pediatrics, the defined duration of FUO is variable, from 8 days 
to 3 weeks (average, 2 weeks), and may depend on the age of the 
patient, with shorter periods of fever tolerated in young infants and 
more traditional adult standards tolerated in adolescent patients. 
A practical diagnosis of FUO in pediatrics is the presence of daily 
temperatures higher than 38°C (100.4°F) for at least 8–14 days and 
no diagnosis after an initial evaluation including history, physical 
examination, and basic laboratory and radiologic tests.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF FEVER
Temperature is controlled by the thermoregulatory center, located in 
the preoptic area of the anterior hypothalamus. The thermoregulatory 
center receives input from peripheral receptors and the temperature 
of the blood bathing the hypothalamus and acts on autonomic, endo­
crine, and behavioral mechanisms to maintain the body temperature at 
a particular set point. The hypothalamic set point normally maintains 
body temperature around 37°C, but there can be significant variation 
among individuals. Normal temperatures range from 36°C to 37.8°C, 
depending on the time of day, with the peak in the afternoon (5–7 p.m.) 
and the trough in the early morning (2–6 a.m.). Although the circadian 
rhythm is not well established in infancy, it becomes more reliable by 
the second year of life.
The febrile response not only produces an elevation in body tem­
perature but also causes physiologic changes that enhance the indi­
vidual’s ability to eliminate infection, including the production of 
acute-­phase reactants and alterations in metabolism and endocrine 
function. Acute-­phase reactants—proteins that are produced in 
response to infection or injury—include ceruloplasmin, CRP, hapto­
globin, amyloid A, complement, ferritin, and fibrinogen. Hormones 
and cytokines, some of which are endogenous pyrogens, regulate the 
production of acute-­phase proteins. Exogenous pyrogens, such as bac­
teria or endotoxins, generate the production of endogenous pyrogens, 
which play a vital role in prostaglandin-­related set point elevation and 
regulation of acute-­phase responses.
Fever results when the thermoregulatory set point is elevated above 
the normal set point; the hypothalamus then generates physiologic 
changes involving endocrine, metabolic, autonomic, and behavioral 
processes. Diversion of blood from peripheral vessels to central ves­
sels causes coolness of the extremities but helps increase core tempera­
ture. Shivering increases metabolic activity and heat production. The 
affected patient may feel cold and seek a warmer environment or add 
clothing to feel warmer and prevent heat loss. Once these processes have 
resulted in increasing the core temperature to match the elevated set 
point, the thermoregulatory center works to maintain the temperature 
at that point, as it does during normothermia. The thermoregulatory 
Fever
Anna R. Huppler
52
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
966
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
point returns to normal once the infection is resolved. The hypothala­
mus then produces physiologic changes to decrease the core tempera­
ture; these changes include sweating, dilatation of cutaneous blood 
vessels, and the sensation of feeling hot, which may lead to behaviors 
such as removing clothing or seeking a cooler environment.
Fever has both positive and negative effects. High body tempera­
tures may impair the reproduction and survival of some invading 
microorganisms by decreasing required nutrients, such as free iron, 
or by optimizing immunologic responses, such as phagocytosis. How­
ever, at extremely high temperatures, immunologic responses may be 
impaired. Fever increases the basal metabolic rate by 10–12% for each 
degree Celsius elevation in temperature. This change in metabolic rate 
increases oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, and fluid 
and caloric needs. Fluid requirements increase 100 mL/m2/day for 
each 1°C rise in temperature above 37.8°C.
Elevated body temperature occurring in the absence of infectious 
or inflammatory stimuli is termed hyperthermia. Hyperthermia can 
result from excessive heat production, inadequate heat dissipation, 
or hypothalamic dysfunction (Table 52.1). Heat stroke is a form of 
heat illness in which excessive heat production and inadequate heat 
dissipation can result in extreme elevations in temperature despite a 
normal hypothalamic set point. Prompt restoration of normal body 
temperature is mandatory to prevent multiorgan dysfunction and 
death.
FEVER WITHOUT SOURCE
The evaluation of FWS aims to identify the etiology of the fever and 
determine the severity of illness. All patients should undergo a thor­
ough history and physical examination. The scope of laboratory and 
radiographic evaluation depend on the patient age and severity of ill­
ness. FWS of long duration may meet criteria for FUO.
History
A detailed history may reveal a potential source for infection. A com­
plete history addresses several important issues: (1) duration and 
pattern of fever; (2) height of fever; (3) mode of temperature mea­
surement; (4) administration and response to medications, including 
antipyretics, antibiotics, or home remedies; (5) associated symptoms; 
(6) environmental exposures; (7) ill contacts; (8) immunization his­
tory including recent administrations, and (9) recent travel. In addi­
tion, inquiry into the child’s past medical history may reveal important 
historical information such as recurrent febrile illnesses, primary or 
acquired immunodeficiency, or underlying diseases that predispose to 
infection or fevers. A personal history of or exposure to COVID-­19 
suggests the possibility of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in chil­
dren (MIS-­C).
Temperature Measurement
Rectal temperature measurement is the gold standard for children 
3 years of age or younger. The most widely accepted definition of 
fever is rectal temperature of 38°C (100.4°F) or higher. It is import­
ant to consider that infants, especially those younger than 2 months 
of age, may have a blunted febrile response or develop hypothermia 
with infection. Hence, lack of fever should not be used as a criterion 
for ruling out infection in infants. Rectal temperature measurement 
should be avoided in neutropenic immunocompromised patients, in 
whom rectal manipulation may result in translocation of bacteria to 
the bloodstream.
Oral temperature measurement is reliable for cooperative patients 
who are older than 4–5 years of age. Axillary temperature measure 
is commonly performed but is less precise than rectal temperatures. 
There is a general correlation between axillary and rectal temperature 
measurements; the axillary temperature is usually 0.5–0.85°C lower. 
Tympanic membrane thermometers are often inaccurate in children. 
Temporal artery temperature measurement correlates well with rectal 
temperature in some studies, but it has been shown to be inferior when 
patients are febrile. It can be considered in settings when children are 
not likely to be febrile and are over 3 months of age. When detection 
of fever is critical for diagnosis and management, rectal temperatures 
should be used in the child 3 years of age and younger.
Physical Examination
The physical examination is vitally important to classify the febrile child 
as ill-­ or well-­appearing. This classification informs the requirement for 
and urgency of laboratory and radiographic evaluation, as well as the 
subsequent management. Ill-­appearing children are typically lethargic 
or irritable. They may show signs of shock, including weak peripheral 
pulses, tachycardia, poor perfusion, respiratory distress, mottling, cya­
nosis, or decreased mental status (Table 52.2). Additional worrisome 
signs include petechiae or purpura and signs of meningitis. After thor­
ough clinical and laboratory evaluation, ill-­appearing children should 
TABLE 52.1  Causes of Hyperthermia
Excessive Heat Production
Exertion
Heat stroke (exertion)
Malignant hyperthermia (anesthesia induced)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Catatonia
Tetanus
Status epilepticus
Delirium
Endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma)
Drugs (cocaine, amphetamines, ephedrine, phencyclidine, tricyclic 
antidepressants, lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD], lithium, thyroid hormone, 
salicylates)
Diminished Heat Dissipation
Heat stroke
Occlusive dressings
Dehydration
Extensive burns (including severe sunburn)
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
Anticholinergic-­like drugs (atropine, antihistamines, phenothiazines, tricyclic 
antidepressants)
Autonomic neuropathy
Spinal cord level paralysis (spinal crisis)
Possible overbundling (especially in a warm environment)
Overheating in automobile exposed to sun or heat
Therapeutic hyperthermia
Hypothalamic Dysfunction*
Stroke
Encephalitis
Granulomatous processes (sarcoid, tuberculosis, eosinophilic)
Trauma
Central: idiopathic
Phenothiazines
Hemorrhage
*Usually associated with hypothermia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
967
CHAPTER 52  Fever
be admitted to the hospital and likely require empiric antibiotic treat­
ment while microbiologic and other diagnostic assays are pending.
Observational Scales
It is challenging to determine the subsequent evaluation and manage­
ment of infants and children with FWS who do not appear ill. The phy­
sician’s ability to make a hypothesis about the child’s degree of illness, 
on the basis of observation, may simultaneously allow for identifica­
tion of serious infection as well as eliminate administration of unnec­
essary testing or treatment. An objective scoring measure may be used 
to assess serious illness in young febrile children. The Acute Illness 
Observation Scale (AIOS) (Table 52.3), also known as the Yale Obser­
vation Score, is a 6-­item predictive model graded on a scale of 1–5. Use 
of the AIOS in conjunction with the history and physical examination 
has a higher sensitivity for identifying serious illness than history and 
physical examination alone. While helpful in determining the severity 
of illness, the AIOS cannot be used to confirm or exclude serious bac­
terial infection.
Differential Diagnosis
Most children who present with FWS are subsequently determined 
to have a self-­limited benign viral infection. In a study of children 
with FWS aged 2–36 months, 76% had one or more known patho­
genic viruses found, most commonly adenovirus, human herpesvirus 
6 (HHV-­6: roseola), enterovirus, or parechovirus. Other identifiable 
viruses include respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza viruses, 
influenza viruses, varicella (chickenpox), human metapneumovi­
rus, and parvovirus (fifth disease/erythema infectiosum). Measles, 
mumps, and rubella are uncommon in countries with sufficiently 
high rates of immunization but have been reported in epidem­
ics following imported cases or in underimmunized communities. 
Although rapid testing for viral pathogens is often readily available, 
a detailed and costly investigation to identify a viral pathogen is not 
necessary unless the confirmation of a viral infection will change the 
acute diagnostic plan, there is potential for antiviral therapy (e.g., 
herpes simplex virus [HSV], influenza), fever is prolonged (FUO), 
or end-­organ involvement is identified (e.g., hepatitis, myocarditis, 
encephalitis, or meningitis).
Although less common than viral infections, bacterial infections 
are notable causes of FWS, especially in younger children. Bacterial 
infections most likely to manifest in the absence of localizing symp­
toms include urinary tract infections, bacteremia, and meningitis. 
Bacterial superinfection concurrent with or after viral infection may 
also occur. Well-­documented examples include croup due to parain­
fluenza virus predisposing to bacterial tracheitis, influenza accompa­
nied by bacterial pneumonia, and varicella complicated by invasive 
group A streptococcal (GAS) infection. In many cases, there is a clear 
biphasic pattern to the symptoms with improvement in the initial 
viral symptoms followed by recurrent fever or worsening symptoms. 
These bacterial superinfections are unusual causes of FWS since 
localizing signs and symptoms in the respiratory tract or skin are 
usually present.
Noninfectious conditions manifesting as FWS are rare. Histori­
cal clues (recurrences, chronicity) or systemic signs usually indicate 
malignancy or rheumatic disorders. Similarly, history should suggest 
conditions associated with hyperthermia, such as heat-­related illness 
or drug ingestion. Recent receipt of immunizations may cause fever 
at a characteristic interval. The 1–2-­week delay between measles, 
mumps, and rubella (MMR) or varicella vaccine and fever onset may 
result in decreased recognition of this fever source. Many noninfec­
tious inflammatory conditions are elusive to diagnosis in the early days 
of fever. However, some inflammatory conditions in children, such as 
TABLE 52.2  International Consensus 
Definitions for Pediatric Sepsis
Infection
Suspected or proven infection or a clinical syndrome 
associated with high probability of infection
SIRS
Two of four criteria, one of which must be abnormal 
temperature or abnormal leukocyte count:
	1.	Core temperature >38.5°C (101.3°F) or <36°C (96.8°F) 
(rectal, bladder, oral, or central catheter)
	2.	Tachycardia:
Mean heart rate >2 SD above normal for age in absence 
of external stimuli, chronic drugs, or painful stimuli
or
Unexplained persistent elevation over 0.5–4 hr
or
In children <1 yr old, persistent bradycardia over 0.5 hr 
(mean heart rate <10th percentile for age in absence 
of vagal stimuli, β-­blocker drugs, or congenital heart 
disease)
	3.	Respiratory rate >2 SD above normal for age or 
acute need for mechanical ventilation not related to 
neuromuscular disease or general anesthesia
	4.	Leukocyte count elevated or depressed for age (not 
secondary to chemotherapy) or >10% immature 
neutrophils
Sepsis
SIRS plus a suspected or proven infection
Severe sepsis
Sepsis plus one of the following:
	1.	Cardiovascular organ dysfunction, defined as:
Despite >40 mL/kg of isotonic intravenous fluid in 1 hr:
 • Hypotension <5th percentile for age or systolic blood 
pressure <2 SD below normal for age 
or
 • Need for vasoactive drug to maintain blood pressure
or
 • Two of the following:
 
• Unexplained metabolic acidosis: base deficit >5 
mEq/L
 
• Increased arterial lactate: >2 times upper limit of 
normal
 
• Oliguria: urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr
 
• Prolonged capillary refill: >5 sec
 
• Core-­to-­peripheral temperature gap >3°C (5.4°F)
	2.	ARDS as defined by the presence of a Pao2/Fio2 ratio 
≤300 mm Hg, bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph, 
and no evidence of left heart failure
or
Sepsis plus two or more organ dysfunctions (respiratory, 
renal, neurologic, hematologic, or hepatic)
Septic shock
Sepsis plus cardiovascular organ dysfunction as defined 
above
MODS
Presence of altered organ function such that 
homeostasis cannot be maintained without medical 
intervention
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; Fio2, fraction of inspired 
oxygen; MODS, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome; Pao2, partial 
pressure arterial oxygen; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syn­
drome.
From Turner DA, Cheifetz IM. Shock. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme 
JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:578, Table 88.7.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
968
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Kawasaki disease and MIS-­C, require early intervention to prevent 
severe sequelae or severe illness.
Urinary Tract Infections
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are the most common serious bacte­
rial infection in children younger than 36 months of age who present 
with FWS. UTIs are often occult in children younger than 24 months 
because the symptoms, except for fever, are nonspecific or nonexistent. 
UTI occurs in 7% of febrile children younger than 2 years. The prev­
alence of UTI varies by height of the fever, duration of the fever, age, 
gender, race, and circumcision status. Children with FWS >39°C are 
at a higher risk of UTIs. Males with fever for more than 2 days and 
females with fever for more than 1 day are more likely to have a UTI. 
Higher rates of UTIs are found in females, especially those younger 
than 12 months of age. For febrile males younger than 3 months of 
age, 20.1% of those who are uncircumcised have a UTI; for circum­
cised males, the rate is 2.4%. UTI rates are higher among children with 
abnormal genitourinary tract anatomy or neurogenic bladder.
Urine specimens should be obtained from the following children 
with FWS: those with a history of UTI, those with a history of uri­
nary tract anomalies or vesicoureteral reflux, females younger than 
12–24 months, uncircumcised males younger than 12 months, and 
circumcised males younger than 6 months. Prompt evaluation of 
the urine in all febrile infants younger than 2 months is mandatory. 
There is an age-­associated risk of bacteremia with UTIs, particularly 
in infants. The incidence of bacteremia in patients with UTI who are 
younger than 2 months ranges from 4% to 15% depending on the set­
ting. Opinions regarding when to obtain blood cultures in infants with 
UTI differ, but a reasonable approach would be to obtain blood cul­
tures in children younger than 2–6 months with suspected UTI and in 
older infants with UTI if they are ill-­appearing.
Bacteremia
Occult bacteremia is defined by the presence of a positive blood cul­
ture for pathogenic bacteria in a febrile patient who does not appear 
extremely ill and who has no focus of infection, excluding otitis media. 
Prior to the introduction of conjugate pneumococcal vaccines, Strepto­
coccus pneumoniae was a common cause of occult bacteremia in young 
children. With the introduction of the 7-­valent conjugate pneumococ­
cal vaccine in 2000, rates of pneumococcal bacteremia decreased from 
74.5 to 10 cases per 100,000 per year. The expansion to 13-­valent conju­
gate pneumococcal vaccine (PCV-­13) in 2010 correlated with a further 
threefold decline in pneumococcal bacteremia. In immunized febrile 
children 3–36 months of age, the likelihood of detecting a contaminant 
TABLE 52.3  Acute Illness Observation Scale
1
3
5
Observation Item
Normal
Moderate Impairment
Severe Impairment
Quality of cry
Strong with normal tone 
or 
Content and not crying
Whimpering 
or 
Sobbing
Weak 
or 
Moaning
or 
High-­pitched
Reaction to parent stimulation
Cries briefly, then stops 
or 
Content and not crying
Cries off and on
Continual cry 
or 
Hardly responds
State variation
If awake → stays awake 
or 
If asleep and stimulated 
→ wakes up quickly
Eyes close briefly → 
awakens 
or 
Awakes with prolonged 
stimulation
Falls asleep 
or 
Will not rouse
Color
Pink
Pale extremities 
or 
Acrocyanosis
Pale 
or 
Cyanotic 
or 
Mottled 
or 
Ashen
Hydration
Skin normal, eyes normal 
and 
Mucous membranes moist
Skin, eyes normal 
and 
Mouth slightly dry
Skin doughy 
or 
Skin tented 
and 
Dry mucous membranes 
and/or
Sunken eyes
Response (talk, smile) to social 
overtures
Smiles
or 
Alert (≤2 mo)
Brief smile 
or 
Alert briefly (≤2 mo)
No smile; face anxious, dull, 
expressionless 
or 
No alertness (≤2 mo)
From McCarthy PL, Sharpe MR, Spiesel SZ, et al. Observation scales to identify serious illness in febrile children. Pediatrics. 1982;70:802.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
969
CHAPTER 52  Fever
on blood culture may be double the incidence of true occult bacteremia 
in the post–­PCV-­13 era. Risk factors for recurrent occult bacteremia 
include functional or anatomic asplenia (including sickle cell anemia) 
as well as defects in the innate immune system, including abnormali­
ties in the toll-­like receptor signaling pathway, which may also result in 
a blunted host immune response and decrease the likelihood of associ­
ated signs or symptoms when bacteremic.
Overall, most cases of bacteremia in children are not occult. Children 
with bacteremia are likely to either be ill-­appearing or have a focus of 
infection, such as a UTI. Escherichia coli is the most common cause of 
bacteremia in children aged younger than 12 months, all associated 
with UTI. Other less common causes of bacteremia in young children 
beyond the neonatal period are Neisseria meningitidis, nontyphoidal 
Salmonella, Staphylococcus aureus, and GAS. N. meningitidis bacte­
remia is frequently associated with serious sequelae, including shock 
and meningitis. Nontyphoidal Salmonella bacteremia is often accom­
panied or preceded by enteritis. In some instances, particularly in 
young infants, the diarrhea is mild or even absent. The prevalence of 
Salmonella bacteremia among patients with Salmonella enteritis has 
been reported to be between 2% and 45%; fever is not always present. 
Salmonella infection seldom causes serious complications in patients 
with normal host defenses and resolves spontaneously. Infants younger 
than 3 months, malnourished children, and immunocompromised 
individuals are at high risk for serious and disseminated Salmonella 
infection.
Meningitis
Bacterial and viral meningitis/meningoencephalitis are important 
causes of FWS in young infants. The most common etiologic agents 
in neonates are E. coli, group B Streptococcus (GBS), Listeria mono­
cytogenes, HSV, and enterovirus. Pneumococcus and meningococcus 
become more common after 1 month of age.
Role of Diagnostic Testing in Patients with 
Fever Without Source
Evaluation is usually divided into four different age ranges: younger 
than 1 month, 1–3 months, 3–36 months, and older than 36 months. 
Testing for each individual age group is based on risks for diseases and 
prevalence of pathogens.
Complete Blood Count and Other Markers 
of Inflammation
The white blood cell (WBC) count is the most commonly used test in 
young children with FWS. CBC is less useful as a marker for invasive 
disease caused by E. coli than by S. pneumoniae; thus, its utility has 
declined with the reduced incidence of invasive pneumococcal disease. 
Similarly, band counts are less informative except in the 29–60-­day-­old 
infant as part of identifying a low-­risk cohort. A WBC count of 5,000–
15,000 is generally considered normal for children over 1 month of age. 
A WBC count of <15,000/mm3 or even leukopenia may be found in 
children with N. meningitidis bacteremia. A minority of children with 
occult nontyphoidal Salmonella bacteremia have been found to have a 
WBC count exceeding 15,000/mm3. CRP and procalcitonin combined 
with a UA can be used to screen for bacterial infection. This combina­
tion of tests has been validated for children 7 days to 36 months of age.
Molecular Testing
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR, also known as nucleic acid amplifica­
tion tests or NAAT) is useful in identifying the cause of acute fever from 
common viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus, influenza viruses, 
parainfluenza viruses, enteroviruses, parechovirus, adenoviruses, coro­
naviruses including severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 
(SARS-­CoV-2), rhinoviruses, and HSV. Appropriate specimens include 
nasopharyngeal (respiratory viruses and enterovirus), stool (adenovi­
rus and enterovirus), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (enterovirus and HSV 
most commonly), skin (HSV), and blood (enterovirus, adenovirus, and 
HSV). Typically, PCR testing is reserved for patients with serious ill­
ness or pathogens that are amenable to treatment, such as HSV, or in 
circumstances when the identification of a specific viral etiology would 
allow for the discontinuation of empiric antibacterial therapy. PCR 
testing is also available for some bacterial pathogens from select body 
fluids (CSF, pleural fluid).
Additional methods are available in select laboratories to identify 
serious bacterial infections. Gene expression profiles of peripheral 
blood leukocytes demonstrate different biosignatures of RNA produc­
tion associated with bacterial or viral infections, though this method 
does not identify the specific pathogen. Rapid multiplex PCR combined 
with standard blood culture methods may identify a specific pathogen 
much sooner (∼20 hours) than standard blood culture techniques. Spe­
cific bacteria may be identified using 16S ribosomal RNA bacterial gene 
detection in tissue biopsies or blood. This method does not require bac­
terial growth but may lack sensitivity with low inoculum.
Blood Cultures
Blood cultures are the gold standard for identification of bacteremia. 
Blood culture methodology allows for continuous and automated 
detection of bacterial growth. Blood cultures are easy to perform and 
provide essential information in the diagnosis and management of 
patients with possible bacteremia. Pathogen growth is usually detected 
within 24–48 hours of collection, with positive identification of most 
organisms within 2–24 hours of growth. Rapid diagnostic techniques 
such as multiplex PCR on positive blood culture bottles and matrix-­
assisted laser desorption/ionization time-­of-­flight mass spectrometry 
(MALDI-­TOF MS) on growing bacteria have further shortened the 
interval to pathogen identification.
False-­negative blood culture results may be due to prior treatment 
with antibiotics, presence of intermittent bacteremia, or sampling error 
due to small specimen volume. Alternatively, too much blood inoc­
ulated into the blood culture bottle may yield a false-­negative result 
because of ongoing killing of bacteria by neutrophils. Reference ranges 
for the appropriate volumes of blood are available based on the patient 
size and type of blood culture bottle. False-­positive results are most 
commonly due to inadequate skin preparation, leading to contamina­
tion with skin flora.
Urinalysis and Urine Culture
Recommendations for the diagnosis of UTI include a UA that has 
pyuria (defined as >5 WBCs/high-­power field [hpf] on the micro­
scopic examination or a positive leukocyte esterase on dipstick) and a 
positive urine culture for a uropathogen in an appropriately collected 
specimen; 50,000 to 100,000 colonies of a single organism is consid­
ered positive (see Chapter 21). Children should have a catheterized 
urine specimen obtained, unless they are toilet-­trained and can supply 
a clean voided specimen. Suprapubic aspiration allows for noncontam­
inated urine collection but requires technical expertise, and parents 
often perceive it as unsuitably invasive; it may be the only alternative 
for males with severe phimosis. The use of plastic receptacles attached 
to the perineum should be discouraged because contamination from 
skin and fecal flora commonly occurs.
Lumbar Puncture
Lumbar puncture (LP) to obtain CSF is indicated if the patient is 
younger than 28 days or if a diagnosis of sepsis, meningitis, or enceph­
alitis is considered, regardless of the child’s age. Normal CSF findings, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
970
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
including chemistry, cell count with differential, Gram stain, PCR, and 
culture, help exclude the diagnosis of meningitis. Less than 1% of chil­
dren with normal preliminary CSF results have a positive culture; in 
most of these, the pathogen is N. meningitidis. Thus, even in the pres­
ence of normal preliminary CSF results, close follow-­up is essential.
Chest Radiographs
Chest radiographs are usually normal in children who have FWS. 
Respiratory signs or symptoms, such as tachypnea, retractions, crack­
les, wheezing, rhonchi, nasal flaring, grunting, cough, or hypoxia, may 
predict chest radiograph findings consistent with pneumonia. In prac­
tice, pneumonia can often be diagnosed solely based on the clinical 
findings of fever, tachypnea, and crackles; chest radiographs are not 
always necessary. However, chest radiographs may be useful in eval­
uating for the presence of pleural effusion or other complications of 
pneumonia, or in instances where lower-­lobe or lingular pneumonia 
produces vague referred abdominal pain that is more pronounced than 
respiratory signs or symptoms.
Stool Cultures
Most acute febrile diarrhea episodes in developed countries are caused 
by viral pathogens. Stool testing for bacterial pathogens by culture or 
enteric pathogen PCR is indicated if there are risk factors in the history, 
such as blood in the stool or certain exposures (petting zoos, ingestion 
of potentially contaminated food) (see Chapter 14).
Evaluation and Management
Children Younger Than 3 Months
Febrile infants younger than 3 months have a higher incidence of seri­
ous bacterial infections than older infants and therefore deserve special 
consideration. The relatively high incidence of bacterial disease prob­
ably results from a combination of factors unique to this age group: 
decreased opsonin activity, decreased macrophage function, decreased 
neutrophil function, poor immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody response 
to encapsulated bacteria, and susceptibility to bacterial pathogens such 
as GBS, gram-­negative enteric organisms such as E. coli, and L. mono­
cytogenes. The incidence of early-­onset GBS infections has decreased 
with routine screening and the intrapartum treatment of GBS-­positive 
pregnant women; the incidence of late-­onset GBS (>1 week) has not 
decreased. In contemporary studies, E. coli is the most common organ­
ism causing bacterial infections in neonates and young infants.
In very young infants, clinical evaluation alone is insufficiently 
sensitive to exclude bacterial infections such as UTI, bacteremia, or 
meningitis. In addition, abnormal initial laboratory results are often 
insufficiently specific to definitively diagnose these infections. Various 
investigators developed clinical prediction models to identify febrile 
infants at low risk for serious bacterial infection (Table 52.4). Appli­
cation of these criteria allowed for decreased laboratory testing and/
or hospitalization in select infants who were unlikely to have bacte­
rial meningitis, bacteremia, or UTI. In 2021, the American Academy 
of Pediatrics (AAP) with the assistance of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality published new guidelines for the evaluation and 
management of well-­appearing febrile infants 8 to 60 days old. Notable 
changes from those earlier clinical prediction models included changes 
in tests used to guide decision making, with increased emphasis on 
CRP and procalcitonin, and new age-­based risk stratification.
Management of well-­appearing febrile infants younger than 21 days 
includes evaluation of the blood, urine, and CSF for bacterial infec­
tion, as well as any other sites based on presenting findings (e.g., chest 
radiograph in neonates with respiratory distress or cough) and hospi­
talization for parenteral antimicrobial therapy pending culture results. 
The reasoning for this conservative approach lies in the difficulty in 
evaluating the behavioral state of neonates, the rapid clinical deteri­
oration of infants with bacterial infections, the immature neonatal 
immune system, and the possibility of life-­threatening viral infections 
caused by HSV and enteroviruses. Evaluation should include bacterial 
cultures of the CSF, blood, and urine; a CBC with differential; examina­
tion of the CSF for cell count and differential, protein, and glucose; and 
UA. Inflammatory markers such as procalcitonin and CRP may also be 
obtained. Testing for HSV (surface swabs, blood, and CSF PCR) and 
empiric treatment for possible HSV infection should be considered 
in patients at increased HSV risk. While the risk of vertical transmis­
sion of HSV is highest during a primary maternal infection of genital 
herpes at or near the time of delivery, the presence of maternal HSV 
infection is often unknown. Additional risk factors for neonatal HSV 
include a known maternal history of genital HSV lesions or peripar­
tum fevers, as well as neonatal seizures, hypothermia, vesicles, mucous 
membrane ulcers, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated alanine 
TABLE 52.4  Low-­Risk Criteria in a Child 
0–3 Months Old with Fever
Boston Criteria
Infants are at low risk if they appear well, have a normal physical examination, 
received no antimicrobials or DTaP vaccine in the previous 48 hr, have a 
caretaker reachable by telephone, and if laboratory tests are as follows:
 • CBC: <20,000 WBC/mm3
 • Urine: negative leukocyte esterase or <10 WBC/hpf
 • CSF: leukocyte count <10 cells/mm3
 • Chest radiograph: no infiltrate (if respiratory symptoms)
Philadelphia Protocol
Infants are at low risk if they appear well and have a normal physical 
examination, caregiver available to be contacted, and if laboratory tests are 
as follows:
 • CBC: <15,000 WBC/mm3; immature: total neutrophil ratio <0.2
 • Urine: <10 WBC/hpf; no bacteria on Gram stain
 • CSF: <8 WBC/mm3; no bacteria on Gram stain; nonbloody specimen
 • Chest radiograph: no infiltrate
 • Stool: no RBC; few to no WBCs (if abnormal stools)
Pittsburgh Guidelines
Infants are at low risk if they appear well and have a normal physical 
examination; no history of prematurity, illness, hospitalization, antibiotics, 
or siblings with GBS disease; and if laboratory tests are as follows:
 • CBC: 5,000–15,000 WBC/mm3; peripheral absolute band count ≤1,500/
mm3
 • Urine (enhanced urinalysis): ≤9 WBC/mm3 and no bacteria on Gram stain
 • CSF: ≤5 WBC/mm3 and negative Gram stain; if bloody tap, then WBC:RBC 
≤1:500
 • Chest radiograph: no infiltrate (if respiratory symptoms)
 • Stool: <5 WBC/hpf (if diarrhea)
Rochester Criteria
Infants are at low risk if they appear well and have a normal physical 
examination; previous healthy, full-­term gestation, no recent antibiotics, 
and no unexplained hyperbilirubinemia; and if laboratory findings are as 
follows:
 • CBC: 5,000–15,000 WBC/mm3; absolute band count ≤1,500/mm3
 • Urine: <10 WBC/hpf, no bacteria on Gram stain
 • Chest radiograph: no infiltrate (if respiratory symptoms)
 • Stool: <5 WBC/hpf (if abnormal stools)
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; hpf, high-­powered field; RBC, red blood cell; 
WBC, white blood cell.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
971
CHAPTER 52  Fever
aminotransferase levels, or CSF pleocytosis with a Gram stain that is 
negative for organisms.
A combination of age, clinical evaluation, and laboratory studies is 
used to define a specific population of well-­appearing febrile infants 
who are at low risk for bacterial infections. With the 2021 AAP guide­
lines, the relevant age range is 22–60 days old, with additional evalua­
tion steps recommended for the infants aged 22–28 days. Infants at low 
risk for bacterial infections are those who are well-­appearing with no 
evident focus of bacterial infection on physical examination and who 
have negative laboratory screening results. Historically, low-­risk screen­
ing criteria included normal total WBC, band count, immature-­to-­total 
neutrophil ratio, UA WBC, CSF WBC, and lack of organisms observed 
in fluid stains (see Table 52.4). Based on existing evidence, the updated 
2021 AAP guidelines focus instead primarily on UA results and inflam­
matory markers for risk stratification. Abnormal inflammatory markers 
are defined as temperature >38.5°C, procalcitonin >0.5 ng/mL, CRP >20 
mg/L, and absolute neutrophil count (ANC) >4000–5200 cells/mm3. A 
positive UA result should be followed with bladder catheterization or 
suprapubic aspiration for urine culture. Decision on the performance of 
an LP depends on the age group of the child (22–28 days versus 29–60 
days old) and the result of the inflammatory marker testing (Table 
52.5). In most circumstances, patients with increased inflammatory 
TABLE 52.5  Management of Fever Without Source
Group
Management
Any toxic-­appearing child 0–36 mo and temperature ≥38°C 
(100.4°F)
Hospitalize, broad cultures plus other tests,* parenteral antibiotics
Child <22 days and temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F)
Hospitalize, broad cultures plus other tests,* parenteral antibiotics
Child 22–60 days and temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F)
Three-Step Process
	1.	Determine risk based on history, physical examination, and laboratory studies.
Low risk:
 • Uncomplicated medical history
 • Well-appearing physical examination
 • Normal laboratory studies
 • Urine: negative leukocyte esterase, nitrite ≤5 WBC centrifuged, and <10 WBC/hpf uncentrifuged
 • Inflammatory markers: temperature ≤38.5°C, procalcitonin ≤0.5 ng/mL, CRP ≤20 mg/L, absolute 
neutrophil count ≤4000–5200/mm3
 • Stool studies if diarrhea (no RBC and <5 WBC/hpf)
	2.	If child fulfills all low-­risk criteria, use age to determine need for LP, parenteral antimicrobials, and 
hospital observation.
 • Age 22–28 days: May perform LP. May administer parenteral antimicrobials. Observe in hospital.
 • Age 29–60 days old: Need not perform LP. Need not administer antimicrobials. Observe closely 
at home with follow-­up within 24–36 h.
	3.	If child does not fulfill all low-­risk criteria, use age and lab results to determine need for LP, 
antimicrobials, and hospital observation.
 • Age 22–28 days with abnormal UA and normal inflammatory markers: May perform LP. 
Administer parenteral antimicrobials. Observe in hospital.
 • Age 22–28 days with abnormal inflammatory markers: Perform LP. If CSF pleocytosis, CSF 
uninterpretable, or abnormal UA, administer parenteral antimicrobials and observe in hospital. If 
CSF and UA are normal, may observe at home after parenteral antimicrobials or observe in the 
hospital with or without parenteral antimicrobials.
 • Age 29–60 days with abnormal UA and normal inflammatory markers: Administer oral 
antimicrobials. May observe closely at home with follow-­up in 12–24 h.
 • Age 29–60 days with abnormal inflammatory markers: May perform LP. If CSF pleocytosis, 
administer parenteral antimicrobials and observe in hospital. If CSF is normal, may administer 
parenteral or oral antimicrobials and may observe closely in hospital or at home. If CSF is not 
available or uninterpretable, administer parenteral antimicrobials and may observe closely in 
hospital or at home.
Child 2–36 mo and temperature 38–39°C (100.4–102.2°F)
Reassurance that diagnosis is likely self-­limited viral infection, but advise return with persistence of 
fever, temperatures >39°C (102.2°F), and/or new signs and symptoms.
Child 2–36 mo and temperature >39°C (102.2°F)
Two-­Step Process
	1.	Determine immunization status.
	2.	If received conjugate pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccines, obtain urine 
studies (urine WBC, leukocyte esterase, nitrite, and culture) for all girls, all boys <6 mo old, all 
uncircumcised boys <2 yr, and all children with recurrent urinary tract infections.
If did not receive conjugate pneumococcal and H. influenzae type b vaccines, manage according to 
the 1993 Guidelines (see Baraff et al. Ann Emerg Med. 1993;22:1198–1210).
*Other tests may include chest radiograph, stool studies, herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction.
hpf, high-powered field; LP, lumbar puncture; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
Adapted from Nield LS, Kamat D. Fever without a focus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW III, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 
20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 177.3; with data from Pantell RH, Roberts KB, Adams WG, et al. Evaluation and Management of Well-
Appearing Febrile Infants 8 to 60 Days Old. Pediatrics. 2021;148(2).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
972
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
markers or positive UA results should be administered parenteral anti­
biotics. Select patients can be treated with oral antimicrobials or be 
observed without antimicrobial therapy in hospital or at home. Regard­
less of whether the clinician chooses to treat the patient with empiric 
antibiotics, all low-­risk infants should be re-­evaluated within 24 hours. 
Those who appear ill or who have positive culture results should be hos­
pitalized for parenteral antibiotics. If a child appears well and all culture 
results are negative, close follow-­up should be continued and a second 
return visit made in 24 hours.
Although most of the original studies on management of well-­
appearing febrile infants included infants up to 3 months of age, 
most infants aged 2–3 months can be managed safely according 
to the guidelines for infants and children aged 3–36 months (see 
Table 52.5). Special consideration should also be given to febrile 
infants with recent receipt of vaccinations. Fever within the first 
48 hours after immunization occurs in greater than 40% of young 
infants.
All ill-­appearing febrile infants regardless of age must be evaluated for 
bacteremia, meningitis, or pyelonephritis and treated immediately after 
cultures are obtained.
Children Aged 3–36 Months
The risk of bacteremia for children with FWS in this age group has 
decreased with the routine use of pneumococcal vaccines. The most 
common occult bacterial infection in this age group is UTI. However, 
children in this age group who appear ill should undergo a full sepsis 
evaluation (see Table 52.5).
Screening UA for UTI should be considered in children with a 
history of UTI; children with a history of urinary tract anomalies or 
vesicoureteral reflux; females younger than 12–24 months, especially 
when the temperature is >39.0°C; uncircumcised males younger than 
12 months; and circumcised males younger than 6 months. Blood 
cultures are recommended for children with probable UTIs who are 
younger than 6 months of age. A febrile child with moderate leuko­
cyte esterase on macroscopic UA or pyuria on an appropriately col­
lected specimen should be treated presumptively for a UTI. Urine 
cultures should be obtained for any patient with a suspected UTI. The 
choice of antibiotics should be guided by knowledge of the common 
pathogens that cause UTIs and by patterns of antibiotic sensitivity in 
the community. Hospitalization should be considered for the child 
who is vomiting, dehydrated, or ill-­appearing; for those in whom 
compliance is likely to be poor; and for any patient with underlying 
renal or urologic anomalies.
Evaluation for meningitis with an LP is necessary in any child 
with unexplained sepsis, signs or symptoms of central nervous sys­
tem (CNS) infection, or blood culture positive for N. meningitidis or 
H. influenzae type B. Admission to the hospital for parenteral antibiot­
ics is necessary while awaiting the results of CSF studies.
Outpatient management of children with FWS is acceptable for 
those with a low probability of meningitis, good follow-­up, and reliable 
caregivers. The clinical evolution and results of cultures dictate the next 
stage of management. The child with occult pneumococcal bacteremia 
who appears well and is afebrile when returning for a follow-­up may be 
managed as an outpatient with parenteral ceftriaxone followed by oral 
antibiotics according to the sensitivity of the organism. If blood cul­
ture is positive for nontyphoidal Salmonella organisms and the child is 
younger than 3 months, full sepsis evaluation and intravenous antibiot­
ics are recommended. Oral antibiotics and close follow-­up are recom­
mended for older children with Salmonella bacteremia. Children with 
continued FWS should be re-­evaluated every 48 hours until fever reso­
lution to assess for the emergence of new signs and symptoms, as well as 
changes in the severity of illness. Laboratory work-­up such as CBC with 
differential, comprehensive metabolic profiles, and inflammatory mark­
ers may be indicated, such as when evaluating for incomplete Kawasaki 
disease.
Children Older Than 36 Months
Evaluation and management of ill-­appearing children older than 36 
months with FWS are similar to those of younger children. History to 
evaluate for potential sources is more reliable in this age group, thus 
decreasing the incidence of FWS. Close attention should be paid to 
environmental exposures and ill contacts because of the high likeli­
hood of increased contacts in this school-­aged cohort. For children in 
this age group with true FWS who do not appear ill, no screening diag­
nostic tests are indicated. For children in the 3–36-­month age range, 
repeat evaluation every 48 hours may be necessary until fever resolves 
or a diagnosis is reached.
Fever with Localizing Signs: Focus on Central Nervous 
System Infections
Bacterial Meningitis
Bacterial meningitis is usually a disease of infants and young chil­
dren. It is seen during all seasons; however, there may be a seasonal 
correlation between the presence of preceding respiratory patho­
gens in the upper respiratory tract and the subsequent develop­
ment of bacterial meningitis. Bacterial meningitis usually occurs 
sporadically, although clusters of cases have been noted in daycare 
centers, colleges, and other closed communities. The incidence of 
meningitis is increased in children with traumatic fractures of the 
cribriform plate or paranasal sinuses or with a cochlear implant 
(pneumococci); children who have undergone neurosurgical pro­
cedures such as ventricular shunts (S. aureus, Staphylococcus epider­
midis, Cutibacterium acnes); children with congenital or acquired 
immunodeficiencies (pneumococci, L. monocytogenes, meningo­
cocci); children with anatomic or functional asplenia (pneumo­
cocci, meningococci); and children with sickle hemoglobinopathies 
(pneumococci).
Bacterial meningitis manifests in two patterns. In the first, the symp­
toms develop slowly over several days, the initial symptoms being those 
of a nonspecific illness. The signs and symptoms of meningitis develop 
subsequently. In the second pattern, the disease develops suddenly and 
quickly with signs and symptoms of meningitis and/or sepsis.
The manifestations of meningitis depend on the child’s age. In 
infants, the findings are usually nonspecific and may be subtle; they 
include vomiting, diarrhea, irritability, lethargy, poor feeding, respira­
tory distress, seizures, hypothermia, and jaundice. Only 50% of affected 
infants have fever, but fever may also be the only presenting symptom. 
It is uncommon for affected young infants to have a stiff neck, and only 
30% have a bulging fontanel.
Older children present with more specific meningeal signs. The 
classic presenting symptoms are headache that is described as severe, 
generalized, and constant, and stiff neck, caused by inflammation of 
the cervical dura and reflex spasm of the extensor muscles of the neck. 
Pain and limitation of motion occur with flexion of the neck, but lateral 
movement of the neck may be normal and pain-­free. Other symptoms 
may include nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and photophobia.
On examination, patients with meningitis demonstrate irritabil­
ity, mental confusion or altered consciousness, nuchal rigidity, and, 
occasionally, hyperesthesia and ataxia. The clinician demonstrates 
nuchal rigidity by feeling resistance and observing a painful response 
while flexing the patient’s neck. The stiffness may not be recognized 
until the end of flexion. The neck usually can be rotated without 
symptoms. In the child who is crying and tensing the muscles, nuchal 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
973
CHAPTER 52  Fever
rigidity may be demonstrated if the examiner places one hand under 
the occiput of the supine patient and lifts the child. If the neck does 
not flex, it is stiff. Alternatively, a sitting child may be observed fol­
lowing an object as it falls to the floor. The child who flexes the neck 
to look at the object does not have nuchal rigidity. In the presence of 
meningitis, flexion of the neck causes spontaneous flexion of the legs 
at the hips and knees, known as the Brudzinski sign (Fig. 52.1). The 
Kernig sign is elicited when the patient lies supine and, with the knee 
flexed, the leg is flexed at the hip. The knee is then extended. A pos­
itive sign is present if this movement is limited by contraction of the 
hamstrings and causes pain. Nuchal rigidity is absent in 1.5% of older 
children with meningitis; it may be absent in children who have over­
whelming infections, who are deeply comatose, or who have focal or 
global neurologic impairment.
As many as 15% of children with bacterial meningitis initially pres­
ent in a comatose or semi-­comatose state (see Chapter 41). Because of 
the short duration and inconsistent development of increased intracra­
nial pressure, papilledema is usually not seen at presentation. When it 
is present, venous sinus thrombosis, subdural effusion, or an intracra­
nial abscess must be considered. Seizures occur before hospital admis­
sion in up to 20% of affected patients.
Children with meningitis may also present with cutaneous findings. 
Although commonly associated with meningococcal disease, purpura, 
petechiae, or a diffuse nonspecific maculopapular rash may be present 
in meningitis caused by any of the common bacterial pathogens (see 
Chapter 53).
Septic arthritis may be seen simultaneously with bacterial men­
ingitis. This has been assumed to be caused by simultaneous localiz­
ing infection after a primary bacteremia. Reactive arthritis caused by 
immune complex deposition is also seen with bacterial meningitis. This 
arthritis affects a single large joint and appears 5–7 days after initiation 
of treatment for meningitis. In general, arthritis occurring acutely with 
meningitis should be assumed to be infectious (see Chapter 44).
Various eye disorders have also been described with acute bacterial 
meningitis, including photophobia, transient cataracts, paralysis of the 
extraocular muscles, pupillary dysfunction, dendritic ulcers, endoph­
thalmitis, cortical blindness, and conjunctivitis.
Recurrent episodes of bacterial meningitis occur rarely. Potential 
etiologies include congenital CSF fistulas (inner ear, dermal sinus, neu­
roenteric cysts, lumbosacral sinus tracts), traumatic or surgical CSF 
fistula (skull fracture, postoperative nasal surgery, cochlear implant), 
immunodeficiency states, and parameningeal infections (mastoiditis, 
sinusitis, craniofacial osteomyelitis). Recurrent nonbacterial lympho­
cytic meningitis (Mollaret meningitis) may be due to HSV-­1, HSV-­2, 
or Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV); HaNDL (headache and neurologic defi­
cits with CSF lymphocytes) is another recurrent syndrome that mimics 
meningitis.
Diagnostic studies
Lumbar puncture and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. The definitive 
diagnosis of meningitis is based on examination of the CSF. The CSF 
is usually obtained via an LP (or spinal tap). The LP is performed by 
introducing a small-­bore, short-­beveled spinal needle with a stylet into 
the subarachnoid space at the L3–L4 or L4–L5 level. Approximately 3 
mL of fluid is removed for analysis.
There are a few contraindications for the performance of an LP. The 
first is cardiorespiratory compromise. Performance of the LP requires 
that the child be held in flexion to open the intervertebral spaces. In 
seriously ill children or children with significant cardiac or pulmo­
nary compromise, this positioning may be enough to cause respira­
tory arrest. The LP may need to be postponed, be performed cautiously 
with continuous cardiorespiratory monitoring, or be performed with 
the patient in the sitting position.
Second, children with increased intracranial pressure from a focal 
CNS lesion, such as brain abscess or tumor or from illnesses associated 
with cerebral edema, have a risk of cerebral herniation after an LP. If 
signs or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure are present, the 
LP should be postponed until the increased pressure is lowered with 
appropriate treatment. If an LP is delayed, appropriate antibiotic ther­
apy should be initiated without further delay. Third, the LP should not 
be done if the spinal needle must pass through an area of infection on 
its way to the subarachnoid space. To do so might introduce pathogens 
into the CNS that could cause meningitis.
Complications of LP are uncommon. In children with underlying 
or temporary bleeding disorders, epidural hematomas causing lower 
limb paralysis may occur. In children with hemophilia, disseminated 
intravascular coagulopathy, or thrombocytopenia, LP should be post­
poned until the bleeding disorder is corrected. Extra care should be 
taken to avoid a traumatic LP, and patients should be monitored for 
postprocedure neurologic deficits. Empirical therapy may be started 
while the coagulopathy is corrected. Other, rarer complications of LP 
include cortical blindness from compression of the posterior cerebral 
artery against the tentorium cerebelli and cervical spinal cord infarc­
tion from herniation of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen 
magnum. Post-­LP headache may occur in up to 10% of older children 
and adults; it is presumably caused by persistent CSF leakage at the 
puncture site.
A
B
Fig. 52.1  A, Brudzinski sign. The patient lies supine, and the head is 
passively elevated from the table by the examiner. The patient com­
plains of neck and low back discomfort and attempts to relieve the men­
ingeal irritation by involuntary flexion of the knees and hips. B, Kernig 
sign. The patient lies supine, with the hips and knees flexed. The knees 
are then gradually extended. Complaints of pain in the lower back, neck, 
and/or head are suggestive of meningeal irritation. (From Reilly BM. 
Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1991:95.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
974
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 52.6  Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Central Nervous System Disorders
Condition
Pressure 
(cm H2O)
Leukocytes (cells/mm3)
Protein (mg/dL)
Glucose (mg/dL)
Comments
Normal
<28
<5, ≥75% Lymphocytes
In neonates: <20
20–45
>50 (or 66–75% serum 
glucose)
Common Forms of Meningitis
Acute bacterial 
meningitis
Usually elevated
100–10,000 or more; usually 
300–2,000; PMNs predominate
Usually 100–500
Decreased, usually 
<40 (or <50% serum 
glucose)
Organisms usually seen on 
Gram stain and isolated by 
culture
Partially treated 
bacterial meningitis
Normal or 
elevated
5–10,000; PMNs usual but 
mononuclear cells may 
predominate if pretreated for 
extended period
Usually 100–500
Normal or decreased
Organisms may be seen on 
Gram stain. Pretreatment may 
render CSF sterile. PCR-­based 
assays may detect bacterial 
DNA
Viral meningitis or 
meningoencephalitis
Normal or slightly 
elevated
Rarely >1,000 cells. Eastern 
equine encephalitis and 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
may have cell counts of several 
thousand. PMNs early but 
mononuclear cells predominate 
through most of the course
Usually 50–200
Generally normal; 
may be decreased 
to <40 in some viral 
diseases, particularly 
mumps (15–20% of 
cases)
HSV encephalitis is suggested 
by focal seizures or by focal 
findings on MRI or CT scans 
or EEG. Most arboviruses 
detected by serology. Most 
other viruses detected by PCR 
of CSF
Uncommon Forms of Meningitis
Tuberculous meningitis
Usually elevated
10–500; PMNs early, but 
lymphocytes predominate 
through most of the course
100–3,000; may be 
higher in presence 
of block
<50 in most cases; 
decreases with time 
if treatment is not 
provided
Acid-­fast organisms rarely seen 
on smear. Large volumes of 
CSF required for recovery of 
organisms. Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis may be detected 
by PCR of CSF
Fungal meningitis
Usually elevated
5–500; PMNs early but 
mononuclear cells predominate 
through most of the course. 
Cryptococcal meningitis may 
lack pleocytosis. Coccidioidal 
meningitis may have 
eosinophilia
25–500
<50; decreases with 
time if treatment is 
not provided
Budding yeast may be seen. 
Organisms may be recovered 
in culture. Cryptococcal 
antigen (CSF and serum) may 
be positive in cryptococcal 
infection
Syphilis (acute) and 
leptospirosis
Usually elevated
50–500; lymphocytes predominate
50–200
Usually normal
Positive CSF serology. 
Spirochetes not demonstrable 
by usual techniques of 
smear or culture; dark-­field 
examination may be positive
Amebic (Naegleria) 
meningoencephalitis
Elevated
1,000–10,000 or more; PMNs 
predominate
50–500
Normal or slightly 
decreased
Mobile amoebae may be seen 
by wet-­mount microscopy 
of CSF
Opening pressure measurements are obtained with the head of the 
bed flat and with the child relaxed and in the lateral decubitus position 
with the back no longer tightly flexed. The upper limit of normal open­
ing pressure depends on age (5 cm H2O in premature infants, 10 cm 
H2O in infants, and 25–28 cm H2O in children 1–18 years of age). 
Opening pressure measurements are elevated if the LP is performed 
with the patient in the sitting position and if the patient is combat­
ive or performing the Valsalva maneuver. Obstructive hydrocephalus, 
hyperventilation, or removal of fluid can all lead to lowering of the 
measurement. Children with bacterial meningitis have a mean opening 
pressure of 18 ± 7 cm H2O.
The CSF is examined for red blood cell (RBC) number, WBC num­
ber and differential, glucose, protein, and the presence of pathogenic 
organisms by stain, rapid testing (antigen and PCR), or culture.
Normal CSF is clear and colorless (Table 52.6). Blood in the CSF 
indicates a traumatic LP (also known as a “traumatic tap”) or a CNS 
hemorrhage. A traumatic tap occurs when the spinal needle is advanced 
through the subarachnoid space and penetrates the richly vascularized 
ventral epidural space. Blood is thereby introduced into the subarach­
noid space, and the CSF appears bloody. Obtaining an RBC count on 
tubes 1 and 3 may be informative because the count is unchanged in 
CNS hemorrhage but may decline in traumatic taps. Centrifugation of 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
975
CHAPTER 52  Fever
the CSF sample may also help differentiate between a traumatic tap 
and a CNS hemorrhage. When blood has been present in the CSF for 
several hours, the CSF is xanthochromic after centrifugation. However, 
if the blood was recently mixed with CSF, as in the case of a traumatic 
tap, the supernatant is clear. Xanthochromic CSF can also be caused by 
icterus or an elevated CSF protein concentration.
The normal values for CSF WBC are shown in Table 52.6. Most 
children with bacterial meningitis have a WBC count of at least 100/
mm3 in their CSF, but in general, more than 5 cells/mm3 in children 
after the neonatal period is considered abnormal. Normal CSF WBC 
values for neonates are higher than for older children, but reference 
ranges have been revised to lower numbers with the availability of 
high-­quality data on noninfected neonates. Mean CSF WBC in the 
absence of viral or bacterial meningitis is 8.6 cells/mm3 and 3.6 cells/
mm3 in the first week of life and weeks 1–8, respectively. A CSF abso­
lute neutrophil count exceeding 3 neutrophils/mm3 is also considered 
abnormal and evidence of a bacterial infection. Although rapidly ful­
minant meningitis may not be accompanied by CSF pleocytosis on ini­
tial examination, the CSF of 98% of children with bacterial meningitis 
has pleocytosis with a differential of more than 50% neutrophils. CSF 
with at least 200–400 WBCs/mm3 will appear visually turbid.
It is sometimes difficult to know whether the WBCs seen on exam­
ination of the CSF are caused by CSF pleocytosis or are peripheral 
blood WBCs contaminating the CSF. To aid in this determination, 
the ratio of WBCs to RBCs in the CSF is compared with the ratio of 
WBCs to RBCs in the patient’s peripheral blood collected around the 
same time. A higher ratio in the CSF can indicate the presence of CSF 
pleocytosis. When the CSF ratio is at least 10 times higher than the 
blood ratio, bacterial meningitis is favored, with a sensitivity of 88% 
and a specificity of 90%. Conversely, the negative predictive value for 
the presence of bacterial meningitis of a <10-­fold difference between 
the ratios is 99%. Traumatic taps usually do not alter the CSF glucose, 
TABLE 52.6  Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Central Nervous System Disorders—cont’d
Condition
Pressure 
(cm H2O)
Leukocytes (cells/mm3)
Protein (mg/dL)
Glucose (mg/dL)
Comments
Brain Abscesses and Parameningeal Focus
Brain abscess
Usually elevated
5–200; CSF rarely acellular; 
lymphocytes predominate; if 
abscess ruptures into ventricle, 
PMNs predominate and cell 
count may reach >100,000
75–500
Normal unless abscess 
ruptures into 
ventricular system
CSF cultures are only positive in 
24% of cases unless abscess 
ruptures into ventricular 
system
Subdural empyema
Usually elevated
100–5,000; PMNs predominate
100–500
Normal
No organisms on smear 
or culture of CSF unless 
meningitis also present; 
organisms found on tap of 
subdural fluid
Cerebral epidural 
abscess
Normal to slightly 
elevated
10–500; lymphocytes predominate
50–200
Normal
No organisms on smear or 
culture of CSF
Spinal epidural abscess
Usually low, with 
spinal block
10–100; lymphocytes predominate
50–400
Normal
No organisms on smear or 
culture of CSF
Chemical (drugs, 
dermoid cysts, 
myelography dye)
Usually elevated
100–1,000 or more; PMNs 
predominate
50–100
Normal or slightly 
decreased
Epithelial cells may be seen 
within CSF by use of polarized 
light in some children with 
ruptured dermoids
Noninfectious Causes
Sarcoidosis
Normal or 
elevated slightly
0–100; mononuclear
40–100
Normal
No specific findings
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus with 
CNS involvement
Slightly elevated
0–500; PMNs usually 
predominate; lymphocytes may 
be present
100
Normal or slightly 
decreased
No organisms on smear or 
culture. Positive neuronal 
and ribosomal P protein 
antibodies in CSF
Tumor, leukemia
Slightly elevated 
to very high
0–100 or more; mononuclear or 
blast cells
50–1,000
Normal to decreased 
(20–40)
Cytology may be positive
Acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis
Normal or 
elevated
∼100 lymphocytes
Normal to elevated
Normal
MRI adds to diagnosis
Autoimmune 
encephalitis
Normal
∼100 lymphocytes
Normal to elevated
Normal
Anti-­NMDAR antibody positive 
(CSF is more sensitive than 
serum)
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HSV, herpes simplex virus; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMN, polymorphonu­
clear neutrophils.
From Janowski AB and Hunstad DA. Central nervous system infections. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics, 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:322–­323, Table 621.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
976
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 52.7  Clinical Conditions and Infectious Agents Associated with Aseptic Meningitis
Viruses
Arboviruses: La Crosse, eastern equine, western equine, Venezuelan equine, 
St. Louis encephalitis, Powassan and California encephalitis, chikungunya, 
Colorado tick fever, dengue, Jamestown Canyon, Japanese encephalitis, 
Rift Valley fever, tick-­borne encephalitis, West Nile virus, Zika
Enteroviruses (coxsackievirus, echovirus, enterovirus, poliovirus)
Parechovirus
Herpes simplex (types 1 and 2)
Varicella-­zoster virus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Cytomegalovirus
Human herpesvirus (types 6 and 7)
Parvovirus B19
Adenovirus
Variola (smallpox)
Measles
Mumps
Rubella
Influenza A and B
Parainfluenza
Rhinovirus
Rabies virus
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Rotaviruses
Cardiovirus A
Hendra and Nipah viruses
Astroviruses
Coronaviruses
Human T-­cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-­1)
HIV
Bacteria
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (early and late)
Leptospira species (leptospirosis)
Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
Borrelia species (tick-­borne relapsing fever or hard tick relapsing fever)
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Nocardia species
Brucella species
Bartonella species (cat-­scratch disease)
Rickettsia rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
Rickettsia prowazekii (typhus)
Ehrlichia species
Anaplasma species
Coxiella burnetii
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Mycoplasma hominis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia psittaci
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Ureaplasma species
Partially treated bacterial meningitis
Bacterial Parameningeal Focus
Sinusitis
Mastoiditis
Brain abscess
Subdural-­epidural empyema
Cranial osteomyelitis
Gram stain, or culture findings, which are often abnormal with bacte­
rial meningitis. When there is doubt about the validity of the cell count 
after a potentially traumatic tap, the LP should be repeated after several 
hours by introducing the spinal needle one intervertebral space above 
the original tap site.
In normal CSF, the glucose concentration is two-­thirds that of 
serum glucose concentration. The CSF glucose concentration is low 
in most infants and younger children with bacterial meningitis and 
in 45% of school-­aged children with bacterial meningitis. In children 
older than 2 months of age, a CSF/serum glucose ratio of <0.4 is 80% 
sensitive and 98% specific for the presence of bacterial meningitis. The 
presence of RBCs in a CSF sample that is promptly analyzed does not 
affect the glucose concentration.
The normal CSF protein concentration is <45 mg/dL in chil­
dren older than 2 months. The mean CSF protein concentration is 
90 (range, 20–170) in full-­term infants and 115 (range, 65–150) in 
preterm infants. The CSF protein concentration is elevated in more 
than 90% of younger children with bacterial meningitis but in only 
60% of infected school-­aged children. Every 1,000 RBCs in the CSF 
(from a traumatic tap) increases the protein concentration by approx­
imately 1 mg/dL.
Microscopic examination of a CSF Gram stain for bacteria should be 
performed routinely, with results used to expand the differential diag­
nosis. Due to inherent inaccuracies in the technique, antibiotics should 
never be narrowed based on Gram stain results alone. The sensitivity of 
this test is directly related to the number of organisms in the CSF and 
is inversely related to the age of the patient. Additional stains (fungal, 
mycobacterial) may be indicated depending on the clinical circum­
stances. Rapid pathogen identification can be accomplished with anti­
gen testing (such as for Cryptococcus species) and PCR. Targeted PCR, 
most commonly for enterovirus and HSV, and multiplex PCR panels 
have proven to be sensitive diagnostic tools in the evaluation of CNS 
infections. Indiscriminate use of multiplex PCR panels may increase 
costs and identify the presence of organisms that are not contributing 
to the current illness (such as chromosomally integrated HHV-­6). PCR 
for bacterial organisms may increase the diagnostic yield in patients 
treated with antibiotics before CSF is obtained. Culture remains the 
gold standard for the identification of bacterial pathogens and permits 
the assessment of antibiotic susceptibility. In circumstances in which 
the causative pathogen remains elusive, unbiased next-­generation 
sequencing (NGS) of CSF may be used.
In patients who have been treated with antibiotics before the LP is 
performed, bacterial meningitis cannot be ruled out based on Gram 
stain or culture alone. The presence of abnormalities of CSF cell count 
(including elevated leukocytes), protein concentration, and glucose 
concentration is compatible with the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis 
and will likely result in presumptive treatment for bacterial meningitis 
based on age and comorbidities. If an organism is identified by culture 
or PCR, definitive antibiotic treatment is administered. If no organism 
is identified, the decision to continue treatment depends on the clinical 
suspicion of bacterial meningitis and the exclusion of other causes of 
aseptic meningitis (Tables 52.7 and 52.8).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
977
CHAPTER 52  Fever
Computed tomography. Routine CT of the head is not indicated 
in children with suspected meningitis. Nonfocal increases in 
intracranial pressure typical of bacterial meningitis do not result in 
cerebral herniation with LP and may appear normal on CT. CT should 
be reserved for children who show clinical signs of herniation or 
cerebral edema and for those with focal symptoms concerning for an 
intracranial mass.
Other laboratory tests. Bacterial meningitis is usually accom­
panied by elevated peripheral blood WBC and platelet counts, but 
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia may also be seen in the case of 
overwhelming infection. The sensitivity (70%), specificity (54%), and 
negative predictive value (81%) of the differential WBC count are too 
low to render the differential WBC examination useful in making the 
diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
Blood cultures may be useful in identifying the bacterial patho­
gen of meningitis. However, blood culture is negative in up to 33% of 
children with meningococcal, 20% with pneumococcal, and 10% with 
H. influenzae type b meningitis. Sensitivity of blood culture further 
decreases with prior antibiotic exposure. In addition, there is a nega­
tive correlation between the length of illness before diagnosis and the 
rate of positive blood cultures. A bacterial meningitis score has been 
developed to attempt to distinguish between bacterial and aseptic (i.e., 
TABLE 52.7  Clinical Conditions and Infectious Agents Associated with Aseptic 
Meningitis—cont’d
Fungi
Coccidioides immitis (coccidioidomycosis)
Blastomyces dermatitidis (blastomycosis)
Cryptococcus neoformans (cryptococcosis)
Histoplasma capsulatum (histoplasmosis)
Candida species
Other fungi (Alternaria, Aspergillus, Cephalosporium, Cladosporium, 
Bipolaris hawaiiensis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Pseudallescheria 
boydii, Sporothrix schenckii, Ustilago species, zygomycetes)
Parasites (Eosinophilic)
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Gnathostoma spinigerum
Baylisascaris procyonis (raccoon roundworm)
Strongyloides stercoralis
Trichinella spiralis
Toxocara canis
Taenia solium (cysticercosis)
Paragonimus westermani
Schistosoma species
Fasciola species
Parasites (Noneosinophilic)
Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis)
Acanthamoeba species
Naegleria fowleri
Balamuthia mandrillaris
Malaria
Postinfectious
Vaccines: rabies, influenza, measles, poliovirus
Demyelinating or allergic encephalitis
Systemic or Immunologically Mediated
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Autoimmune encephalitis
Bacterial endocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis, including polyarteritis nodosa
Sjögren syndrome
Mixed connective tissue disease
Rheumatoid arthritis
Behçet syndrome
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Granulomatous arteritis
Sarcoidosis
Familial Mediterranean fever
Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome
Neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID)
Sweet syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis)
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
Malignancy
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Metastatic carcinoma
Central nervous system tumor (e.g., craniopharyngioma, glioma, 
ependymoma, astrocytoma, medulloblastoma, teratoma)
Drugs
Intrathecal injections (contrast media, serum, antibiotics, antineoplastic agents)
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
OKT3 monoclonal antibodies
Carbamazepine
Azathioprine
Intravenous immunoglobulin
Antibiotics (trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, sulfasalazine, ciprofloxacin, 
isoniazid)
Miscellaneous
Heavy metal poisoning (lead, arsenic)
Foreign bodies (shunt, reservoir)
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Postictal state
Postmigraine state
Mollaret syndrome (recurrent)
Intraventricular hemorrhage (neonate)
Familial hemophagocytic syndrome
Postneurosurgical procedure
Dermoid-­epidermoid cyst
Syndrome of transient headache and neurologic deficits with cerebrospinal 
fluid lymphocytosis (HaNDL)
Data from Bronstein DE, Glaser CA. Aseptic meningitis and viral meningitis. In: Cherry J, Demmler-­Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds. Feigin and 
Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2014:484–492; and from Romero JR. Aseptic and viral 
meningitis. In: Long SS, Pickering LK, Prober CG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
2012:292–297.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
978
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 52.8  Characteristics of the Most Common Causes of Aseptic Meningitis
Organism
Age Group
Season
Prodrome
Clinical Characteristics
Epidemiologic 
Characteristics
Agent 
Identification
Serologic 
Diagnosis
Common
Enteroviruses
Infants, young 
children
Summer, fall
None, or mild GI or pharyngitis 
syndrome for 1–3 days
Exanthem, myopericarditis, 
conjunctivitis, pleurodynia, hand-­
foot-­mouth disease, herpangina, 
myositis, hepatitis
Epidemic
PCR of CSF, blood, 
throat, stool
Paired IgG (rarely used)
Arboviruses
Children, elderly
Summer, early 
fall
Fever, rash, malaise for 1–5 
days
Encephalitis or aseptic meningitis
Geographic area, 
contact with insect 
vector, encephalitis in 
community or animals
PCR of CSF for some
IgM, paired IgG (serum 
or CSF)
Herpes simplex 
type 2
Neonates, young 
adults
Year round
Fever (neonate), genital 
vesicles for 1–7 days
Associated primary herpes lesions
Perinatal or sexual 
exposure
PCR or culture of genital/
skin lesions; PCR (CSF)
IgM, paired IgG
Borrelia burgdorferi 
(Lyme disease)
Children, adults
Spring–late fall Erythema migrans; secondary 
symptoms weeks to months 
later
Facial palsy or other cranial nerve 
palsy; radiculitis; heart block
Endemic area, deer 
tick exposure (often 
unrecognized)
PCR (CSF) (low 
sensitivity)
EIA screen with Western 
blot confirmation
Less Common
Mumps
5–9 yr olds
Late winter–
spring
Parotitis, orchitis: 2–10 days
Parotitis, orchitis, oophoritis, 
pancreatitis
Exposure to mumps or 
vaccination
PCR (CSF or throat)
IgM, paired IgG
HIV
Young adults
Year round
Fever, arthralgias, 
maculopapular rash, 
pharyngitis, adenopathy
Same as prodrome; meningitis may 
occur 1–5 days into the illness
2–6 wk after sexual or 
blood exposure
PCR (RNA, blood)
Fourth-­generation Ag/Ab 
test (may be negative 
at this stage)
Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis 
virus
Older children, 
young adults
Fall, early 
winter
Fever and flulike syndrome, 
5–21 days
Orchitis, alopecia
Exposure to mice, 
hamsters
PCR (CSF or blood)
IgG
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Infants (primary 
infection), 
young adults 
(reactivation)
Year round
Fever
Pneumonia, basilar inflammation 
with cranial nerve palsy and 
intracranial hypertension
History of tuberculosis 
or exposure, HIV risk 
factors
Culture, PCR (CSF)
None
Leptospira
Young adults
Late summer, 
early fall
Hepatitis and hematuria, 1–7 
days
Conjunctivitis, splenomegaly, 
jaundice, nephritis, rash
Exposure to animals, 
water contaminated 
with animal urine
Culture (blood, CSF, or 
urine)
Paired IgG
Fungal
Premature infant, 
young adult
Year round
Fever
Basilar inflammation on CT or MRI, 
cranial nerve findings
Endemic area 
(blastomycosis, 
histoplasmosis)
Immunodeficiency 
(cryptococcosis)
Prematurity (candidiasis)
Culture (CSF), antigen 
(select species), 
meningeal biopsy
Specific IgG
Mycoplasma 
organisms
Children, young 
adults
Fall, winter
Fever, malaise, sore throat, 
cough
Cough, rash, hemolytic anemia
Family or community 
epidemic
PCR (CSF or 
nasopharyngeal)
IgM (false positive 
common)
CSF, cerebral spinal fluid; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GI, gastrointestinal; IgG and IgM, immunoglobulins G and M; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Modified from Connolly KJ, Hammer SM. The acute aseptic meningitis syndrome. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1990;4:599–622; and from Davis LE. Aseptic and viral meningitis. In: Long SS, 
Pickering LK, Prober CG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Disease. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1997:331.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
979
CHAPTER 52  Fever
nonbacterial) meningitis in patients with CSF pleocytosis. The risk of 
bacterial meningitis is low if none of the following criteria are pres­
ent: history of a seizure with the illness, blood neutrophil count ≥10 × 
109 cells/L, positive CSF Gram stain, CSF protein ≥80 mg/dL, or CSF 
neutrophil count ≥1 × 109 cells/L. This diagnostic tool is 99% sensitive 
and 62% specific for bacterial meningitis. It should only be applied to 
non–ill-­appearing children older than 2 months without petechiae, 
purpura, or other concerning findings on examination who have not 
been pretreated with antibiotics.
Aseptic Meningitis
Aseptic meningitis is an inflammatory process of the meninges, most 
often characterized by acute signs and symptoms of meningeal irri­
tation; mononuclear CSF pleocytosis (predominance of monocytes, 
macrophages, and/or lymphocytes); a normal or, less frequently, ele­
vated CSF protein concentration; normal or, less often, low CSF glu­
cose concentration; and no organisms demonstrable by Gram stain 
or bacterial cultures. There are many causes of aseptic meningitis (see 
Table 52.7). The most common cause is viral infection; up to 90% of 
cases are caused by enteroviruses and arboviruses (see Chapter 42). 
The definitive diagnosis is made by identifying the organism in the 
CSF. However, this is not always possible, and other causes must be 
excluded by history, presence or absence of associated symptoms, and 
appropriate laboratory tests (see Tables 52.7 and 52.8).
Viral meningitis. The most common pathogens to cause viral 
meningitis are enteroviruses. Enteroviral meningitis occurs most often 
during the summer and early fall months. Transmission is via the fecal-­
oral route, and young children exhibit increased transmission of the 
viruses and more severe disease in comparison with other age groups. 
Initially, patients may have a respiratory tract infection, a nonspecific 
febrile illness, or vomiting and diarrhea. Viral infection of the meninges 
occurs 7–10 days after initial exposure. The clinical course may be 
biphasic. Virus from the oropharynx can be cultured only during the 
first 5–7 days of the illness but may be excreted in stool for 6–8 weeks.
Children with viral meningitis present with fever, nuchal rigid­
ity, irritability, headache, and vomiting. Less common symptoms are 
anorexia, drowsiness, photophobia, myalgia, and malaise. Affected 
young infants often lack meningeal signs. In addition, children may 
have an altered sensorium, but focal neurologic signs are rare. Seizures 
are more common in infants.
The number of WBCs in the CSF varies from zero to several 
thousand (see Table 52.6). Up to 75% of initial (early in the illness) 
CSF specimens contain a predominance of polymorphonuclear cells. 
Mononuclear cells predominate by 2 days after the onset of symptoms. 
Of children with enteroviral meningitis, 18% may have decreased CSF 
glucose concentrations, whereas 12% may have elevated CSF protein. 
Aseptic meningitis secondary to parechovirus may have no CSF pleo­
cytosis. Meningitis due to Lyme disease may mimic viral meningitis in 
both clinical presentation and CSF findings. It is important to differ­
entiate viral meningitis from Lyme meningitis (which is treatable) in 
endemic areas.
Treatment of enteroviral meningitis is supportive. Admission to the 
hospital may be required while bacterial meningitis is being ruled out 
and for intravenous hydration. Analgesics and antipyretics may also 
be indicated. The LP performed to diagnose viral meningitis is often 
helpful in ameliorating the acute symptoms. The mechanism for this 
is not clear.
The outcome is quite good for children in whom common viral patho­
gens cause aseptic meningitis. Multisystem organ involvement may 
occur in neonates with enterovirus infections, including septic shock, 
hepatitis, myocarditis, and respiratory failure. Long-­term adverse out­
comes are more common (but unusual) in children who have viral 
meningitis during the first year of life. Speech and language develop­
ment may be affected. Treatment and outcome for the other types of 
aseptic meningitis depend on the underlying cause.
Tuberculous meningitis. Tuberculous meningitis is an important 
treatable cause of aseptic meningitis. During the primary pulmonary 
tuberculous infection and subsequent lymphohematogenous spread 
to extrapulmonary sites, tubercle bacilli produce local microscopic 
granulomas in the CNS and meninges. If this primary CNS infection is not 
contained by host defense mechanisms (T lymphocytes, monocytes), or if 
host defense mechanisms fail at a later period, tuberculous meningitis may 
result. Meningitis occurs weeks to months after the primary pulmonary 
process. Miliary tuberculosis is a risk factor for TB meningitis.
The symptoms of tuberculous meningitis are insidious and sub­
acute (weeks to months). Stage 1 is a prodrome with nonspecific man­
ifestations (apathy, poor school function, irritability, weight loss, fever, 
night sweats, nausea); stage 2 is heralded by the onset of neurologic 
signs (headache, cranial neuropathy, nuchal rigidity, signs of increased 
intracranial pressure); and stage 3 manifests with altered levels of con­
sciousness (lethargy, stupor, coma). Meningismus may be absent.
The diagnosis is supported by a history of contact with adults with 
known active tuberculosis, a chronic cough, or HIV disease, or by 
a history of immigration, poverty, or homelessness. In addition, the 
patient’s chest radiograph is consistent with active or, often, quiescent 
tuberculosis (parenchymal-­hilar node calcifications, infiltrates, hilar 
adenopathy, and, in rare cases, endobronchial or cavitary lesions), 
and the patient’s tuberculin skin test or interferon-­γ release assay may 
yield a positive result (see Chapter 3). Cranial CT or MRI may show 
the intense meningeal inflammation around the base of the brain 
or inflammatory mass lesions (tuberculomas). The CSF results (see 
Table 52.6) include profound hypoglycorrhachia, a high CSF pro­
tein, lymphocyte-­ or monocyte-­predominant cells (usually 500 cells/
mm3), increased opening pressure, and, on occasion, organisms on 
acid-­fast staining. PCR amplification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
DNA aids in making a more rapid diagnosis than does culture of CSF, 
sputum, or gastric aspirates, which traditionally requires 2–6 weeks. 
The differential diagnosis depends on the stage of the illness.
Encephalitis and Meningoencephalitis
Encephalitis is inflammation of the brain parenchyma, whereas 
meningoencephalitis is inflammation of the brain accompanied by 
inflammation of the meninges (see Chapter 42). Meningoenceph­
alitis is distinguished from aseptic meningitis by evidence of brain 
parenchymal involvement, including behavior or personality changes; 
altered level of consciousness (including agitation or coma); general­
ized seizures; focal neurologic signs, including focal seizures and focal 
motor defects (hemiparesis or ataxia); or movement disorders. The dif­
ferential diagnosis is broad, inclusive of both infectious and noninfec­
tious etiologies. Despite broad diagnostic testing, an etiologic agent is 
identified in less than half of cases.
Enteroviruses and arboviruses are the most commonly identified 
causes of infectious encephalitis in children. Enterovirus encepha­
litis, uncommon without meningeal involvement, is suggested by 
epidemic occurrence and presence of typical prodrome or associ­
ated findings (see Table 52.8); diagnosis is by PCR for enterovirus 
in CSF, blood, throat, or stool specimens. A CSF or blood specimen 
is preferred because enterovirus persists in the throat and especially 
stool for weeks after the primary infection has resolved and its pres­
ence in stool is nonspecific. Arbovirus encephalitis is suggested by 
mosquito or tick exposure and epidemic occurrence and is diag­
nosed by findings of arbovirus immunoglobulin M (IgM) in CSF 
or blood or by paired serologic findings (acute and convalescent 
serology) for IgG.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
980
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 52.9  Etiology of Fever of Unknown Origin (FUO) in Children
Abscesses
Brain
Hepatic
Intraabdominal*
Odontogenic (dental)
Pelvic*
Perinephric and renal
Psoas
Rectal
Subphrenic
Bacterial Diseases
Actinomycosis
Bartonella henselae (cat-­scratch disease)*
Brucellosis
Campylobacter
Chlamydia
Francisella tularensis (tularemia)
Fusobacterium (Lemierre syndrome)
Leptospirosis
Listeria monocytogenes (listeriosis)
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Meningococcemia (chronic)
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Psittacosis
Rat-­bite fever (Streptobacillus moniliformis; streptobacillary form of rat-­bite 
fever)
Salmonella
Tuberculosis*
Whipple disease
Yersiniosis
Localized Infections
Bacterial endocarditis*
Cholangitis
Ludwig angina
Mastoiditis
Osteomyelitis*
Pericarditis
Pneumonia
Pyelonephritis*
Sinusitis
Spondylodiskitis
Spirochetes
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Leptospirosis
Rat-­bite fever (Spirillum minus; spirillary form of rat-­bite fever)
Relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis, Borrelia miyamotoi)
Syphilis
Fungal Diseases
Blastomycosis (extrapulmonary)
Coccidioidomycosis (disseminated)
Cryptococcosis
Histoplasmosis (disseminated)
Rickettsiae-­like Organisms
Anaplasmosis
Ehrlichiosis
Q fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Tick-­borne typhus
HSV is a treatable cause of encephalitis. In neonates, HSV 
encephalitis usually occurs between 7 and 21 days of age; may 
produce focal or generalized CNS disease; and may occur with or 
without conjunctivitis, oral mucosal involvement, vesicles on skin, 
or disseminated disease (hepatitis, pneumonia, septic appearance). 
After the neonatal period, HSV encephalitis is usually isolated to 
the CNS and classically produces necrotizing encephalitis with a 
focus in the temporal lobe. Symptoms in persons with HSV enceph­
alitis range broadly from those suggesting mild aseptic meningitis 
to the presence of status epilepticus and coma and then death. In 
addition to elevated WBC, CSF examination later in infection may 
show increased numbers of erythrocytes and elevated protein due 
to parenchymal brain involvement. CT, MRI, and EEG may suggest 
a temporal lobe focus. Specific diagnosis is by PCR of CSF for HSV 
DNA. In the appropriate clinical setting, presumptive therapy with 
high-­dose intravenous acyclovir is indicated while awaiting the 
results of PCR of CSF for HSV.
Autoimmune encephalitis, such as anti-­N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate 
receptor (anti-­NMDAR) encephalitis, is a relatively common form 
of noninfectious encephalitis. Data from the California Encephalitis 
Project showed that anti-­NMDAR encephalitis was the most com­
mon identifiable cause of encephalitis in their cohort, which included 
patients from 6 months to 30 years. Most of the cases occurred in chil­
dren and adolescents. Patients present with features similar to viral 
encephalitis, but seizures, language dysfunction, psychosis, autonomic 
dysfunction, movement disorders, and EEG abnormalities are more 
common in these patients.
FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN
Daily fevers lasting more than a week with no diagnosis apparent after 
initial history and physical examination are termed FUO. The differ­
ential diagnosis for FUO in children is broad (Table 52.9). The most 
commonly identified etiology for FUO in children is infection, with 
rates as high as 51% depending on the practice setting and availability 
of diagnostic testing. Infections identified included UTI and tubercu­
losis in all children; osteomyelitis and bartonellosis in countries with 
higher baseline socioeconomic status; and brucellosis and typhoid in 
countries with lower baseline socioeconomic status. Other significant 
causes of FUO are collagen vascular disease, malignancy, Kawasaki 
disease, and inflammatory bowel disease. Often patients with FUO 
have atypical manifestations of common childhood bacterial or viral 
diseases rather than unusual or uncommon disorders. Approximately 
one quarter of FUO resolves without diagnosis.
The evaluation of a child with FUO centers on serial histories and 
physical examinations. Repeated history taking is useful because par­
ents often remember important details after the initial interview. The 
physical examination findings may also change during the course of 
the investigation, revealing important clues (Fig. 52.2 and Table 52.10). 
Clues to the diagnosis are noted in Tables 52.11 and 52.12.
History
The detailed history should include the time of day of the fever, who 
measured the temperature, and the instrument that was used to mea­
sure the temperature. Increased temperatures after exercise and in the 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
981
CHAPTER 52  Fever
TABLE 52.9  Etiology of Fever of Unknown Origin (FUO) in Children—cont’d
Viruses
Arboviruses
Cytomegalovirus*
Epstein-­Barr virus*
Hantavirus
Hepatitis viruses
HIV
Human herpesviruses (HHV-­6 and HHV-­7)
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Respiratory viruses (especially, adenovirus and enteroviruses)*
Parasitic Diseases
Amebiasis
Babesiosis
Baylisascaris
Malaria
Naegleria
Toxoplasmosis
Trichinosis
Trypanosomiasis
Visceral larva migrans (Toxocara)
Rheumatologic Diseases
Autoimmune hepatitis
Behçet syndrome
Chronic noninfectious osteomyelitis (CNO)
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis* ± macrophage activation syndrome
Rheumatic fever
Systemic lupus erythematosus*
Vasculitis syndromes (granulomatous, nongranulomatous)
Hypersensitivity Diseases
Drug fever
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity vasculitis/reactive arthritis*
Serum sickness
Weber-­Christian disease
Neoplasms
Atrial myxoma
Cholesterol granuloma
Hodgkin lymphoma
Inflammatory pseudotumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Leukemia
Lymphoma*
Pheochromocytoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Granulomatous Diseases
Crohn disease
Granulomatous hepatitis
Polyangiitis with granulomatosis
Sarcoidosis
Familial and Hereditary Diseases
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Autonomic neuropathies
Fabry disease
Familial dysautonomia
Familial Hibernian fever
Familial Mediterranean fever and the many other autoinflammatory (periodic 
fever) diseases (see Chapter 54)
Hypertriglyceridemia
Ichthyosis
Sickle cell crisis
Spinal cord/brain injury
Miscellaneous
Addison disease
Allergic alveolitis
Castleman disease (see Chapter 48)
Cyclic neutropenia
Diabetes insipidus (non-­nephrogenic and nephrogenic)
Factitious fever
Hemophagocytic syndromes
Hypereosinophilia syndromes
Hypothalamic-­central fever
Infantile cortical hyperostosis
Inflammatory bowel disease*
Kawasaki disease*
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Metal fume fever
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)
Pancreatitis
Poisoning
Pulmonary embolism
Thrombophlebitis
Thyrotoxicosis, thyroiditis
*Most common identified causes of FUO in children.
afternoon often represent normal variations. The appearance of the 
child while febrile is also important. Increased temperature without 
sweating might be seen in a child with ectodermal dysplasia or facti­
tious fever. Increased temperature without signs of fatigue or malaise is 
less likely to be true fever.
The pattern of fever should be noted (Fig. 52.3). Sustained fever, 
intermittent fever, and relapsing fever are associated with different 
disease states. Sustained or remittent fever remains elevated with little 
variation during the day and is associated with enteric (typhoid) fever, 
tularemia, and rickettsial diseases such as typhus and Rocky Moun­
tain spotted fever. Intermittent fever normalizes at least once a day and 
is associated with tuberculosis, abscesses, lymphomas, juvenile idio­
pathic arthritis (JIA), and some forms of malaria. Children with relaps­
ing fever have afebrile days between febrile episodes. Relapsing fever is 
associated with rat-­bite fever, Borrelia species (tick-­borne and hard tick 
relapsing fever), malaria, brucellosis, subacute bacterial endocarditis, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
982
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
African trypanosomiasis, lymphoma, and Lyme disease. Saddle-­back 
or double-­hump fever lasts a few days, is followed by an afebrile day or 
two, and then returns. This pattern is associated with viruses such as 
enterovirus and dengue fever. Double quotidian fever (two fever spikes 
each day) occurs in visceral leishmaniasis, malaria, and gonococcal 
endocarditis. Unfortunately, neither the fever pattern nor the duration 
is sufficient to determine a cause.
Other patterns of fever are rarely due to infection. This includes 
periodic fevers and prolonged fevers lasting more than 1 year. Peri­
odic fevers occur as acute stereotypical febrile episodes separated 
by prolonged afebrile, healthy periods. Diseases to consider include 
cyclic neutropenia, familial Mediterranean fever, and the syndrome 
of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis 
(PFAPA). Periodic fever syndromes have different prevalence pat­
terns in different ethnic groups and different inheritance patterns. A 
detailed family history is particularly important when these diagno­
ses are considered (see Chapter 54). Fevers lasting for more than 1 
year are not usually infectious; factitious fever, rheumatic or gran­
ulomatous disorders, familial diseases, or malignancies need to be 
considered in these patients.
FEVER ≥38.3°C for ≥14 Days
Thorough history
Identify:
  Pneumonia
  UTI
Consider history, physical, and screening
labs for clues to diagnosis
Clues absent or nonspecific and
fever still present
Physical examination
including growth chart
Screening laboratory
studies:
  CBC, CRP, ESR, UA + culture,
  blood culture, chest x-ray
Clues present
Pursue
Clues present
Clues absent or
nonspecific
and fever still present
Repeat history and physical exam
Repeat screening labs: CBC, ESR,
CRP, UA, blood culture, urine culture
• LFTs, LDH, uric acid, BUN, creatinine
• Stool heme
• PPD, interferon-γ release assay
• Tube to hold
Consider EBV, Bartonella serologies
Consider abdominal CT, STIR MRI or MRI/PET scan
Avoid empiric antibiotic therapy without
  clear indication
Consider: hospitalization if:
      • Clinically worrisome
      • Labs worrisome
      • Fever history suspect
      • Need for evaluation by
        multiple subspecialists
Perform serial physical exams
Consider as appropriate:
  Pediatric infectious diseases consult
  Hematology/oncology consult
  Rheumatology consult
Fig. 52.2  Approach to the evaluation of fever of unknown origin (FUO). EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; LDH, lactate 
dehydrogenase; LFT, liver function test; PPD, purified protein derivative; STIR, short tau inversion recovery 
rapid MRI; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
983
CHAPTER 52  Fever
TABLE 52.10  Examples of Subtle Physical Findings Having Special Significance in Patients 
with Fever of Unknown Origin
Body Site
Physical Finding
Diagnosis
Head
Sinus tenderness
Sinusitis
Scalp redness or tenderness
Infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease)
Oropharynx
Ulceration
Disseminated histoplasmosis, SLE, Behçet syndrome, IBD
Tender tooth
Periapical abscess
Fundi or conjunctivae
Choroid tubercle
Disseminated granulomatosis*
Petechiae, Roth spot
Endocarditis
Thyroid
Enlargement, tenderness
Thyroiditis
Heart
Murmur
Endocarditis, rheumatic fever
Abdomen
Enlarged iliac crest lymph nodes, splenomegaly
Lymphoma, endocarditis, disseminated granulomatosis*
Rectum
Perirectal fluctuance, tenderness
Abscess
Perianal skin tags, fistula
IBD
Genitalia
Testicular nodule
Periarteritis nodosa, tumor
Epididymal nodule
Disseminated granulomatosis*
Lower extremities
Deep venous tenderness
Thrombosis or thrombophlebitis; malignancy, autoimmune disease
Skin and nails
Petechiae, splinter hemorrhages, subcutaneous nodules, clubbing
Vasculitis, endocarditis, chronic pulmonary disease
Muscles
Weakness, tenderness
Myositis
Joints
Swelling, stiffness, erythema
SLE, JIA, IBD
*Includes tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, sarcoidosis, and syphilis.
IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Wright WF. Fever of unknown origin. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and 
Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:790–800, Table 56.7.
TABLE 52.11  Examples of Potential Diagnostic Clues to Infections Presenting as Fever of 
Unknown Origin
Etiology
Historical Clues
Physical Clues
Anaplasmosis
Transmitted by the bite of an Ixodes tick in association with outdoor 
activity in north central and eastern USA
Fever, headache, arthralgia, myalgia, pneumonitis, 
thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, and elevated liver 
enzymes
Babesiosis
Transmitted by the bite of an Ixodes tick in association with outdoor 
activity in the northeastern USA
Arthralgia, myalgia, relative bradycardia, 
hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and 
elevated liver enzymes
Bartonellosis
Recent travel to the Andes mountains with fever and bacteremia 
(Oroya fever, Bartonella bacilliformis), association with 
homelessness in urban settings (Bartonella quintana) or contact 
with either fleas or the scratch of an infected kitten or feral cat 
(Bartonella henselae)
Conjunctivitis, retroorbital pain, anterior tibial bone pain, 
macular rash, nodular plaque lesions, and/or regional 
lymphadenopathy
Blastomycosis
Contact with soil adjacent to the Mississippi and Ohio River 
valleys, Saint Lawrence River in New York and Canada, and North 
American Great Lakes, or exposure to infected dogs
Arthritis, atypical pneumonia, pulmonary nodules, and/or 
fulminant adult respiratory distress syndrome; verrucous, 
nodular, or ulcerative skin lesions; and prostatitis
Brucellosis
Associated with contact with or consumption of products from 
infected goats, pigs, camels, yaks, buffalo, or cows and with 
abattoir work
Arthralgia, hepatosplenomegaly, suppurative 
musculoskeletal lesions, sacroiliitis, spondylitis, uveitis, 
hepatitis, and pancytopenia
Coccidioidomycosis
Exposure to soil or dust in the southwestern USA
Arthralgia, pneumonia, pulmonary cavities, pulmonary 
nodules, erythema multiforme, and erythema nodosum
Ehrlichiosis
Transmitted by the bite of an Amblyomma, Dermacentor, or Ixodes 
tick in association with outdoor activity in midwestern and 
southeastern USA
Pneumonitis, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, and lymphopenia
Enteric fever (Salmonella 
enterica serovar typhi)
Recent travel to a third world country with consumption of 
potentially contaminated food or water
Headache, arthritis, abdominal pain, relative bradycardia, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and leukopenia
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
984
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 52.11  Examples of Potential Diagnostic Clues to Infections Presenting as Fever of 
Unknown Origin—cont’d
Etiology
Historical Clues
Physical Clues
Histoplasmosis
Exposure to bat or black bird excreta in roosts, chicken houses, or 
caves in the region surrounding the Ohio and Mississippi River 
valleys of the USA or regions of Central and South America, 
Africa, Asia, and Australia
Headache, pneumonia, pulmonary cavities, mucosal ulcers, 
adenopathy, erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, 
hepatitis, anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia
Leishmaniasis (visceral disease)
Associated with recent travel to areas endemic for sand flies
Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and 
hyperpigmentation of the face, hand, foot, and/or 
abdominal skin (kala azar)
Leptospirosis
Occupational exposure among workers in sewers, rice and sugar 
cane fields, and abattoirs; recreational water sports and exposure 
to contaminated waters or infected dogs
Bitemporal and frontal headache, calf and lumbar muscle 
tenderness, conjunctival suffusion, hepatic and renal 
failure, and hemorrhagic pneumonitis
Malaria
Recent travel to endemic areas in Asia, Africa, and Central and 
South America
Fever, headaches, nausea, emesis, diarrhea, hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, and anemia
Psittacosis (Chlamydia psittaci)
Associated with contact with birds, especially psittacine birds
Fever, pharyngitis, hepatosplenomegaly, pneumonia, 
blanching maculopapular eruptions, erythema multiforme, 
erythema marginatum, and erythema nodosum
Q fever (Coxiella burnetii)
Associated with farm, veterinary, or abattoir work; consumption of 
unpasteurized milk; and contact with infected sheep, goats, or 
cattle
Atypical pneumonia, hepatitis, hepatomegaly, relative 
bradycardia, and/or splenomegaly
Rat-­bite fever (Streptobacillus 
moniliformis)
Recent bite or scratch by a rat, mouse, or squirrel and/or ingestion 
of food or water contaminated by rat excrement
Headaches, myalgia, polyarthritis, and maculopapular, 
morbilliform, petechial, vesicular, or pustular rash over the 
palms, soles, and extremities
Relapsing fever (Borrelia 
recurrentis)
Associated with poverty, crowding, and poor sanitation (louse 
borne); or with camping (tick borne), particularly in the Grand 
Canyon
High fever with rigors, headache, delirium, arthralgia, 
myalgia, and hepatosplenomegaly
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Associated with outdoor activity in the South Atlantic or 
southeastern USA and exposure to Dermacentor tick bites
Headache, petechial rash involving the extremities, hand 
palms, and feet soles
Tuberculosis
Recent contact with tuberculosis, recent immigration from an 
endemic country, and work or residence in homeless shelters, 
correctional facilities, or health care facilities
Night sweats, weight loss, atypical pneumonia, cavitary 
pulmonary lesions
Tularemia
Associated with bites by Amblyomma or Dermacentor ticks, deer 
flies, and mosquitoes or direct contact with the tissues of infected 
animals such as rabbits, squirrels, deer, raccoons, cattle, sheep, 
and swine
Ulcerated skin lesions at a bite site, pneumonia, relative 
bradycardia, lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis
Whipple disease (Tropheryma 
whipplei)
Potential association with exposure to sewage
Chronic diarrhea, arthralgia, weight loss, malabsorption, 
and malnutrition
From Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:798, Table 56.8.
TABLE 52.12  Discriminating Features of Noninfectious Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Causes of Fever
Exposure or Condition
Features
Diagnostic Method
Infectious Causes
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Regional or generalized lymphadenopathy; elevated 
inflammatory markers
Biopsy or histology
Inflammatory pseudotumor
History of nonspecific illness 
(presumed host-­controlled 
infection)
Insidious; malaise, weight loss, vague abdominal pain or 
tenderness; anemia; elevated inflammatory markers
Abdominal CT; biopsy or histology
Kawasaki disease 
(incomplete)
Asynchronous or incomplete features of Kawasaki disease; 
elevated inflammatory markers; thrombocytosis
Clinical constellation; echocardiogram
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Familial, sporadic
Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, exanthem; 
anemia, elevated inflammatory markers
Clinical constellation
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Familial, sporadic
Malaise, weight loss; then multisystem involvement 
(kidneys, joints, skin)
Serum antinuclear antibody, anti–
double-­stranded DNA, anti–smooth 
muscle antibody
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
985
CHAPTER 52  Fever
A complete review of systems is essential in the evaluation of FUO. 
Subtle respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms may suggest back-­to-­
back viral illnesses, commonly occurring during the first year in school 
or daycare. A history of rash is important for diagnosing Lyme disease, 
JIA, and acute rheumatic fever (see Chapter 53). The review of systems 
may reveal heat intolerance, palpitations, tremors, and declining qual­
ity of schoolwork in a child with hyperthyroidism. The overall state of 
health, including growth, energy, and appetite, can classify the severity 
of the illness and urgency of diagnostic testing.
Exposure history can be informative for uncommon causes of fever 
(see Table 52.12). A history of pica with fevers is associated with vis­
ceral larva migrans and toxoplasmosis. Exposure to domesticated and 
wild animals should be identified to exclude zoonoses (see Chapter 53). 
The food history should be detailed and should include water sources 
(particularly inquiring about well water), use of game meats, and con­
sumption of undercooked meats or unpasteurized dairy products (e.g., 
milk or cheese). Travel history is critically important in the establish­
ment of a differential diagnosis. Areas visited, accommodations, activ­
ities, prophylactic treatments, animal and insect exposures, and water 
and food sources should be reviewed. Coccidioidomycosis, histoplas­
mosis, malaria, Lyme disease, and Rocky Mountain spotted fever have 
regional distributions in the United States; travel to and within coun­
tries where other diseases are endemic should be ascertained as well 
(Table 52.13).
Previous medical records should be reviewed. Weight loss is 
important for diagnosing many chronic diseases such as lymphoma, 
tuberculosis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Poor weight gain and 
growth, with or without gastrointestinal symptoms, may be the only 
historical clue to inflammatory bowel disease (see Chapter 14). HIV 
risk factors in the parents and child should be reviewed. The types and 
frequency of prior infections may suggest an immunodeficiency. Past 
and current medications may reveal additional medical history. A his­
tory of severe head trauma may be associated with hypothalamic dys­
function and central fevers.
Physical Examination
Whenever possible, the patient should be examined during a febrile 
episode. Accompanying tachycardia and tachypnea can differentiate 
true fever from normal diurnal variation or factitious fever. Certain 
signs, such as rash, may only be present during the fever.
Eyes
The ophthalmologic examination should include assessment of visual 
acuity, extraocular motion, visual field integrity, and gaze, as well as 
inspection of external structures and ophthalmoscopic examination 
(see Chapter 43). Conjunctivitis, iritis-­uveitis-­scleritis, or both may 
be seen in a variety of infectious conditions, including EBV infection, 
leptospirosis, rickettsial infection, and cat-­scratch disease. Conjunc­
tivitis, uveitis, or both occur with Kawasaki disease, systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), polyarteritis nodosa, and JIA. Sarcoidosis may 
be associated with conjunctival and uveal tract nodules. A thorough 
ophthalmoscopic evaluation (and, if needed, slit-­lamp examination) 
should be performed. Sarcoidosis may be accompanied by vascular 
occlusions, hemorrhages, vascular sheathing, and preretinal inflamma­
tory exudates. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) produces chorioretinitis asso­
ciated with white infiltrates near vessels and confluent depigmented 
Causes of Fever
Exposure or Condition
Features
Diagnostic Method
Hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis
Virus associated; familial 
rheumatic disorder
Severe, rapidly progressive illness; hepatomegaly, 
lymphadenopathy, exanthem; cytopenias; extreme 
elevations of inflammatory markers
Ferritin, triglyceride levels, other 
diagnostic criteria; erythrophagocytosis 
by macrophages; natural killer cell, 
CD8+ T lymphocyte dysfunction
Vasculitis syndromes
Familial, sporadic
Specific hallmarks (renal, neurologic, stomatitis or perianal 
ulcers, uveitis, pulmonary)
Clinical constellation; specific 
autoantibodies; biopsy or histology
Sarcoidosis
Geography; race
Fatigue, weight loss, leg pain; anemia; elevated 
inflammatory markers; mediastinal lymphadenopathy; 
uveitis
Clinical constellation; biopsy or 
histology; soluble interleukin-­2 
receptor level
Inflammatory bowel disease
Familial; sporadic
Linear growth failure, subtle gastrointestinal symptoms 
or abdominal tenderness; perirectal skin tag; iron-­
deficiency anemia; elevated inflammatory markers
Abdominal CT; barium study
Lymphoreticular malignancy
Weight loss, fatigue; nonarticular bone pain; 
lymphadenopathy; cytopenias
Bone marrow or tissue biopsy
Drug hypersensitivity
Prescription or 
nonprescription drug 
exposure
Preserved sense of well-­being; exanthems; eosinophilia; 
organ dysfunction (renal, cardiac, pulmonary)
Clinical constellation; withdrawal of 
drug
Factitious fever or 
Munchausen syndrome by 
proxy
Predisposing parent-­patient 
dynamic
Discordant temperature and vital signs; discordant parent-­
measured temperature and urine temperature; normal 
inflammatory markers
Clinical constellation; verification of 
temperature in medical setting
Hypothalamic dysfunction, 
diabetes insipidus, 
dysautonomia, or absent 
corpus callosum
Underlying condition; genetic 
syndrome; anatomic 
abnormality
Normal inflammatory markers; hypernatremia; no response 
to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Clinical constellation; laboratory tests 
and imaging
Modified from Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:121, Table 15.2.
TABLE 52.12  Discriminating Features of Noninfectious Causes of Fever of Unknown 
Origin—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
986
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
areas. Histoplasmosis causes small atrophic spots and, in rare cases, 
focal granulomas of the retina and choroid. Toxoplasma gondii is a 
common cause of recurrent retinochoroiditis. Retinal changes also 
occur with bacterial endocarditis. Tuberculosis can cause formation 
of choroidal tubercles and ulcerative palpebral conjunctival lesions. 
Slit-­lamp examination may also reveal iridocyclitis in JIA, Behçet syn­
drome, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Ears, Nose, and Throat
The frontal and maxillary sinuses should be palpated for tenderness. 
The nares should be inspected for inflamed mucosa, aphthae, and 
purulent discharge. Tympanic membranes should be viewed and 
insufflated (see Chapter 5). The mouth should be checked for lesions, 
inflammation, and tooth tenderness. Behçet syndrome may manifest 
with oral aphthous lesions. Inspection of teeth and gums may reveal 
a dental abscess; percussing each tooth with a wooden tongue blade 
may produce pain in the abscessed tooth that may not otherwise be 
appreciated on visual inspection. Pharyngitis with and without exu­
date is associated with EBV infection, tularemia, leptospirosis, and 
CMV. PFAPA syndrome is characterized by periodic fever, aphthous 
stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenopathy. Candida infection in 
the mouths of children older than 6 months may result from immuno­
deficiency such as HIV, from stasis of oral secretions in children who 
are not orally fed, or from improper technique with inhaled steroids.
Day
107
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
170
Pulse Temp.
Date
Day of disease 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
1
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
AM
PM
106
105
104
103
102
101
Temperature
Temperature
100
99
98.6
98
97
107
Time
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Days
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
Stools
B
A
C
D
Respirations
Temperature
Pulse
105
103
101
99
97
1st
M E M E M E
Simple Tertian
1st week
2nd week
3rd week
4th week
Temperature
M E M E M E
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Day
107
105
103
101
99
97
1st
M E M E M E
Simple Quartan
M E M E M E
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Day
107
105
103
101
99
97
1st
M E M E M E
Malignant Tertian
M E M E M E
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
M E
7th
Fig. 52.3  Distinctive fever patterns. A, Malaria. B, Typhoid fever (demonstrating relative bradycardia). C, Hod­
gkin disease (Pel-­Ebstein pattern). D, Borreliosis (relapsing fever pattern). (Data from Woodward TE. The fever 
pattern as a clinical diagnostic aid. In: Mackowiak PA, ed. Fever: Basic Mechanisms and Management. 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997:215–236.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
987
CHAPTER 52  Fever
Neck
The neck should be examined for adenopathy or thyroid enlargement 
(see Chapter 48). The rest of the lymphatic system should be carefully 
examined. A single tender node may be seen with cat-­scratch disease 
or nontender node with lymphoma. Generalized adenopathy can be 
seen in CMV, EBV, HIV, and systemic JIA (see Chapter 44).
Heart, Lungs, and Abdomen
Careful auscultation of the heart and lungs is essential. A mitral or aortic 
regurgitant murmur may be the initial finding of infectious endocardi­
tis or of carditis in children with acute rheumatic fever. A pericardial 
friction rub may also suggest JIA, SLE, rheumatic fever, malignancy, or 
viral pericarditis. The abdomen must be carefully palpated for evidence 
of masses or hepatosplenomegaly (see Chapters 17 and 20). Abdominal 
tenderness may be present with abdominal abscesses, hepatosplenomeg­
aly, and inflammatory bowel disease. A rectal examination should be 
performed, and stool should be tested for occult blood. Sexually active 
girls should have a pelvic examination. Pain on movement of the uterus 
during the pelvic examination may indicate pelvic inflammatory disease.
Musculoskeletal Evaluation
The musculoskeletal examination should include assessments of 
strength and of active and passive range of motion and evaluation for 
warmth, tenderness, or swelling of joints. Irritability and pain on pal­
pation over a bone or pseudoparalysis may be the first clue to osteo­
myelitis. Bone pain may also result from neoplastic infiltration of the 
bone marrow or sickle cell anemia. Unexplained fever, arthralgia, and 
arthritis may be present with acute rheumatic fever, JIA, Lyme disease, 
Kawasaki disease, SLE, polyarteritis nodosa, and Behçet syndrome 
(see Chapter 44). Myalgia occurs commonly with viral diseases such 
as influenza, and may be present with rickettsial diseases, polyarteritis 
nodosa, Takayasu arteritis, and dermatomyositis.
Skin
The skin must be inspected for evidence of rashes and other lesions 
(see Chapter 53). JIA may manifest with an evanescent, salmon-­
colored macular rash over the trunk and joints that may appear and 
disappear rapidly and be evident only during febrile periods. Derma­
tomyositis is characterized by a heliotropic rash of the upper eyelids 
and an erythematous eruption (vasculitis) over the extensor surfaces 
(Gottron sign). SLE may manifest with a butterfly rash over the nose 
and malar regions, signs of photosensitivity in sun-­exposed areas, or 
vasculitis. The rash of Kawasaki disease is erythematous and may man­
ifest in many forms; it is most commonly a diffuse maculopapular rash. 
In Rocky Mountain spotted fever, there are erythematous macules on 
the wrists, ankles, or forearms that may become maculopapular and 
expand centripetally to the proximal extremities and torso; palms and 
soles may be involved and petechiae may develop later in the course of 
the illness. Endocarditis may be associated with splinter hemorrhages, 
Janeway lesions (painless, small, erythematous, or hemorrhagic lesions 
on the palms and soles), or Osler nodes (small, tender nodules on the 
palms). Lyme disease usually manifests with erythema migrans. This 
nontender, erythematous rash expands over hours and may have a 
pale center (“bull’s eye rash,” occurring in ∼50% of erythema migrans). 
The rash begins at the site of the tick bite during early localized Lyme 
disease; secondary lesions may appear at other sites during early dis­
seminated Lyme disease. Tularemia, salmonellosis, listeriosis, and EBV 
infections may feature generalized maculopapular rashes.
Diagnostic Studies
Laboratory evaluation should proceed in a stepwise, focused manner 
with emphasis on identifying serious illnesses with defined interven­
tions (see Fig. 52.2). Initial studies should include a CBC with differen­
tial, ESR, CRP, blood cultures, UA, urine culture, and chest radiograph.
The CBC with differential is neither specific nor diagnostic, except 
in rare circumstances, such as seeing lymphoblasts on the blood smear. 
Approximately 30% of patients have abnormal WBC counts; 46% may 
have a left shift (i.e., increased band neutrophil percentage), lymphocy­
tosis, atypical lymphocytes, or blasts. An elevated ESR or CRP indicates 
inflammation. The ESR is usually high in children with FUO caused 
by infectious pathogens, malignancies, and rheumatic diseases. Of 
patients with an ESR <10 mm/hr, 90% have a self-­limited viral disease.
UA and urine culture identify occult infections, particularly in 
young girls. The UA may also be abnormal in patients with endocardi­
tis and rheumatic and other inflammatory disorders.
Chest radiographs should be examined for unexpected consolida­
tions, calcifications, interstitial changes, perihilar adenopathy, medias­
tinal masses, or cardiomegaly (heart failure, pericarditis). Chest films 
are abnormal in up to 15% of patients with FUO.
Further studies should be directed by information obtained from 
detailed histories and physical examinations, as well as the initial labo­
ratory studies. Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and hyponatremia may 
be a sign of certain tick-­borne infections. Abnormalities in the physical 
exam or laboratory values may suggest diagnostic yield for biopsy of 
lymph nodes, skin, liver, or bone marrow.
In many cases, the etiology is still unknown after the initial eval­
uation and fever persists, necessitating performance of a second tier 
of testing. The initial laboratory studies may be repeated, especially 
to assess for trends in inflammatory markers. Additional studies may 
include a complete metabolic panel (CMP, to include assessments of 
kidneys and liver), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), uric acid, fibrinogen, 
ferritin, immunoglobulins, and fecal occult blood. The presence of 
transaminitis suggests the need to evaluate for associated viral infec­
tions, such as hepatitis A, CMV, EBV, adenovirus, and enterovirus. 
Elevation in LDH and uric acid suggests increased cell turnover due 
to an occult malignancy. Marked abnormalities in fibrinogen, ferritin, 
or immunoglobulins may suggest a more serious cause of FUO such 
as immune disregulation. The presence of fecal occult blood can point 
toward inflammatory bowel disease; if symptoms or the presence of 
TABLE 52.13  Causes of Fever in the 
Returned Traveler
Diagnosis
%
Malaria
30–40
Hepatitis
3–6
Respiratory infection*
2–11
Urinary tract infection/pyelonephritis
2–4
Dysentery
4–5
Dengue fever
2–6
Enteric (typhoid) fever
1–2
Tuberculosis
1–2
Rickettsial infection
∼1
Acute HIV infection
<1
Amebic liver abscess
<1
Other miscellaneous infections
4–9
Miscellaneous noninfectious causes
1–6
Undiagnosed
∼25
*Includes upper respiratory tract infection, pneumonia, and bronchitis.
Modified from Suh KN, Kozavsky PE, Keystone JS. Evaluation of fever 
in the returned traveler. Travel Med. 1999;83:997–1017.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
988
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
fecal occult blood suggest inflammatory bowel disease, fecal calprotec­
tin can assess for bowel inflammation and suggest the need for endo­
scopic studies and biopsy. All children with FUO should be assessed 
for tuberculosis (tuberculin skin tests or interferon-­γ release assay) 
and HIV (fourth-­generation antibody/antigen screen; see Chapter 48). 
After 10–14 days of fever have elapsed, additional infections may be 
identified by serologies. Organism-­specific IgG and IgM can be used 
to diagnose CMV, EBV (with the addition of EBV nuclear antigen 
antibody [EBNA] to aid with timing of the infection), and Bartonella 
infection. PCR-based bacteria detection from whole blood may also 
detect nonculturable organisms. Depending on travel and exposure 
history, additional serologic testing for toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, 
tularemia, and leptospirosis may be indicated. Expanded radiologic 
studies should include abdominal imaging. In well-­appearing children, 
abdominal ultrasound may be performed first. With ill appearance or 
continued elusive diagnosis, abdominal CT is appropriate. Additional 
imaging that may be of benefit include sinus CT, whole-­body MRI (to 
evaluate for occult osteomyelitis, malignancy, or histiocytic disorders), 
and PET/CT or MRI. Specialized radiologic studies performed without 
specific diagnostic clues from the history, physical examination find­
ings, or initial laboratory evaluation results have a low yield.
Finally, hospitalization may be considered at any time if the clinical 
assessment or laboratory values are worrisome for a serious cause of 
fever (see Table 52.13). In some cases, hospitalization is used to verify 
the presence of fever or facilitate evaluation by multiple subspecialists, 
such as infectious diseases, hematology/oncology, or rheumatology. In 
most well-­appearing children, serial physical examinations and diag­
nostic evaluation can be performed safely in an outpatient setting.
Cause
Most of the causes of FUO eventually develop localizing signs, symp­
toms, or abnormal laboratory studies. The following list of etiologies 
may either initially present with isolated fever or atypically present 
with fever.
Infectious Syndromes Causing Fever of Unknown Origin
A wide variety of infectious syndromes have been identified in children 
with FUO including subacute bacterial endocarditis, UTI, sinusitis, 
abscesses, osteomyelitis, and rheumatic fever.
Bacterial endocarditis. Bacterial endocarditis is rare in children; 
incidence increases with advancing age and history of pre-­existing heart 
disease (see Chapter 9). A new murmur or a change in the characteristic of 
an existing murmur may not be initially evident. Vegetations also may not 
be visible initially by transthoracic echocardiography; repeat transthoracic 
echocardiography or a transesophageal approach for patients with 
larger body habitus may be more sensitive. Large-­volume blood cultures 
separated in space and time are necessary for definitive diagnosis. PCR-
based blood assays may help diagnose culture negative endocarditis.
Urinary tract infection. Both upper and lower UTIs may present 
without localized pain or dysuria. Leukocytes may be absent in urine 
early in infection (see Chapter 21). Sterile pyuria may be present with 
tuberculosis, nongonococcal urethritis, viral cystitis, Kawasaki disease, 
reactive arthritis, interstitial nephritis, well-­circumscribed renal abscess, 
and certain rheumatic diseases. Renal ultrasonography may show areas 
of decreased echogenicity, enlarged echogenic kidneys, and renal or 
perinephric abscesses. A CT scan with contrast may reveal infected 
parenchyma as a nonenhancing lucency. Nuclear medicine renal scans 
can be used to identify active areas of infection and old scars.
Sinusitis. Factors that decrease the size and patency of the ostium 
or impair the mucociliary transport system predispose a child to 
sinusitis. Ethmoid and maxillary sinuses are present at birth. The frontal 
sinuses usually appear near 5 or 6 years of age but may be asymmetric 
or absent. Sphenoid sinuses may be seen radiographically by 9 years of 
age. Prolonged nasal congestion, headache, purulent nasal discharge, 
sore throat, daytime cough, tender teeth, and halitosis may be present in 
children with sinusitis. CT will demonstrate opacification of the sinuses 
but may not differentiate viral and bacterial infections. Rhinoscopy may 
show purulent material at the ostium of an infected sinus. Three distinct 
clinical presentations can identify high probability of bacterial sinusitis: 
(1) acute onset of high fever with severe purulent nasal discharge, (2) 
recurrent fever with onset of purulent nasal discharge during a period 
of apparent recovery from a viral URI, and (3) prolonged (>10–14 days) 
fever and nasal drainage. Infectious complications of sinusitis include 
dural space empyema or brain abscess.
Abscesses. Focal abscess not apparent on physical examination 
may present with FUO. Liver abscess may manifest with right upper 
quadrant tenderness and hepatomegaly. Blood cultures and laboratory 
assessments of the liver are often normal. Pelvic abscesses should be 
suspected in children with FUO who have abdominal, rectal, or pelvic 
tenderness even in the absence of a mass. Congenital anomalies, such 
as a patent urachus, may become superinfected and present with fever. 
The diagnosis of deep-­seeded abscesses is usually made with MRI, CT 
with contrast, or ultrasonography. CT or ultrasound guidance may be 
used to direct percutaneous drainage of many abscesses for diagnostic 
and therapeutic purposes.
Osteomyelitis. Bacterial osteomyelitis in childhood is usually seeded 
from a hematogenous source, but it sometimes follows penetrating 
injury. Refusal to use the affected limb or tenderness to palpation over 
the infected site is common; localizing symptoms may be initially 
absent in infants. Abnormalities in plain radiographs appear late, 
typically 2 weeks or more after onset. MRI is the imaging modality 
of choice. The blood or bone culture is often positive and markers of 
inflammation (CRP, procalcitonin, and ESR) are elevated. Suppurative 
myositis may mimic osteomyelitis and manifest as an FUO. Chronic 
noninfectious osteomyelitis (CNO), including chronic recurrent 
multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO), may present with fever and pain at 
one or more sites of sterile inflammation. The presence of recurrent 
sterile bone and joint inflammation accompanied by acne and pustulosis 
is highly suggestive of SAPHO syndrome (synovitis, acne, pustulosis, 
hyperostosis, and osteitis), a rare multisystem inflammatory disorder.
Rheumatic fever. Acute rheumatic fever may initially present 
as FUO, but diagnosis requires the development of a localizing 
sign or symptom. Early acute rheumatic fever may only manifest as 
polyarthralgia and elevation of inflammatory markers. Elbows, wrists, 
knees, and ankles are frequently involved. The diagnosis is made by 
fulfillment of the Jones criteria, which requires at least one objective 
major criterion (see Chapter 9).
Bacterial Pathogen Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Bacterial syndromes that cause FUO in children include Lyme disease, 
cat-­scratch disease, Q fever, rat-­bite fever, tularemia, brucellosis, lepto­
spirosis, chlamydial infections, and rickettsial infections.
Lyme disease. Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia 
burgdorferi and is transmitted by the Ixodes scapularis and Ixodes 
pacificus ticks. Although fever may be the only presenting symptom, 
careful history and examination invariably reveals one of the specific 
manifestations of Lyme disease. The usual manifestation of early Lyme 
disease is with a single (early localized) or multiple (early disseminated) 
erythema migrans lesions—an erythematous, annular, nontender, 
expanding rash with or without central clearing (see Chapter 53). The 
rash is self-­limited and resolves in 1–30 days (usually 2 weeks). Other 
manifestations of early disseminated Lyme disease include facial nerve 
palsy, peripheral neuropathy, cardiac conduction defects, myocarditis, 
and aseptic meningitis. Patients with early localized or disseminated 
Lyme may also exhibit fever, chills, fatigue, headaches, malaise, myalgia, 
and arthralgia. Late disseminated Lyme disease presents as monoarticular 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
989
CHAPTER 52  Fever
arthritis, typically with marked swelling but preservation of some range 
of motion. Although a history of exposure to outdoor activities or ticks 
is common in patients with Lyme disease at any stage, recognition of the 
specific tick bite resulting in disease transmission is unusual. Diagnosis 
in early localized Lyme disease should be made clinically on the basis of 
an erythema migrans lesion. Serology in early infection lacks sensitivity 
and specificity. Diagnosis of early disseminated and late disseminated 
Lyme disease requires a typical clinical illness and serologic evidence of 
infection with a two-­tier testing strategy. The initial test is an enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or immunofluorescence assay 
(IFA) screen. If this result is equivocal or positive, a Western immunoblot 
is performed to confirm the presence of at least five IgG antibodies 
(“bands”) specific to B. burgdorferi infection. Western blot should not be 
performed if the ELISA is negative or has not been performed because it 
lacks specificity in this setting.
Cat-­scratch disease. Cat-­scratch disease is a febrile illness 
associated with cats (usually kittens or cats in the first 2 years of life) 
and, more rarely, dogs. Bartonella henselae, which may be transmitted 
by the cat flea and cat saliva, is the etiologic agent. After a scratch or 
bite, a papule forms and may persist from days to months. Regional 
lymphadenopathy with one or more nodes occurs proximal to the skin 
site 1–9 weeks after inoculation. The node or nodes become enlarged 
and tender and may have overlying erythema. The lymphadenopathy 
usually resolves after 2–4 months but may last up to 3 years. Affected 
children may have adenopathy with fever, headache, malaise, anorexia, 
sore throat, and conjunctivitis (see Chapter 48). Atypically, cat-­scratch 
disease can present with isolated fever (FUO) or disseminated disease 
(culture-­negative endocarditis, encephalopathy, bone lesions, or liver 
or spleen granulomas). Diagnosis is established with serology.
Q fever. Q fever occurs as an acute or chronic infection caused by 
Coxiella burnetii. It manifests with headache, fever, chills, malaise, and, 
on occasion, respiratory symptoms. Gastrointestinal tract symptoms 
are also common in children. Severe disease with hepatic, cardiac, 
or CNS involvement is rare. Domesticated farm animals including 
cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reservoirs for human infection. 
Humans acquire the organism through inhalation of infected aerosols, 
particularly after livestock birthing, or ingestion of unpasteurized dairy 
products. Diagnosis is made by serologic testing.
Rat-­bite fever. Rat-­bite fever is a relapsing fever caused by Strep­
tobacillus moniliformis or Spirillum minus. Both organisms live in the 
upper respiratory tract of rodents and can be transmitted to humans 
through rodent bites, exposure to rodent oral secretions, or ingestion 
of contaminated food or water. Initial symptoms include relapsing 
fever, chills, malaise, and muscle aches. Rash, including palm and sole 
involvement, and migratory polyarthritis or arthralgia are common. 
Complications include abscesses, pneumonia, endocarditis, myocardi­
tis, and meningitis. Diagnosis is made by blood culture or culture of 
other infected fluid, such as abscess aspiration.
Tularemia. Francisella tularensis is the causative agent of tularemia. 
The disease is spread by contact with wild animals, such as rabbits and 
prairie dogs; insects that bite these animals, such as ticks and deer flies; 
or contaminated water or aerosols. A maculopapular nodule forms at 
the portal of entry and later becomes ulcerated with associated regional 
lymphadenopathy, a phenomenon termed ulceroglandular disease. 
Children may also present with fever and other disease variants based on 
the site of inoculation. Pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, hepatosplenomegaly, 
and pneumonia may occur. Diagnosis is made by serologic study.
Brucellosis. Brucellosis is caused by several bacterial species 
including Brucella abortus, Brucella melitensis, Brucella suis, and Brucella 
canis. The microorganisms are found in wild and domesticated animals. 
Infection may occur by airborne spread or by ingestion of meat or milk, 
with most childhood cases in the United States resulting from ingestion of 
unpasteurized milk or cheese. The infected child may present with fever, 
chills, malaise, headache, arthralgia, or myalgia. Pneumonia, cardiac 
involvement, and CNS involvement occur in rare cases. Diagnosis is 
made by special culture techniques and serologic study.
Leptospirosis. Leptospirosis is caused by members of the spirochete 
genus Leptospira. Infection is spread by contact with the urine of wild 
or domestic animals. In 1–2 weeks after exposure, patients experience 
the abrupt onset of fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, headache, and occa­
sionally conjunctival suffusion and rash. The initial acute septicemia 
phase may be followed by a second immune-­mediated phase with 
fever, aseptic meningitis, and uveitis. Severe illness with renal failure, 
jaundice, myocarditis, shock, and pulmonary hemorrhage may occur. 
Diagnosis is made by special culture techniques and serologic testing.
Chlamydial infection. Psittacosis and lymphogranuloma vene­
reum are chlamydial causes of FUO. Chlamydia psittaci may be 
transmitted by infected birds and produces respiratory illness with 
fever. Cardiac, liver, CNS, and thyroid involvement are possible 
though are rare. Diagnosis is made serologically. Chlamydia tra­
chomatis is a sexually transmitted organism that causes urogenital 
infections, perihepatitis, invasive lymphadenopathy (lymphogranu­
loma venereum), neonatal conjunctivitis, and neonatal pneumonia. 
Diagnosis is by PCR of infected body fluids.
Rickettsial infections. Transmission of the causative agent for Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever, Rickettsia rickettsii, occurs by tick bite. This 
disease is a small-­vessel vasculitis that manifests with fever, headache, 
intense myalgia, and abdominal symptoms. A characteristic rash is usu­
ally present by the sixth day of illness, includes palms and soles, and 
progresses from macular to petechial. Characteristic laboratory findings 
include leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and hyponatremia. Mortality 
rates are high, necessitating prompt therapy when the diagnosis is sus­
pected. Diagnosis is confirmed by PCR testing of blood or serology.
Anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis are caused by Anaplasma phagocytoph­
ila and multiple Ehrlichia species. Organisms are transmitted by I. scapu­
laris or the Lone Star tick (Amblyomma americanum). These illnesses are 
usually seen in the southeastern and upper midwestern United States and 
present with fever, severe headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, and myal­
gia. Rash is inconsistent but more common in children than in adults. 
Symptoms and general laboratory perturbations are similar to Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. Diagnosis is confirmed by PCR or serology.
Fungal Pathogen Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Fungal causes of FUO include blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidi­
oidomycosis, and cryptococcoses.
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a saprophytic fungus with both yeast and 
mycelial forms; it is found in the soil all over the world but is common in 
the Americas. It is endemic in the Southeast and Midwest regions of North 
America (Great Lakes). Infections with this fungus may localize to the 
lungs or disseminate to the brain, bone, or skin. The diagnosis is made by 
antigen testing on urine, fungal culture from respiratory or tissue samples, 
or visualization of broad-­based budding yeast on fungal stains.
Histoplasma capsulatum is a yeast found in soil in the Ohio and 
Mississippi River valleys and other locations in the United States and 
causes pulmonary and disseminated disease. Its many disease presen­
tations make it one of the “great mimics” in medicine. Diagnosis is 
made by the demonstration of the microorganism in biopsy or respira­
tory specimens, antigen testing on urine, or serology.
Coccidioides immitis is found in soil in the southwestern United 
States. Infections in humans are associated with a febrile pulmonary 
disease characterized by cough, rash, and chest pain. Diagnosis is usu­
ally made serologically.
Cryptococcus neoformans is often found in pigeon droppings and 
can cause pulmonary or CNS infection in immunocompromised 
patients. The diagnosis is made by culture, antigen in blood or CSF, or 
identification of encapsulated yeast in collected specimens.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
990
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Viral Pathogen Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Fever associated with most viral infections resolves within 7–10 days. 
For this reason, laboratory work-­up of FUO is usually deferred until 
after this interval in the well-­appearing child. Although certain respira­
tory viruses such as adenovirus can cause prolonged fevers, the classic 
viral infections associated with FUO are CMV, EBV, and HIV.
Cytomegalovirus. CMV may cause a mononucleosis-­like syn­
drome (heterophile-­negative mononucleosis) in children. General­
ized or cervical adenopathy may be seen along with fatigue, malaise, 
fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and abdominal pain (see Chapter 48). A 
morbilliform rash may occur. CMV retinitis, hepatitis, colitis, and 
pneumonitis are usually limited to children with impaired immune 
systems. The virus is transmitted by contact with infected secre­
tions. Infection is diagnosed by PCR (blood, urine) or by serology, 
although care must be taken to differentiate acute infection from 
reactivation.
Epstein-­Barr virus. Infectious mononucleosis is typically caused 
by EBV and may manifest with fever, exudative pharyngitis, malaise, 
and fatigue (see Chapter 48). The appearance of rash is sometimes 
preceded by amoxicillin therapy, but rash may occur without antibiotic 
administration. Tender lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly 
may occur. The diagnosis may be made by nonspecific tests 
(heterophile antibody or monospot) in older patients, but these studies 
are unreliable for young children. Specific antibody tests against viral 
capsid antigen, early antigen, and nuclear antigen are recommended in 
younger children.
Human immunodeficiency virus. Infection with HIV may cause 
FUO in children. The fever is typically due to associated opportunistic 
infections or malignancies that occur as a result of chronic immuno­
deficiency. Diagnosis is made with fourth-­generation antigen/antibody 
tests or PCR if acute infection is suspected (see Chapter 48).
Parasitic Pathogen Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
FUO in children may be caused by parasitic infections, including babe­
siosis, toxoplasmosis, and toxocariasis.
Babesiosis is caused by Babesia microti and is a parasite of rodents trans­
mitted to humans by tick bite. Infection may result in fever, chills, nau­
sea, vomiting, night sweats, myalgia, and arthralgia. Identification of the 
organism in a thick smear of RBCs, blood PCR, or serology is diagnostic.
Toxoplasma gondii is a protozoan parasite. Children become 
infected from eating contaminated, undercooked meat or from expo­
sure to the feces of domestic cats. Most infections acquired postnatally 
are asymptomatic, but children may develop a mononucleosis-­like ill­
ness (see Chapter 48). Diagnosis is by serology.
Toxocariasis (visceral larva migrans or ocular toxocariasis) results 
from ingestion of larvae of Toxocara canis or from Toxocara cati shed 
in dog and cat feces, respectively. Heavy or repeated infection results in 
fever, intense eosinophilia, hepatomegaly, and hypergammaglobulin­
emia. Lung, heart, and CNS involvement is rare. In ocular toxocariasis, 
the eye is infected, resulting in inflammation and scarring. Diagnosis 
is based on serology, but care must be taken to differentiate prior or 
asymptomatic infection from active infection.
Infections in Children with Fever of Unknown Origin 
Who Live in or Have Traveled to Countries with Certain 
Endemic Infections or Lower Baseline Socioeconomic 
Status
In a child who has traveled to or lives in a country with lower base­
line socioeconomic status, consideration must be given to the location, 
water sources, and activities. Some causes of FUO to consider include 
malaria, viral hepatitis, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, and amebic liver 
abscess (see Table 52.13).
Malaria
Malaria is transmitted by the bite of an infected mosquito carrying 
one of the five species of the Plasmodium genus that cause disease in 
humans. The patient experiences chills, rigors, high fever, diaphore­
sis, and headaches. The incubation period varies among species, from 
1 week to several months. Demonstration of the parasite on thick 
peripheral blood smear is diagnostic. The endemicity of malaria in var­
ious countries can be checked at http://www.cdc.gov/malaria.
Viral Hepatitis
Hepatitis A may be contracted by ingestion of contaminated food or 
water. Hepatitis B and C viruses are transmitted through blood prod­
ucts or sexual contact. Symptoms can include fever, malaise, jaundice, 
hepatomegaly, nausea, and anorexia. Hepatitis B and C can become 
chronic (see Chapter 18). Initial diagnosis is by serologic testing, with 
PCR testing for active disease in hepatitis B and C.
Typhoid Fever (Enteric Fever)
Enteric fever is caused by infection with Salmonella enterica serovars 
typhi, paratyphi A, paratyphi B, and paratyphi C. After ingestion of 
contaminated water or food, the incubation period is usually 1–2 
weeks, but may be as long as 8 weeks. Persistent fever, headache, mal­
aise, anorexia, splenomegaly, and rose spots are clinical hallmarks of 
enteric fever. Diagnosis is by blood culture.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis may manifest as FUO in children (see Chapters 3 and 48). 
Affected children may have pulmonary or extrapulmonary disease. 
The signs and symptoms of pulmonary disease may vary greatly from 
weight loss, tuberculin skin test conversion, and low-­grade fever to 
mass effect from mediastinal lymphadenopathy and fulminant dissem­
inated pulmonary involvement with miliary infiltrates or, in rare cases, 
cavitation. Pulmonary tuberculous presents as an FUO less commonly 
than nonpulmonary tuberculosis. Hematogenous spread may cause 
CNS, liver, heart, or renal involvement. Ingested bacilli may result in 
gastrointestinal tuberculosis. The diagnosis requires demonstration 
of acid-­fast bacilli or positive PCR from sputum, gastric aspirate, or 
the affected organ. Skin testing or interferon-­γ release assays may yield 
negative results in the case of active tuberculosis.
Amebiasis
Intestinal infection with Entamoeba histolytica may produce invasion 
of the mucosal lining and spread to other organs such as the liver. Ame­
bic liver abscess may manifest with fever, weight loss, right upper quad­
rant pain, and anorexia. The patient may have painful hepatomegaly 
without splenomegaly. The abscess may be localized with abdominal 
ultrasonography or CT. Diagnosis is by ova and parasite examination 
of the stool and serology.
Rheumatic Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Rheumatic diseases are the second most common identified cause of 
FUO after infections. In a systematic review, the most common causes 
were JIA and SLE (see Chapter 44).
Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
JIA is a diagnosis that requires time to identify all manifestations and to 
exclude other entities. JIA is defined by arthritis of unknown origin that 
begins in a child younger than 16 years and persists for a minimum of 
6 weeks. JIA is divided into three subtypes: systemic, polyarticular, and 
oligoarticular. The systemic form often manifests with prolonged high 
fever. Affected children often have a daily fever and may have a fine 
macular rash, arthralgias, arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly, or pericardial 
involvement. Characteristic laboratory findings include leukocytosis, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
991
CHAPTER 52  Fever
thrombocytosis, and elevated ESR. Polyarticular JIA may manifest with 
arthritis, low-­grade fever, morning stiffness, anorexia, and weight loss. 
There is no diagnostic laboratory test for JIA.
Polyarteritis
Polyarteritis is a necrotizing vasculitis that may manifest with myalgia, 
arthralgia, fever, vasculitic skin lesions, and abdominal pain. Cardiac, CNS, 
and renal involvement may also occur. The ESR is usually markedly ele­
vated. Biopsy and the presence of antibodies to proteinase 3 and myeloper­
oxidase (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) aid with diagnosis.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
SLE may manifest with fever, photosensitivity, mouth sores, weight loss, 
rash, myalgias, malaise, fatigue, and hepatosplenomegaly. Patients may 
also have serositis and renal involvement. Cytopenias are typical. The 
presence of autoantibodies is common, including antinuclear antibody 
(ANA), double-­stranded DNA (dsDNA), antibodies to extractable 
nuclear antigens (ENAs, such as anti-­Smith antibody, anti-­ribonuclear 
protein antibody, anti-­Ro antibody, and anti-­La antibody), and anti­
phospholipid antibodies.
Behçet Syndrome
Behçet syndrome is very rare in children but may manifest with FUO. 
Patients may have aphthous stomatitis, arthritis, genital ulcers, uveitis, 
and erythema nodosum.
Neoplasms
Hodgkin lymphoma, lymphoma, neuroblastoma, and leukemia may 
all manifest as FUO. In young children, leukemia, neuroblastoma, 
and lymphoma should be suspected, whereas in adolescents, Hod­
gkin lymphoma and Ewing sarcoma are more common as causes of 
FUO.
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma may manifest with firm, nontender adenopathy; 
fever; night sweats; and weight loss. Some patients present with a medi­
astinal mass with or without respiratory symptoms. Diagnosis is made 
through biopsy.
Lymphoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma may manifest as painless adenopathy, cough 
or dyspnea from a mediastinal mass, abdominal mass, nerve compres­
sion, bone pain, fever, and weight loss. Adenopathy and masses may be 
inapparent on physical examination but found on chest or abdominal 
imaging. Diagnosis is by biopsy.
Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma may manifest as abdominal, thoracic, or pelvic masses; 
spinal cord compression; bone pain; hypertension; hepatomegaly; 
diarrhea; and fever (see Chapter 20). Diagnosis is aided by radiologic 
studies and urinary catecholamine measurements and is confirmed by 
biopsy.
Leukemia
Both acute lymphocytic leukemia and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia 
may manifest with lethargy, pallor, bleeding, fever, bone pain, lymph­
adenopathy, and arthralgia. Diagnosis is made by blood smear and 
bone marrow biopsy.
Pheochromocytoma
Pheochromocytomas are rare catecholamine-­secreting tumors; 10% 
occur in children. These tumors manifest with paroxysmal or sustained 
hypertension, headache, excessive sweating, fever, hyperglycemia, and 
palpitations. The tumors are usually in the adrenal medulla, but 35% 
of those occurring in children are multiple or extra-­adrenal. Diag­
nosis is made by measuring urinary or plasma metanephrine or cat­
echolamine levels. Localization of tumor is by CT, MRI, or iodine 
131-­metaiodobenzylguanidine scanning.
Miscellaneous Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
Genetic Diseases (See Chapter 54)
Familial Mediterranean fever is an autosomal recessive trait seen in 
people of Sephardic Jewish descent and people of Middle Eastern 
descent. The fever may be accompanied by joint, abdominal, and chest 
pain. Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is an X-­linked recessive disor­
der associated with decreased ability to sweat, dental abnormalities, 
and sparse hair. Eyebrows and eyelashes may be absent. Fever may 
result from the inability of the body to cool itself. Diagnosis is made by 
skin biopsy that shows an absence of eccrine glands.
Drug Fever
Drug fever is a diagnosis of exclusion. Some drugs are more likely 
than others to cause drug fever (α-­methyldopa, phenytoin, penicil­
lins). There is no characteristic fever pattern. The lag time between 
the initiation of the drug and onset of fever is highly variable. There is 
an infrequent association with rash or eosinophilia. Some drugs may 
cause fever by virtue of physiologic side effects. Anticholinergic drugs 
may decrease sweating and diminish the body’s ability to cool itself. 
Chronic salicylate intoxication can cause increased heat production by 
uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation.
Kawasaki Disease
Kawasaki disease may manifest with a variety of signs, including rash; 
lymphadenopathy; conjunctival hyperemia; strawberry tongue; ery­
thematous lips; swelling of hands and feet; arthralgia; arthritis; myo­
carditis; late desquamation of hands, feet, and perineal area; and sterile 
pyuria. Fever may be high and spiking. Diagnosis is by fulfillment of 
clinical criteria (see Chapter 53). A subset of patients with MIS-­C will 
present with features of Kawasaki disease with additional findings, 
such as coagulopathy, cardiac dysfunction, or shock. A known prior 
history of infection with the SARS-­CoV-­2 virus or demonstration of 
prior infection via positive IgG in an unvaccinated individual in the 
setting of a hyperinflammatory illness suggests MIS-­C rather than 
Kawasaki disease.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease) may 
manifest with FUO. Ulcerative colitis may manifest with bloody diar­
rhea, fever, fecal urgency, and straining (see Chapter 14). Pyoderma 
gangrenosum, arthritis, and erythema nodosum can also be seen. 
Crohn disease (regional enteritis) may manifest with abdominal pain, 
fever, anorexia, and growth failure. Diarrhea may develop later. Arthri­
tis, erythema nodosum, and finger clubbing may also occur. Diagnosis 
of inflammatory bowel disease is by endoscopy and histology.
Thyrotoxicosis
Hyperthyroid states may manifest with FUO. Physical examination 
may reveal tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, exophthalmos, lid lag, 
eyelid retraction, and smooth, flushed skin with diaphoresis. Diagnosis 
is made from thyroid function studies.
Factitious Disorders
Factitious fever may be a form of factitious disorder imposed on self 
(formerly Munchausen syndrome) or medical child abuse (formerly 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
992
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Munchausen syndrome by proxy) (see Chapter 30). A variety of tech­
niques have been used to falsely elevate a recorded temperature. A 
mercury thermometer may be rubbed between hands or placed near 
a light bulb. Hot liquids may be placed in the mouth before an oral 
temperature is taken. Hot rectal douches have also been reported to 
raise a rectally taken temperature. Even with pathologic fevers, there is 
some circadian rhythm to the temperature curve; with factitious fever 
there is no rhythm. In addition, there is usually no vasoconstriction, 
sweating, tachypnea, or tachycardia. If factitious fever is suspected, the 
temperature should be obtained while the patient is observed. The tem­
perature of freshly voided urine can also be recorded.
Other patients may produce actual diseases that cause true fevers, 
such as by injecting infected pyogenic material subcutaneously or 
intravenously or by taking toxic levels of thyroid hormone. Once 
the diagnosis is documented and the safety and security of the child 
ensured, psychiatric care is indicated.
Patients with Fever of Unknown Origin in Whom 
No Diagnosis Is Made
If no diagnosis is made, most patients are clinically well and asymp­
tomatic on follow-­up. Some may be determined to be healthy from the 
start; most are in good health at follow-­up, whereas few have symptoms 
at the end of evaluation. Some may have relapses of fever for a few 
months. Diseases such as JIA, inflammatory bowel disease, and PFAPA 
syndrome may not be immediately diagnosed but usually manifest typ­
ical symptoms and signs within 2 years of the onset of the FUO.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Many children with fever will have a source identified on their ini­
tial history and physical examination. Red flags include patients with 
symptoms or signs of sepsis (tachycardia, hypotension) or meningi­
tis or encephalitis (fever, headache, irritability, altered mental status, 
and, for the older child, meningismus). Affected infants with menin­
gitis are more likely than older children to have subtle and nonspecific 
symptoms.
A child with fever of recent onset with no adequate historical or 
physical explanation for the fever is said to have FWS. Because of the 
high volume of children with FWS, it is important to have a reliable sys­
tem for individual patient evaluation and management. Although most 
patients with FWS have a self-­limited viral illness, up to 10% have an 
invasive bacterial infection, with young infants at highest risk. Because 
of the potential for morbidity and mortality from the organisms that 
cause invasive disease, identification of patients at high risk is essential. 
Although there is no single, timely series of tests that correctly cate­
gorizes all patients, the combination of careful clinical evaluation and 
appropriate laboratory screening criteria can help identify a level of 
risk in children of different ages. The reduction of bacteremia due to 
vaccine-­serotype pneumococcus has led to a careful reduction in diag­
nostic testing, especially in the 3–36-­month-­old child with FWS. Red 
flags include a history of immunodeficiency or other chronic medical 
illness, prior episodes of bacteremia, anatomic or functional asplenia, 
no prior immunizations, toxic appearance, signs of shock, petechiae or 
purpura, poor responsiveness, and other signs of altered mental status.
Some children who are initially thought to have FWS develop into 
patients with FUO. A practical definition of FUO is a temperature 
higher than 38°C (100.4°F) daily for at least 8–14 days and no diag­
nosis after an initial evaluation. Work-­up of the patient with FUO 
should proceed in a stepwise manner. It should be kept in mind that 
many patients with FUO have unusual, atypical, or complicated man­
ifestations of common childhood illness, mainly infections. Red flags 
include weight loss, night sweats, signs of organ system dysfunction or 
failure, or unstable vital signs suggestive of sepsis (Table 52.14). Only 
this last category requires empiric antibiotics or deviation for the usual 
stepwise evaluation of FUO.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 52.14  Red Flags for Potentially Serious Febrile Conditions
History
Poor appetite
Weight loss (unintentional)
Sleep perturbation
Focal complaints
High fever longer than 5 days
Oliguria
Physical Examination
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Rash (especially petechiae or purpura)
Wasting
Clubbing
Altered mental status
Focal findings
Shock (tachycardia hypotension)
Screening Laboratory Tests
Anemia
Hypoalbuminemia
Lactate dehydrogenase or uric acid elevation
Immunoglobulin elevation
Elevated Inflammatory Markers
Marked leukocytosis or neutropenia
Bandemia
Pronounced thrombocytosis or thrombocytopenia
Markedly Elevated
ESR
CRP
Procalcitonin
Ferritin
Fibrinogen (elevated or low)
From Chusid MJ. Fever of unknown origin in childhood. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64(1):205–230, Box 1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
992.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Bahorski J, Repasky T, Ranner D, et al. Temperature measurement in 
pediatrics: a comparison of the rectal method versus the temporal artery 
method. J Pediatr Nurs. 2012;27:243–247.
Carr EA, Wilmoth ML, Eliades AB. Comparison of temporal artery to rectal 
temperature measurements in children up to 24 months. J Pediatr Nurs. 
2011;26:179–185.
Cimpello LB, Goldman DL, Khine H. Fever pathophysiology. Clin Pediatr 
Emerg Med. 2000;1:84–93.
Cunha BA. The clinical significance of fever patterns. Infect Dis Clin N Amer. 
1996;1:33–44.
Goldstein B, Giroir B, Randolph A, et al. International Pediatric Sepsis 
Consensus Conference: definitions for sepsis and organ dysfunction in 
pediatrics. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2005;6(1):2–8.
Sinha M, Jupe J, Mack H, et al. Emerging technologies for molecular diagnosis 
of sepsis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018;31(2):e00089-17.
Stine CA, Flook DM, Vincze DL. Rectal versus axillary temperatures: is there 
a significant difference in infants less than 1 year of age? J Pediatr Nurs. 
2012;27:265–270.
Sullivan JE, Farrar HC. Fever and antipyretic use in children. Pediatrics. 
2011;127(3):580–587.
Tribble AC, Gerber JS, Bilker WB, et al. Impact of rapid diagnostics with 
antimicrobial stewardship support for children with positive blood 
cultures: a quasi-­experimental study with time trend analysis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2020;41(8):883–890.
Wolfe M, Bachur R. Serious bacterial infection in recently immunized young 
febrile infants. Acad Emerg Med. 2009;16(12):1284–1289.
Fever Without Source
American Academy of Pediatrics. Reaffirmation of AAP clinical practice 
guideline: the diagnosis and management of the initial urinary tract 
infection in febrile infants and young children 2-­24 months of age. 
Pediatrics. 2016;138(6):e21063026.
Andreola B, Bressan S, Callegaro S, et al. Procalcitonin and C-­reactive 
protein as diagnostic markers of severe bacterial infections in febrile 
infants and children in the emergency department. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2007;26(8):672–677.
Arora R, Mahajan P. Evaluation of child with fever without source: review of 
literature and update. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60(5):1049–1062.
Baraff LJ. Management of fever without source in infants and children. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2000;36(6):602–614.
Biondi EA, Lee B, Ralston SL, et al. Prevalence of bacteremia and bacterial 
meningitis in febrile neonates and infants in the second month of life: a 
systematic review and meta-­analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(3):e190874.
Colvin JM, Muenzer JT, Jaffe DM, et al. Detection of viruses in young children 
with fever without an apparent source. Pediatrics. 2012;130(6):e1455–e1462.
Coulthard MG, Kalra M, Lambert HJ, et al. Redefining urinary tract infections 
by bacterial counts. Pediatrics. 2010;125(2):335–341.
Cruz AT, Mahajan P, Bonsu BK, et al. Accuracy of complete blood cell counts 
to identify febrile infants 60 days or younger with invasive bacterial 
infections. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(11):e172927.
Dall L, Stanford JF. Fever, chills, and night sweats. In: Walker HK, Hall WD, 
Hurst JW, eds. Clinical Methods: The History, Physical, and Laboratory 
Examinations, 3/e. Boston: Butterworths; 1990.
Farnham AC, Zimmerman CM, Papadouka V, et al. Invasive pneumococcal 
disease following the introduction of 13-­valent conjugate vaccine 
in children in New York City from 2007 to 2012. JAMA Pediatr. 
2015;169(7):646–652.
Greenhow TL, Hung YY, Herz AM, et al. Changing epidemiology of serious 
bacterial infection in young infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014;33(6):595–599.
Greenhow TL, Hung YY, Herz A. Bacteremia in children 3 to 36 months 
old after introduction of conjugated pneumococcal vaccines. Pediatrics. 
2017;139(4):e20162098.
Huppler AR, Eickhoff JC, Wald ER. Performance of low-­risk criteria in the 
evaluation of young infants with fever: review of the literature. Pediatrics. 
2010;125(2):228–233.
Kuppermann N, Dayan PS, Levine DA, et al. A clinical prediction rule to 
identify febrile infants 60 days and younger at low risk for serious bacterial 
infections. JAMA Pediatr. 2019;173(4):342–351.
Milcent K, Faesch S, Gues CG, et al. Use of procalcitonin assays to predict 
serious bacterial infection in young febrile infants. JAMA Pediatric. 
2016;170(1):62–69.
Mischler M, Ryan MS, Leyenaar JK, et al. Epidemiology of bacteremia 
in previously healthy febrile infants: a follow-­up study. Hosp Pediatr. 
2015;5(6):293–300.
Nigrovic LE, Mahajan PV, Blumberg SM, et al. The Yale Observation Scale 
Score and the risk of serious bacterial infections in febrile infants. 
Pediatrics. 2017;140(1):e20170695.
Ogoina D. Fever, fever patterns and diseases called “fever” – a review. J Infec 
Public Health. 2011;4:108–124.
Pantell RH, Newman TB, Bernzwig J, et al. Management and outcomes of care 
of fever in early infancy. J Am Med Assoc. 2004;291(10):1203–1212.
Pantell RH, Roberts KB, Adams WG, et al. Evaluation and management of 
well-appearing febrile infants 8 to 60 days old. Pediatrics. 2021;148(2).
Powell EC, Mahajan PV, Roosevelt G, et al. Epidemiology of bacteremia in febrile 
infants aged 60 days and younger. Ann Emerg Med. 2018;71(2):211–216.
Sanders S, Barnett A, Correa-­Velez I, et al. Systematic review of the 
diagnostic accuracy of C-­reactive protein to detect bacterial infection in 
nonhospitalized infants and children with fever. J Pediatr. 2008;153:570–574.
Shaikh N, Hoberman A, Hum S, et al. Development and validation of a 
calculator for estimating the probability of urinary tract infection in young 
febrile children. JAMA Pediatr. 2018;172(6):550–556.
Shaikh N, Morone NE, Bost JE, et al. Prevalence of urinary tract infection in 
childhood—a meta-­analysis. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2008;27:302–308.
Tam PI, Madoff LC, Coombes B, et al. Invasive pneumococcal disease 
after implementation of 13-­valent conjugate vaccine. Pediatrics. 
2014;134(2):210–217.
Tzimenatos L, Mahajan P, Dayan PS, et al. Accuracy of the urinalysis for 
urinary tract infections in febrile infants 60 days and younger. Pediatrics. 
2018;141(2):e20173068.
Van den Bruel A, Haj-­Hassan T, Thompson M, et al. Diagnostic value of 
clinical features at presentation to identify serious infection in children in 
developed countries: a systematic review. Lancet. 2010;375:834–845.
Whitney C, Farley M, Hadler J, et al. Decline in invasive pneumococcal disease 
after the introduction of protein-­polysaccharide conjugate vaccine. N Engl 
J Med. 2003;348:1737–1746.
Yo CH, Hsieh PS, Lee SH, et al. Comparison of the test characteristics of 
procalcitonin to C-­reactive protein and leukocytosis for the detection 
of serious bacterial infections in children presenting with fever without 
source: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Ann Emerg Med. 
2012;60(5):591–600.
Central Nervous System Infection
Avery RA, Licht DJ, Shah SS, et al. CSF opening pressure in children with optic 
nerve head edema. Neurology. 2011;76:1658–1661.
Avery RA, Shah SS, Licht DJ, et al. Reference range for cerebrospinal fluid 
opening pressure in children. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(9):891–892.
Byington CL, Kendrick J, Sheng X. Normative cerebrospinal fluid profiles in 
febrile infants. J Pediatr. 2011;158(1):33–37.
Chadwick SL, Wilson JW, Levin JE, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid characteristics of 
infants who present to the emergency department with fever. Pediatr Infect 
Dis J. 2011;30:e63–e67.
Curtis S, Stobart K, Vandermeer B, et al. Clinical features suggestive of 
meningitis in children: a systematic review of prospective data. Pediatrics. 
2010;126(5):952–960.
Freedman SB, Marrocco A, Pirie J, et al. Predictors of bacterial meningitis 
in the era after Haemophilus influenzae. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2001;155:1301.
Gable MS, Sheriff H, Dalmau J, et al. The frequency of autoimmune N-­
methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor encephalitis surpasses that of individual viral 
etiologies in young individuals enrolled in the California Encephalitis 
Project. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54:899–904.
Kanegaye JT, Soliemanzadeh P, Bradley JS. Lumbar puncture in pediatric 
bacterial meningitis: defining the time interval for recovery of 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
992.e2
cerebrospinal fluid pathogens after parenteral antibiotic pretreatment. 
Pediatrics. 2001;108:1169.
Kim KS. Acute bacterial meningitis in infants and children. Lancet Infect Dis. 
2010;10(1):32–42.
Kimberlin DW, Lin CY, Jacobs RF, et al. Natural history of neonatal 
herpes simplex virus infections in the acyclovir era. Pediatrics. 
2001;108:223.
Kimberlin DW, Lin CY, Jacobs RF, et al. Safety and efficacy of high-­dose 
intravenous acyclovir in the management of neonatal herpes simplex virus 
infections. Pediatrics. 2001;108:230.
Kulik DM, Uleryk EM, Maguire JL. Does this child have bacterial meningitis? 
A systematic review of clinical prediction rules for children with suspected 
bacterial meningitis. J Emerg Med. 2013;45(4):508–519.
Lee MW, Vedanarayanan VV. Cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure in 
children: experience in a controlled setting. Pediatr Neurol. 2011;45:238–
240.
Nigrovic LE, Malley R, Kuppermann N. Meta-­analysis of bacterial meningitis 
score validation studies. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97(9):799–805.
Wong M, Schlaggar BL, Buller RS, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid protein 
concentration in pediatric patients. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2000;154:827.
Fever of Unknown Origin
American Academy of Pediatrics. Report of the Committee on Infectious 
Diseases. 31th ed. Itaska, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018.
Antoon JW, Potisek NM, Lohr JA. Pediatric fever of unknown origin. Pediatr 
Rev. 2015;36(9):380–390.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria. [Updated 8-­20-­2020; 
cited 8-­29-­2020.] Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/malaria.
Chovel-­Sella A, Ben Tov A, Lahav E, et al. Incidence of rash after amoxicillin 
treatment in children with infectious mononucleosis. Pediatrics. 
2013;131:e1424.
Chow A, Robinson JL. Fever of unknown origin in children: a systematic 
review. World J Pediatr. 2011;7(1):5–10.
Chusid MJ. Fever of unknown origin in childhood. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2017;64(1):205–230.
Hocqueloux L, Guinard J, Buret J, et al. Do penicillins really increase the 
frequency of a rash when given during Epstein-­Barr virus primary 
infection? Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57:1661–1662.
Kouijzer IJE, Mulders-­Manders CM, Bleeker-­Rovers CP, et al. Fever of unknown 
origin: the value of FDG-­PET/CT. Semin Nucl Med. 2018;48(2):100–107.
Palazzi DL, McClain DL, Kaplan SL. Hemophagocytic syndrome in children: 
an important diagnostic consideration in fever of unknown origin. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2003;36(3):306–312.
Pizzo PA, Lovejoy FH, Smith DH. Prolonged fever in children: review of 100 
cases. Pediatrics. 1975;55:468–473.
Talano JAM, Katz BZ. Long-­term follow-­up of children with fever of unknown 
origin. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2000;39:715–717.
Weakley KE, Marshall GS, Statler VA. Long-­term health outcomes of patients 
evaluated for unexplained fever in a pediatric infectious diseases clinic. J 
Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2020;9(4):494–497.
Woods CR. Rocky Mountain spotted fever in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2013;60(2):455–470.
Zhou W, Tan Z, Li Y, et al. Human herpes viruses are associated with 
classic fever of unknown origin (FUO) in Beijing patients. PloS One. 
2014;9(9):e110077.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
