567
MUSCLE WEAKNESS AND HYPOTONIA
As a symptom, hypotonia may be overt in its presentation, with the 
manifestations of low muscle tone apparent to family and the medi­
cal team alike. Other times, hypotonia may be insidious, subtly pre­
senting to an examiner during a medical evaluation and only rising to 
the awareness of family when delays or regressions in milestones are 
pointed out in the process of obtaining a history. Hypotonia is defined 
as decreased resistance to passive movement of a muscle through its 
range of motion, while weakness consists of decreased maximal force 
of active muscle contraction. Depending on the underlying cause, 
hypotonia may be associated with either weakness or normal muscle 
strength; similarly, muscle weakness may be associated with hypo­
tonia, hypertonia, or no apparent change in muscle tone. Hypotonia 
affects children of all ages and may be congenital or acquired, acute or 
chronic, progressive or static, isolated or part of a complex clinical sit­
uation (Table 35.1). An analytical approach to children with hypotonia 
requires historical information, clinical observations, and detailed gen­
eral physical and comprehensive neurologic examinations to localize 
the source of hypotonia to a specific lesion (Fig. 35.1). This neuraxial 
localization is then combined with laboratory, imaging, and genetic 
studies as indicated to arrive at a diagnosis (Tables 35.2 and 35.3).
The generation of normal muscle tone requires the integrity of 
the entire central and peripheral nervous systems, from the cerebral 
cortex to cortical white matter pathways, basal ganglia, cerebellum, 
brainstem, spinal cord, peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction 
(NMJ), and muscle. Diseases that affect the function of the nervous 
system at any of these levels may result in abnormal muscle tone (see 
Tables 35.2 and 35.3). The primary structure responsible for regulat­
ing muscle tone is the muscle spindle, a sensory apparatus within the 
muscle that detects stretching of muscle fibers and that, in response, 
sends impulses to the spinal cord via sensory afferent pathways. These 
sensory afferent fibers bifurcate in the spinal cord, with one branch 
synapsing directly onto anterior horn α motor neurons, producing 
contraction in the agonist muscle that underwent stretching, while 
the other branch synapses onto an inhibitory interneuron, inactivating 
the antagonist muscle. When engaged by stretching of the muscle, this 
pathway is referred to as the stretch reflex, which works to oppose 
changes in muscle length (Fig. 35.2). Additional inputs to the muscle 
include excitatory input traveling via α motor neurons that end at the 
NMJ to produce voluntary contraction, as well as γ motor neurons that 
end at the muscle spindle, providing inhibitory input to the muscle 
spindle, setting the level of resting muscle tone. This lower motor neu­
ron pathway of α motor neurons and γ motor neurons is closely moni­
tored and influenced by descending central pathways from the cerebral 
cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum. These descending 
pathways constitute the upper motor neuron pathways that influence 
resting muscle tone.
Associated symptoms and physical findings in hypotonia vary 
depending on whether the hypotonia is caused by lesions of the central 
nervous system (CNS), as opposed to the peripheral nervous system 
(PNS) (Table 35.4). An estimated 80–90% of infantile hypotonia is cen­
tral in origin, with the remaining 10–20% being peripheral. Most cases 
of acute lateralized body weakness result from abnormalities of the 
blood supply to a portion of the CNS. Stroke serves as a term to denote 
the sudden onset of symptoms attributable to such an interruption of 
cerebral or spinal perfusion and is discussed in Chapter 37.
EVALUATING HYPOTONIA
The systematic evaluation of muscle tone consists first of making the 
following clinical observations:
 • Characterization of spontaneous posture
 • Response to postural changes
 • Extent of joint mobility
 • Response to flapping of distal extremities
Muscle tone is divided into postural and phasic. Postural tone 
is the steady contraction of muscles in uniform resistance to passive 
movement. Antigravity resistance is an example of postural tone. Pha­
sic tone is the catch experienced when an extremity is rapidly flexed 
or extended across a joint. The method of evaluating muscle tone and 
strength depends on the age of the patient.
HYPOTONIC INFANT
Clinical Evaluation
In an infant, historical information must include a complete obstetric 
history, including the amount and quality of fetal movements, amniotic 
fluid volume, and intrauterine growth restriction, as well as accurate 
data about perinatal events, diet, toxic exposures, and family history. 
The muscle strength, passive tone, joint extensibility, and postural 
reflexes, including responses to traction, axillary suspension, and ven­
tral suspension of the hypotonic infant, should be compared to those of 
the normal infant (Fig. 35.3).
Muscle Strength
Muscle strength (Table 35.5) cannot be measured directly in infants, but 
numerous clinical clues allow the careful observer to identify weakness. 
The most important of these clues is the spontaneous posture. The weak 
infant has diminished or no spontaneous movement, often in striking 
contrast to the usual vigorous and plentiful movements of the infant 
with normal strength. The lower extremities are abducted and the lat­
eral surfaces of the thighs lie against the examination table in a classic 
“frog leg” position, whereas the upper extremities lie extended alongside 
the body or flexed in a flaccid position beside the head (Figs. 35.4 and 
35.5A). With marked weakness, there are no movements that overcome 
Hypotonia and Weakness
Chamindra G. Konersman
35
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
568
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.1  Causes of Hypotonia and Weakness
Systemic
Connective Tissue
Cerebral
Spinal Cord
Anterior Horn Cell
Peripheral Nerve
Neuromuscular 
Junction
Muscle
Common
Sepsis
Heart failure
Acidosis
Hypoxia
Renal failure
Hypoglycemia
Trisomy 21
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Fragile X syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Other chromosomal disorders
Maternal-­fetal drug effects
Stickler syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Achondroplasia
Hypoxic-­ischemic brain 
injury
Intracranial hemorrhage
Brain malformation*
Intrauterine infection
Postnatal brain injury
Myelodysplasia
Spinal cord tumor
Epidural abscess
Transverse myelitis
Acute flaccid myelitis
Trauma (transection or 
compression)
Syringomyelia
Spinal muscular atrophy
Postinfectious polyneu­
ropathy (Guillain-­
Barré syndrome)
Toxic neuropathies 
(isoniazid, vincristine, 
platinum-­based anti­
neoplastic medica­
tions, nitrofurantoin)
Botulism
Infantile myasthenia
Transient acquired 
neonatal myasthenia
Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy
Becker muscular dys­
trophy
Myotonic dystrophy
Dermatomyositis
Uncommon
Disorders of amino acid 
metabolism
Urea cycle disorders
Peroxisomal disorders
Scurvy
Rickets
Sotos syndrome
Angelman syndrome
Rett syndrome
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Osteogenesis imper­
fecta
Velocardiofacial 
syndrome
Progressive encepha­
lopathies
Mitochondrial disease
Neonatal spinal cord 
transection
Hypoxic-­ischemic 
myelopathy
Arteriovenous malfor­
mation
Möbius syndrome
Chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating poly­
neuropathy
Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth 
disease
Hereditary sensory and 
autonomic neurop­
athies
Toxic (organophosphate 
poisoning, aminogly­
cosides, magnesium)
Postneuromuscular 
blocking agents 
(vecuronium)
Pompe disease
Rare
Lowe syndrome
Zellweger syndrome
Neonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy
Mucolipidosis type IV
Tay-­Sachs disease
Gangliosidosis
Mannosidosis
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy
Miller-­Dieker syndrome
Congenital muscular 
dystrophy
Metachromatic leuko­
dystrophy
Krabbe disease
Poliomyelitis
Incontinentia pigmenti
Fazio-­Londe disease
Brown–Vialetto–Van 
Laere syndrome
Juvenile amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis
Refsum disease
Giant axonal neuropathy
Metachromatic leuko­
dystrophy
Krabbe disease
Congenital myasthenic 
syndromes
Other muscular dystro­
phies
Congenital myopathies
Metabolic myopathies
Mitochondrial myopa­
thies
*Examples of brain malformations include agenesis of the corpus callosum, lissencephaly, Joubert syndrome, and Dandy-­Walker malformations.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
569
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
the pull of gravity. The immobility of the weak infant results in flatten­
ing of the occipital bone, which is often associated with occipital hair 
loss. When placed in a sitting posture, the infant droops forward, the 
shoulders sink, the head falls forward, and the arms hang limply.
Passive Tone
Passive tone can be assessed by evaluating the resistance to movement 
of the limbs through their range of motion. Evaluation of the shoulders, 
elbows, wrists, hips, knees, and ankles is especially helpful. In hypo­
tonic infants, the examiner senses a looseness of the limbs as the limbs 
are moved. In addition, grasping the midportion of the infant’s limb 
and passively flapping the extremity allows the examiner to evaluate 
the degree of limpness of the distal extremity. In the hypotonic infant, 
the hands and feet wave limply; in the normal infant, the ankle and 
wrist are maintained fairly rigidly in line with the rest of the extremity.
Even in normal infants, there is a wide variation of muscle tone. 
Passive muscle tone varies and is particularly diminished after feed­
ing and before sleep. There is profound hypotonia in all infants during 
sleep. Premature infants, even those without neurologic injury, have 
diminished tone relative to term infants, due to incomplete myelin­
ation of corticospinal and subcorticospinal tracts. Tone can also be 
affected by the position of the head. The infant whose head is turned 
to one side may manifest an asymmetric tonic neck response, with 
increased extensor tone on the side of the body to which the head is 
turned and increased flexor tone on the contralateral side, resulting in 
a “fencer’s posture” (Fig. 35.6). This asymmetry of tone may be elic­
ited even in the child who does not exhibit the typical fencer’s posture. 
Therefore, examination of an infant should always be conducted while 
the infant’s head is at the midline; the same is true for eliciting muscle 
stretch reflexes. Hypotonia can also be a secondary finding in a variety 
CT/MRI abnormal
EEG abnormal
Normal metabolic screen
+/– abnormal MRI
Abnormal
metabolic screen
Multi-organ
dysfunction
EEG abnormal
Developmental
regression
CT/MRI brain, serial neuro exams, EEG, serum/CSF,
amino acids, urine organic acids, acylcarnitine
profile, ammonia, lactate/pyruvate, CK, VLCFA
Hypotonia due to CNS disease
CNS dysfunction? abnormal HC, encephalopathy,
hyperreflexia, pathologic reflexes, hemibody weakness,
developmental regression, seizures, reduced alertness
Yes
No
History, exam, family
history, consanguinity,
maternal history
Hypotonic infant
Fetal factors
Sepsis, CHF, hypothyroidism
Hypotonia due to PNS disease
CK, EMG
Normal MRI/EEG
Normal metabolic screen
+ syndromic features
Normal MRI/EEG
Sensory and/or motor
spinal level
CK normal or mildly 
EMG pure motor disease
Motor delay
Motor neuron disease
Exome/genome 
sequencing
Copy number analysis
Spinal cord?
MRI entire spine
Genetic syndromes
(Trisomy 21, DiGeorge,
Prader-Willi, others)
Spinal trauma
Myelodysplasia
Hypoxia / ischemia
AVM
Tumor
SMA
Mobius
Fazio-Londe
BVVL
CK normal
EMG sensory and
motor abnormal
Sensation abnormal
Neuropathy
EMG myopathic
No pain with
weakness
CK normal
3 Hz RNS decrementing
Fluctuating weakness
Muscle
disease
Mother with
myasthenia
Autonomic
abnormalities:
Dilated pupils
Constipation
Previously
healthy
Seropositive
Botulism
Autoimmune
myasthenia
History of
feeding/respiratory
problems
Seronegative
CMS
TNM
NMJ disorder
CMT
GAN
Other genetic
neuropathies
CK 
CK normal
Muscular dystrophy
Myopathy
Muscle biopsy
Congenital
myopathy
Mother w/distal
weakness, grip, myotonia
Congenital
myotonic
dystrophy
CK > 10,000
Global delay
Abnormal brain MRI
CNS signs
Cardiomegaly
DMD
CMD
Pompe
Mitochondrial
myopathy
Metabolic
Inborn errors of
metabolism:
Urea cycle defects
Organic acidurias
Aminoacidopathies
Fatty acid oxidation
Storage disorders
Mitochondrial disease
Neurodegenerative disease
Leukodystrophies
Progressive
encephalopathies
Brain malformation
HIE
Stroke
Intracranial hemorrhage
Birth complication
Intrauterine infection
Fig. 35.1  Diagnostic approach to the hypotonic infant. AVM, arteriovenous malformation; BVVL, Brown–
Vialetto–Van Laere syndrome; CHF, congestive heart failure; CK, creatine kinase; CMD, congenital muscular 
dystrophy; CMS, congenital myasthenic syndrome; CMT, Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease; CNS, central nervous 
system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy; EMG, electromyography with nerve 
conduction; GAN, giant axonal neuropathy; HC, head circumference; HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy; 
NMJ, neuromuscular junction; PNS, peripheral nervous system; RNS, repetitive nerve stimulation; SMA, spi­
nal muscular atrophy; TNM, transient neonatal myasthenia; VLCFA, very long-­chain fatty acids.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
570
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.2  Differentiating the Causes of Infantile Hypotonia
Localization
Cause
History and Exam Findings
Investigation to Aid in Diagnosis
Brain
HIE
Intracerebral hemorrhage
Prematurity, difficult delivery
Brain MRI
Brain malformations
Cranial nerve abnormalities, Babinski sign, gradual 
development of hypertonia (especially axial), respira­
tory or feeding difficulties, global delay, micro-
macrocephaly
Cerebral ultrasound
Brain MRI
Intrauterine infection
Fever, altered mental status
Microbial cultures/evaluations, CSF evaluation
Postnatal birth injury
Seizures, focal neurologic deficits
Brain MRI, EEG
Progressive encephalopathies 
(leukodystrophies, progressive 
myoclonic epilepsies, Lennox-­
Gastaut syndrome, infantile 
spasms)
Seizures, developmental regression, ataxia, focal neuro­
logic deficits, visual loss
Brain MRI, EEG, EMG/NCS (useful in adrenoleuko­
dystrophy, Krabbe disease, and metachromatic 
leukodystrophy), specific genetic testing
Mitochondrial disease
Seizures, focal neurologic deficits, global delay, visual 
loss, hyper-­ or hyporeflexia
Brain MRI, lactate, pyruvate, creatine kinase, 
GDF-­15, muscle biopsy, mitochondrial DNA 
sequencing and deletion/duplication analysis on 
muscle or affected tissue, EMG/NCS
Brainstem
Joubert syndrome
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia
Cobblestone malformations
Multiple cranial nerve abnormalities, breathing and 
feeding difficulties, possible intellectual delay, nystag­
mus, possible hyperreflexia, ataxia
Brain MRI (molar tooth sign in Joubert syndrome), 
genetic panels for specific disorders
Spinal cord
Myelodysplasia
Spinal cord tumor
Syringomyelia
Hypoxia-­ischemia
Trauma
AVM
Spinal level on exam, weakness below a defined 
spinal level, absent reflexes (acutely) or hyperreflexia 
(chronically) below the level, may have Babinski sign, 
history of trauma
Brain MRI, complete spinal MRI
Motor neuron
Spinal muscular atrophy
Absence of antigravity movements, tongue fascic­
ulations, absent reflexes to hyporeflexia, normal cogni­
tion, breathing/feeding difficulties; weakness in legs 
more than arms in SMA types II–III
SMN1 genetic analysis
Poliomyelitis
Neck stiffness, muscle spasms, areflexia, asymmetric 
flaccid paralysis of a limb, respiratory distress, muscle 
atrophy, normal sensation
Isolation of poliovirus from stool, confirmation 
using RT-­PCR, acute and convalescent serology 
showing fourfold increase in titer, EMG/NCS 
showing pure motor neuronopathy
Incontinentia pigmenti
Skin blistering, verrucous skin lesions, hyperpigmented 
streaks, pale/hairless atrophic linear streaks that respect 
Blaschko lines, dental abnormalities, intellectual delay
DNA analysis, EMG/NCS showing pure motor 
neuronopathy
Fazio-­Londe disease
Brown–Vialetto–Van Laere 
syndrome (BVVL)
Optic atrophy, nystagmus, bulbar palsy, facial weakness, 
hearing loss (BVVL only), tongue fasciculations, ptosis, 
respiratory compromise, muscle weakness
DNA analysis
Nerve
Guillain-­Barré syndrome (GBS)
Chronic inflammatory demyelinat­
ing polyneuropathy (CIDP)
Sensory ataxia with walking difficulties, rapidly (GBS) or 
slowly (CIDP) progressive weakness, absent reflexes 
or hyporeflexia, autonomic dysfunction, antecedent 
gastrointestinal or respiratory illness in GBS
EMG/NCS with absent or prolonged F-­waves, 
prolonged distal latencies, conduction block, 
demyelinating nerve conduction velocities, CSF 
showing cytoalbuminologic dissociation, MRI 
with edematous enhancing nerve roots
Toxic neuropathies
History and temporal correlation with exposure to a neu­
rotoxic drug, distal then proximal muscle weakness, 
absent reflexes or hyporeflexia, sensory ataxia with 
walking difficulties
EMG/NCS showing mixed axonal/demyelinating 
features, plasma drug levels
Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease
Family history of similar disease, pes cavus and hammer 
toe foot deformities, ataxic gait, foot drop, absent 
reflexes or hyporeflexia
EMG/NCS to determine if axonal or demyelinating 
subtypes, DNA analysis
Hereditary sensory and autonomic 
neuropathies
Sensory loss in a stocking/glove distribution, chronic 
skin ulceration and poor wound healing, distal muscle 
weakness with foot deformity, absent reflexes or 
hyporeflexia, variable anhidrosis
EMG/NCS showing normal or mildly abnor­
mal motor responses and abnormal sensory 
responses, nerve biopsy showing reduced myelin­
ated and unmyelinated fibers, DNA analysis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
571
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Localization
Cause
History and Exam Findings
Investigation to Aid in Diagnosis
Nerve—cont’d
Refsum disease
Autosomal recessive inheritance, stocking/glove 
distribution of sensory and motor weakness, anosmia, 
hearing loss, ataxia, ichthyosis, short metacarpals and 
metatarsals, cardiac arrhythmia, and cardiomyopathy
Elevated plasma phytanic acid concentration, DNA 
analysis
Giant axonal neuropathy
Stocking/glove distribution of sensory loss and motor 
weakness, cerebellar ataxia, absent reflexes or 
hyporeflexia, kinky hair (tightly curled), nystagmus, 
dysarthria, pyramidal tract signs, optic neuropathy, 
seizures
Brain MRI with white matter abnormalities, 
axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy on EMG/
NCS, nerve biopsy showing giant axons (axonal 
swelling) and disorganized neurofilaments, DNA 
analysis
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Krabbe disease
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Developmental regression, absent reflexes or hypore­
flexia, Babinski signs
EMG/NCS showing demyelinating neuropathy, 
brain MRI showing white matter disease, DNA 
analysis
Neuromuscular 
junction
Botulism
Sudden poor feeding, constipation, weak cry, gradual 
muscle weakness, dilated poorly reactive pupils, expo­
sure to soil/dust with bacterium or honey consumption
Presence of toxin in stool/serum, culture bacterium 
from stool, EMG/NCS showing low-­amplitude 
motor responses or decrement on repetitive 
nerve stimulation in a weak muscle
Transient acquired neonatal 
myasthenia
Ptosis, feeding and respiratory difficulties, aspiration, 
mother with signs or symptoms of autoimmune 
myasthenia
Maternal history of myasthenia, EMG/NCS show­
ing decrement on repetitive nerve stimulation in 
a weak muscle, good response to acetylcholines­
terase inhibitors
Infantile (autoimmune) myas­
thenia
Ptosis, episodic weakness, recurrent feeding and respi­
ratory difficulties, easy fatigability
EMG/NCS showing decrement on repetitive nerve 
stimulation in a weak muscle, good response to 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, antiacetylcholine 
receptor antibody serology
Congenital myasthenic syndrome
Ptosis, episodic weakness, recurrent feeding and respi­
ratory difficulties, easy fatigability
EMG/NCS showing decrement on repetitive nerve 
stimulation in a weak muscle, DNA analysis, 
negative antiacetylcholine receptor antibody 
serology
Muscle
Duchenne/Becker muscular 
dystrophy
X-­linked pattern of inheritance, enlarged calves, proxi­
mal muscle weakness with a Gower maneuver
Markedly elevated CK, DNA analysis
Congenital myotonic dystrophy
Autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, frog-­leg 
position, open down-­turned mouth, minimal antigrav­
ity movements in infants, distal > proximal weakness 
in children, impaired relaxation of grip, dysarthria, 
myopathic facies with temporal wasting
Test mother (then father) for clinical myotonia 
or electrical myotonic discharges, EMG/NCS 
with myopathy in newborn period and myotonic 
discharges in older children, normal to mildly 
elevated CK, DPMK gene CTG repeat analysis
Pompe disease
Absence of antigravity movements, severe cardiomeg­
aly, feeding/respiratory difficulties, hepatomegaly
GAA enzyme activity in dried blood spot, lympho­
cytes or fibroblasts, GAA gene analysis
Congenital muscular dystrophy
Family history, proximal > distal muscle weakness, 
feeding and respiratory difficulties, early-­onset con­
tractures in specific subtypes, keloids/hyperkeratosis 
pilaris in specific subtypes, CNS dysfunction in specific 
subtypes
Brain MRI, mild to markedly elevated CK, muscle 
biopsy showing dystrophic changes, muscle MRI, 
EMG/NCS to assess for demyelinating neuropa­
thy component and myopathy, DNA analysis
Congenital myopathies
Family history, proximal > distal muscle weakness, 
feeding and respiratory difficulties, ptosis and ophthal­
moparesis in specific subtypes
Normal to mildly elevated CK, muscle biopsy 
showing specific changes (nemaline rods, cores, 
centrally placed nuclei), DNA analysis
Metabolic myopathies
Family history, proximal muscle weakness, history 
of rhabdomyolysis or myoglobinuria, second-­wind 
phenomenon in some subtypes
Normal to markedly elevated CK, EMG/NCS usually 
myopathic, metabolic evaluation (lactate, pyru­
vate, acylcarnitine profile, plasma amino acids, 
urine organic acids), muscle biopsy, DNA analysis
Mitochondrial myopathies
Maternal inheritance pattern, proximal > distal weak­
ness, ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, short stature, variable 
cardiac and CNS involvement, recurrent rhabdomy­
olysis
Normal to moderately elevated CK, abnormal GDF-­
15, EMG/NCS showing myopathy and variable 
neuropathy, muscle biopsy with ragged red fibers, 
mitochondrial DNA analysis
AVM, arteriovenous malformation; CK, creatine kinase; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CTG, cytosine-­thymine-­guanine; EMG/
NCS, electromyography/nerve conduction study; GAA, acid α-­glucosidase; GDF-­15, growth differentiation factor-­15; HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encepha­
lopathy; RT-­PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; SMA, spinal motor atrophy.
Modified from Sparks SE. Neonatal hypotonia. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:363–371.
TABLE 35.2  Differentiating the Causes of Infantile Hypotonia—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 35.3  Localization of Symptoms on Neural Axis
UPPER MOTOR UNIT
LOWER MOTOR UNIT
Brain
Spinal Cord
Alpha Motor 
Neuron*
Peripheral Nerve
Neuromuscular 
Junction
Muscle
Level of conscious­
ness
↓
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Strength
Mild to moderate ↓
Mild to moderate ↓
Marked ↓
Marked ↓
Marked ↓
Marked ↓
Tone
Spastic (hypotonia at 
onset possible)
↓ Acutely; ↑
↓, flaccid
↓
↓
↓
Deep tendon 
reflexes
Normal to ↑
↓ Acutely; ↑
↓ to absent
↓ to absent (lost early)
Normal
Normal to ↓ to absent
Babinski
Present
Present usually
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Fasciculations
Absent
Absent
Present
Rarely
Absent
Absent
Atrophy
Mild to moderate
Mild to moderate
Present
Present
Absent
Present pseudohyper­
trophy
Sensation
Normal
Absent below level 
of lesion
Normal
Abnormal in defined 
peripheral nerve 
distribution or glove/
stocking
Normal
Normal
Creatine kinase 
level
Normal
Normal
Normal to moderately 
elevated (several 
1,000s IU/L)
Normal or mildly ele­
vated (100s IU/L)
Normal
Normal to severely 
elevated
Overall pattern
Hemibody deficits
Spinal level present
Proximal weakness in 
SMA; asymmetric 
weakness in other 
diseases
Distal, length-­dependent 
usually, defined nerve 
territory
Symmetric, pain­
less weakness of 
tonically active 
muscles
Proximal > distal 
weakness
Other
Seizures
Developmental delay
Regression
Cortical signs (e.g., 
language)
Radicular back pain, 
bowel/bladder 
dysfunction
Fluctuating diurnal 
variation
Fatigability
Myalgia, Gower sign
SMA, spinal muscular atrophy.
*Originate in anterior horn cells.
Inhibitory interneuron
Lumbar spinal cord
Alpha motor
neuron
(active)
Dorsal root ganglion
Ia afferent fiber
Muscle spindle
Quadriceps muscle
Hamstring muscle
Ventral root
Gamma motor
neuron
(inhibited)
Fig. 35.2  Lower motor neuron pathway influencing resting muscle tone. Stretching of the quadriceps muscle 
(agonist) will result in relaxation or inhibition of the hamstring muscle (antagonist).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
573
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
TABLE 35.4  Exam and Historical Findings to Distinguish Central from Peripheral Hypotonia
Finding
Central
Peripheral
Seizures
Present
Absent
Altered mental status
Present
Absent
Delayed cognitive milestones
Present
Absent
Deep tendon reflexes
Normal or increased
Absent or decreased usually
Babinski sign
Present
Absent
Infantile reflexes
Persistent
Not persistent
Pull-­to-­sit
Minor head lag
Marked head lag
Tongue fasciculations without other 
cranial nerve deficits
Unlikely
Very likely
Ophthalmoparesis
Present in brainstem disease
Present in some myopathic diseases
Ptosis
Present in some brainstem diseases
Present in some myopathic and neuromuscular 
junction diseases
Weakness
Mild to moderate
Severe
Antigravity movements
Present
Absent usually
Arthrogryposis
Less common
More common
Muscle atrophy
None to mild
Moderate to severe
A
B
C
D
Fig. 35.3  Normal postural responses in a 5-­month-­old infant showing that the elbow does not extend beyond 
the midline on joint extensibility testing (A), the head and body in the same plane (no head lag) on pull-­to-­sit 
with resistance resulting in flexed elbows and knees (B), and lack of a slip-­through with resistance against the 
examiner’s hands, good maintenance of head control, and extension of the head and legs with the steppage 
reflex (D). An infant with hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy who was initially hypotonic at the time of delivery 
was noted to be hypertonic at 8 months with a normal ventral suspension response as evidenced by the 
ability to keep the head above horizontal (C).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
574
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
of systemic conditions, such as heart failure, sepsis, acidosis, or failure 
to thrive (see Table 35.1).
Joint Extensibility
The extent to which the joints may be extensible provides an indi­
rect clue to the presence of hypotonia. Examination of mobility at the 
elbows, wrists, hips, and knees is helpful. The hypotonic infant may 
assume unusual postures in the presence of joint hyperextensibil­
ity. The scarf sign is a useful sign of hyperextensibility in the young 
infant. With the infant in a semireclining position, the hand is pulled 
across the chest toward the opposite shoulder and the position of the 
elbow is noted (see Fig. 35.3A). If the elbow passes the midline, there 
is hypotonia.
Postural Reflexes
Traction response (pull-­to-­sit). The traction response is the most 
useful and most sensitive of the postural reflexes in infants. With the 
infant lying supine, the infant’s hands are grasped, and the infant is 
pulled up to a sitting position. Once the sitting posture is attained, the 
head is held erect in the midline. During the maneuver, the examiner 
notes the infant’s attempt to counter the traction by flexion of the arms 
(see Fig. 35.3B).
In an infant younger than 3 months, the plantar grasp should 
also be evident when grasping the infant’s hands to assess the traction 
response. In addition, there should be flexion at the elbow, knee, and 
ankle in response to the maneuver. The degree to which the head and 
neck pull up along with the trunk depends on the child’s age.
In infants younger than 33 weeks’ gestation, there is no traction 
response. From 33 weeks to term, the infant has head lag but responds 
to the traction maneuver by flexing the neck flexors in an attempt to lift 
the head. The full-­term infant exhibits a traction response with mini­
mal head lag, and when the sitting posture is attained, the head may be 
held erect momentarily and then falls forward.
By age 3 months, there should be no head lag, and the head should be 
aligned with the plane of the back as the child is pulled to sitting. The 
absence of flexion of the limbs in response to the examiner’s pull and 
the presence of head lag inappropriate for age suggest hypotonia (see 
Figs. 35.4D and 35.5C).
Axillary suspension. The response to axillary suspension allows assess­
ment of generalized and shoulder girdle tone. The infant is held under 
the arms, lifted, and suspended from the axillae without the thorax 
being grasped. In infants with normal tone and strength, the shoul­
der girdle muscles exert enough strength to allow the infant to be sus­
pended without slipping through the examiner’s grasp. In addition, the 
infant’s head is held midline and the legs are held with some flexion 
at the hips, knees, and ankles (see Fig. 35.3D). The hypotonic infant 
droops with legs extended and head falling forward, and the absence 
of resistance of the muscles of the shoulder girdle allows the infant to 
slip through the grasp of the examiner as the baby’s arms fling upward 
(see Fig. 35.5B).
Ventral suspension. The response to ventral suspension allows assess­
ment of tone of the trunk, neck, and extremities. The examiner holds 
the infant, who is lying prone. The infant is supported only by the 
examiner’s hand on the abdomen. A normal infant holds the head erect 
and the back straight and holds the extremities with some flexion at the 
elbows, hips, knees, and ankles (see Fig. 35.3C). A full-­term neonate 
makes intermittent attempts to hold the head straight, maintains the 
back straight, and can flex the limbs. The hypotonic infant droops in 
the examiner’s palm, as if in the shape of an inverted “U,” with the head 
and legs dangling limply (see Fig. 35.4C).
TABLE 35.5  Grading Muscle Strength
	0:	 No contraction
	1:	 Minimal visual or palpable contraction only
	2:	 Moves in horizontal plane but not against gravity
	3:	 Moves against gravity but not against resistance
	4:	 Moves against gravity and minimal resistance
	5:	 Moves against gravity and full resistance
A
B
C
D
Fig. 35.4  Spinal muscular atrophy I: characteristic postures. A, A 6-­week-­old infant with severe weakness 
and hypotonia from birth. Note the frog-­leg posture of the lower limbs and internal rotation (“jug-­handle”) at 
the shoulders. B, A 1-­year-­old infant with frog-­leg posture, external rotation at shoulders, intercostal reces­
sion, and normal facial expressions. A 6-­week-­old infant with marked weakness of the limbs and trunk giving 
the characteristic inverted “U” appearance on ventral suspension (C) and pull-­to-­sit (D). (Modified from Volpe 
JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008:770–771.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
575
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
WEAK CHILD
Clinical Evaluation
Posture and Strength
Observation of the child’s spontaneous posture may suggest the presence 
of weakness. Muscle strength can be observed as the child performs func­
tional tasks, including moving from a supine to a seated position, arising to 
stand from a sitting or lying position, standing on one leg independently, 
hopping, walking, running, and climbing stairs. The wheelbarrow 
maneuver, in which the pelvis and lower extremities are supported by the 
examiner while the child propels themselves forward on the floor using 
only the arms, can be used to functionally assess strength in the upper 
extremities. In the child older than 5 years, manual muscle testing can 
be performed if the child is cooperative (see Table 35.5). The examiner 
evaluates each muscle group independently, comparing the child’s mus­
cle strength in resistance to the examiner’s strength. Although a child’s 
strength is not expected to be equal to an adult, the child is given full 
strength scores if the degree of strength exhibited is substantial for age. 
The child with muscle weakness has difficulty performing motor tasks and 
may exhibit unusual postures (e.g., lordosis) or toe walking, and on man­
ual muscle testing may be easily overcome by the examiner’s strength.
Passive Tone
Passive muscle tone is more consistent during the waking hours in the 
child than in the infant. The major joints should be moved through 
their range of motion and the extent of resistance noted. Flapping 
the distal extremities provides a useful clue. Briskly lifting the lower 
extremity at the knee while the patient lies supine is another useful test 
of muscle tone. In the normal child, the foot briefly drags along the 
examination table and then rises with the leg. In the hypertonic child, 
the leg remains extended stiffly at the knee. In the hypotonic child, the 
lower leg hangs limply and the foot drags as the knee is raised.
Joint Extensibility
The hypotonic child demonstrates hyperextensibility of joints, espe­
cially at the elbows, wrists, knees, and ankles. Examination of the small 
muscles of the fingers across distal joints may also be helpful (Fig. 35.7).
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO THE HYPOTONIC 
INFANT
The diagnosis of a particular neurologic disorder depends on the loca­
tion of the lesion (i.e., which part of the nervous system is impaired or 
abnormal), the patient’s age, and whether the condition is progressive 
or static (see Tables 35.1 to 35.3).
A careful perinatal history is obtained to identify possible features 
suggestive of perinatal hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury. The infant who 
has neurologic dysfunction attributable to perinatal asphyxia typically 
has a history of an acute encephalopathy during the neonatal period 
(e.g., disturbance of consciousness, poor feeding, seizures, autonomic 
dysfunction).
C
A
B
A
B
Fig. 35.5  An 18-­month-­old infant, with an undiagnosed pure motor neuron disorder with severe axial more 
than appendicular weakness, delays in motor milestones, and respiratory insufficiency, has internal rotation 
of upper arm and frog-­leg position (A), a slip-­through appearance on axillary suspension (B), and a prominent 
head lag on pull-­to-­sit traction testing (C).
Fig. 35.6  Asymmetric tonic neck reflex. Normally present from birth to 
2 months. Turning head to one side when supine elicits extension of 
arm and leg ipsilateral to side that head is turned and flexion of opposite 
arm and leg. Persistence beyond 2 months might suggest abnormal 
development of contralateral motor cortex.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
576
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
A CT study or MRI of the head is helpful to identify evidence of 
brain malformation, intrauterine infection, hypoxic brain injury, intra­
cranial hemorrhage, or hydrocephalus. If the history suggests seizures, 
an EEG should be obtained.
An ophthalmologic evaluation may detect evidence of ocular mal­
formation (cataracts, microphthalmia, optic hypoplasia), evidence of 
intrauterine infection (chorioretinitis), or retinal/macular abnormality 
(retinitis pigmentosa, cherry-­red spot) (see Chapter 43).
In some cases, requesting a hearing evaluation or brainstem audi­
tory evoked response may be appropriate. A lumbar puncture is neces­
sary if acute or chronic (intrauterine) meningitis is suspected.
Fig. 35.1 summarizes the diagnostic approach to the hypotonic 
infant. After a thorough history and detailed general and neurologic 
examinations, the first priority is to determine if there are signs and 
symptoms of CNS dysfunction because the majority of hypotonia in 
infants is central in origin (see Table 35.4). Extraneural involvement 
such as the presence of multiorgan dysfunction, bone marrow suppres­
sion, organomegaly, or heart failure accompanying hypotonia is highly 
suggestive of a systemic disease, such as a storage disorder or an inborn 
error of metabolism. Particular attention should be given to family 
history, perinatal maternal illnesses and exposures, delivery complica­
tions, and the possibility of consanguinity. Signs and symptoms of CNS 
involvement in an infant include abnormal head circumference (either 
micro-­ or macrocephaly), reduced levels of alertness (i.e., encepha­
lopathy), seizures, respiratory and feeding difficulties, hypotonia and 
later hypertonia, hemibody weakness, hyperreflexia, developmental 
cognitive regression, and pathologic reflexes such as persistence of the 
Babinski sign in an older infant or child. The hypotonic infant’s exam 
findings may change with age, even on the order of weeks to months. 
Many hypotonic neonates initially thought to have PNS dysfunction 
eventually develop hypertonia, hyperreflexia, and pathologic Babinski 
signs over time, indicative of CNS dysfunction; therefore, serial thor­
ough neurologic exams are essential until confirmatory testing yields 
a firm diagnosis or until a clinical diagnosis is made with reasonable 
confidence. An MRI of the head is obtained to detect any anatomic 
abnormalities or other causative lesions. If CNS dysfunction is present, 
initial recommended testing includes EEG (which may show seizures 
or cortical slowing) and a complete metabolic screen—serum amino 
acids (aminoacidopathies, urea cycle disorders, some organic acid­
urias), urine organic acids (organic acidurias), ammonia (urea cycle 
disorders, organic acidurias), acylcarnitine profile (organic acidurias, 
fatty acid oxidation disorders, riboflavin transporter defect), serum 
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate and pyruvate (mitochondrial dis­
ease), serum growth differentiation factor-­15 (GDF-­15) levels (mito­
chondrial disease), very long-­chain fatty acids (peroxisomal disorders), 
and lysosomal enzyme panel (lysosomal storage disease), since some 
conditions are treatable and prompt initiation of therapy may halt or 
slow progression of disease.
An abnormal brain MRI and EEG with a normal metabolic screen 
suggests a possible static cause such as brain malformation, hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy (HIE)/stroke, maternal or fetal infection, or 
a birth complication. Developmental regression is highly suggestive 
of inborn errors of metabolism, storage disorders, mitochondrial dis­
eases, or neurodegenerative diseases (see Table 35.1 under “systemic” 
and “cerebral” for specific disorders) (see Chapter 28). Regression 
coupled with an abnormal metabolic screen may suggest urea cycle 
defects, organic acidurias, aminoacidopathies, fatty acid oxidation 
defects, lysosomal and peroxisomal disorders, mitochondrial disease, 
or certain neurodegenerative disorders and should prompt immediate 
referral to a metabolic specialist for rapid diagnosis and possible treat­
ment. Many of the treatable metabolic disorders are diagnosed early in 
the United States via newborn screening programs.
In the setting of persistent hypotonia with normal MRI, EEG, and 
metabolic screening, syndromic genetic causes should be considered. 
Common congenital considerations such as Prader-­Willi syndrome, 
spinal muscular atrophy, and myotonic dystrophy type 1 may lack 
other overt phenotypic features beyond reduced tone and require 
specific genetic testing to detect the underlying pathogenic genetic 
abnormalities, which may not be detected on exome or genome 
sequencing. In the case of Prader-­Willi syndrome, DNA methylation 
testing detects >99% of affected individuals, whereas sequence analy­
sis detects <1%. For patients not identified prenatally or on newborn 
screening, deletion/duplication analysis of the SMN1 gene detects 
>95% of patients with spinal muscular atrophy, whereas sequence 
analysis typically detects <5%. Targeted analysis of DMPK is required 
to identify pathologic expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat leading 
to myotonic dystrophy type 1. If these targeted analyses are negative in 
patients with a high suspicion of a genetic disorder, exome sequencing 
with copy number variant analysis should be pursued to detect other 
genetic etiologies of hypotonia. Detailed phenotyping is essential in 
interpreting the results of genetic sequencing. Some syndromes, such 
as trisomy 21 or 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, have characteristic fea­
tures that may allow for presumptive clinical diagnosis while await­
ing confirmatory genetic testing. For other disorders, dysmorphic 
facial features to note in infancy include low-­set ears, large/small ears, 
hyper-­ or hypotelorism, epicanthal folds, asymmetric crying facies, 
short or webbed neck, cleft lip/palate, and maxillary or mandibular 
hypoplasia (see Chapter 29). Body dysmorphisms in infancy include 
abnormal limb length, palmar crease, club feet, polydactyly/syndac­
tyly, genitourinary abnormalities, spinal abnormalities, and oph­
thalmologic abnormalities. These phenotypic findings may provide 
additional context for the interpretation of sequence or copy number 
variants of uncertain significance.
If a careful neurologic exam demonstrates a sensory or motor level, 
such as strong arms and flaccid legs with a pathologic Babinski sign and 
lower extremity hyperreflexia, then spinal cord pathology is suspected. 
MRI of the entire spine (with and without gadolinium) typically cap­
tures anatomic abnormalities as well as intra-­ and extramedullary spi­
nal abnormalities.
Fig. 35.7  Hyperlaxity at the distal interphalangeal joints in a 9-­year-­old 
girl with a congenital myopathy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
577
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
If hypotonia persists and MRI of the brain and spine, EEG, met­
abolic screening, and preliminary genetic syndrome screens are neg­
ative, then motor neuron, nerve, muscle, or NMJ diseases should be 
considered (see Tables 35.1 and 35.3).
Profound and persistent hypotonia in the setting of normal intel­
lectual function is the typical pattern for the majority of PNS dis­
eases, and the physical examination does not tend to evolve as much 
during infancy as it does in CNS disease. In addition, hyporeflexia and 
absence of a pathologic Babinski sign are the norm with a few excep­
tions, such as in congenital muscular dystrophy. The most useful initial 
tests for these patients are a creatine kinase (CK), thyroid-­stimulating 
hormone (TSH), and electromyography with nerve conduction study 
(EMG/NCS, or simply EMG). In motor neuron disease, CK is typ­
ically normal but occasionally might be slightly elevated, while the 
EMG shows a pure motor neuropathy (see Table 35.2). When obtain­
ing EMG, at least one sensory and motor nerve conduction assessment 
should be done in an upper and lower extremity and needle EMG 
should be performed on at least one proximal and one distal muscle. 
If ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, episodic weakness, or feeding/breathing 
difficulties are present clinically, then doing a 3-­Hz repetitive nerve 
stimulation (RNS) on an affected muscle may be informative to assess 
for fatigability suggestive of NMJ disorders. Needle EMG in newborns 
can be difficult to interpret; waiting for the child to be at least 2 months 
old might yield more meaningful results. In the meantime, other ave­
nues of testing, such as muscle biopsy and genetic testing, should be 
pursued as appropriate.
Nerve disorders demonstrate involvement of both sensory and 
motor nerves either in an axonal or demyelinating pattern on EMG; 
CK is normal. Muscle diseases have a myopathic EMG, typically with 
normal sensory nerve conductions. An elevated CK is a hallmark of 
muscular dystrophies due to the continual degeneration and regenera­
tion of muscle fibers, whereas myopathies typically have a normal CK. 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the prototypical muscular dystrophy 
with a markedly elevated CK >10,000 U/L in an infant. A parental his­
tory of distal weakness with grip myotonia suggests congenital myo­
tonic dystrophy. The congenital muscular dystrophies have variable 
brain MRI findings ranging from normal to lissencephaly, with clinical 
findings of intellectual delay and seizures. Pompe disease is character­
ized by concomitant cardiomegaly, feeding difficulties, and failure to 
thrive. When EMG suggests a myopathy and the CK is normal, then 
a muscle biopsy can help distinguish between congenital myopathy, 
mitochondrial disorders, and metabolic myopathies.
If the 3-­Hz RNS shows significant decrement and CK is normal, then 
an NMJ disorder is likely. Clinically, NMJ disorders appear similar to 
each other with fluctuating ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, feeding and respi­
ratory difficulties, limb and trunk weakness, and poor head control, but 
key differences help narrow the differential diagnosis. If the mother is 
known to have autoimmune myasthenia, then a hypotonic infant may 
have transplacental-­derived transient neonatal myasthenia. If the 
hypotonic infant has autonomic dysfunction such as dilated pupils or 
constipation, then botulism must be considered. If the infant was pre­
viously healthy and then rapidly developed symptoms that localize to 
the NMJ, autoimmune myasthenia is possible, and antibodies should be 
tested. A child with a history of persistent feeding and respiratory diffi­
culties since birth, worsened by illness or suddenly without an identified 
cause, should prompt evaluation for congenital myasthenic syndromes, 
which are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders.
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, the finding of multiple joint 
contractures affecting two or more body areas and present at birth, can 
be caused by lesions anywhere in the neural axis including the CNS 
and PNS, connective tissue and joint disorders, and maternal and fetal 
factors (Table 35.6). In an infant with arthrogryposis, determining if 
the cause is central or peripheral or neither is often crucial to making 
a diagnosis.
Diagnostic Approach to the Child with Weakness
The diagnostic approach to the weak child is very similar to the hypo­
tonic infant, with emphasis placed on identifying systemic disorders 
first and then determining if signs and symptoms localize to the CNS 
or PNS. Fig. 35.8 outlines an algorithm for determining the cause of 
weakness in a child.
TABLE 35.6  Major Causes of 
Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita
Site of Major 
Pathologic 
Findings
Disorder
Cerebrum, brainstem, 
cerebellum
 • Microcephaly
 • Cortical migrational disorders: lissencephaly-­
pachygyria (e.g., Zellweger syndrome), poly­
microgyria, agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
schizencephaly
 • Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (type 1)
 • Dentato-­olivary dysplasia
 • Cytomegalovirus infection
 • Leptomeningeal angiomatosis
 • Encephaloclastic processes: porencephalies, 
hydranencephaly, multicystic encephalomalacia
 • Hydrocephalus
Spinal cord
 • Cervical spinal atrophy
 • Lumbosacral meningomyelocele
 • Sacral agenesis
Motor neuron
 • Spinal muscular atrophy type 1
 • Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory 
distress type 1
Peripheral nerve
 • Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease
Neuromuscular junction
 • Congenital myasthenic syndromes
 • Maternal autoimmune myasthenia (rare)
Muscle
 • Congenital myotonic dystrophy
 • Congenital muscular dystrophies
 • Congenital myopathies (nemaline myopathy, 
myotubular myopathy, core myopathy)
 • Distal arthrogryposis syndromes (types 1–10)
Intrauterine/maternal 
factors
 • Amyoplasia (vascular compromise to fetus or 
placenta during embryogenesis)
 • Lack of space: multiple pregnancies, uterine 
abnormality (bicornuate uterus, uterine fibroid)
 • Fetal alcohol syndrome with contractures
 • Intrauterine tumors
 • Amniotic fluid leakage
 • Disruption (bands)
 • Maternal illnesses: infections, untreated SLE, 
metabolic imbalances
 • Maternal medications (curare, muscle relaxants)
 • Maternal injuries in the first trimester
Joint and connective 
tissue abnormalities
 • Chondrodysplasia
 • Congenital contractural arachnodactyly
 • Marfan syndrome
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Phila­
delphia: Saunders; 2008:760.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
578
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Disorders of the cerebral cortex commonly cause axial hypotonia 
but appendicular hypertonia in children. Some progressive neurologic 
disorders affect both the brain and peripheral nerves (metachromatic 
dystrophy, Krabbe disease, adrenoleukodystrophies, and some mito­
chondrial disorders). Other progressive disorders may affect both 
brain and muscle (Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, 
dystroglycanopathies, and some mitochondrial disorders).
Sometimes disturbance of function at one site conveys a predilec­
tion for injury to another site in the nervous system, making neuraxial 
localization more challenging. For instance, children with congenital 
muscle weakness (e.g., congenital myopathy) are likely to have had 
severe respiratory impairment at birth that results in secondary anoxic 
injury to the brain. Because hypotonia itself is nonspecific with regard 
to localizing the site of nervous system dysfunction, the evaluation of 
the child with hypotonia must begin with a search for clues that might 
identify the location of the abnormality.
Is the Problem a Systemic Disorder?
Systemic disorders are a common cause of generalized hypotonia in 
toddlers and children (see Table 35.1). Hypotonia is commonly seen 
in association with sepsis and other infections, heart failure, failure to 
thrive, hypercalcemia, renal failure, hypothyroidism, acidosis, hypoxia, 
hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia, rickets, scurvy, amino and organic 
acid disorders, severe malnutrition, and other chronic disorders. This 
MRI brain abnormal
EEG abnormal
+/– regression
Brain MRI, EEG
Weakness due to CNS disease
CNS dysfunction?
Intellectual delay,
seizures, spasticity,
hyperreflexia, Babinski,
language delay,
micro/macrocephaly
Yes
No
History, exam, family
history, consanguinity
Subacute/chronic weakness
Child > 1 yr
Non-focal symptoms:
Generalized fatigue
Poor endurance
Clumsiness
Systemic disorder
Hypothyroidism
CHF
Renal failure
Acidosis
FTT
Malnutrition
Chronic medical illness/infection
Connective tissue disease
Weakness due to PNS disease
CK, EMG, TSH
MRI +/–
EEG abnormal
Syndromic features
MRI normal
EEG normal
CK normal or mildly 
EMG pure motor disease
Motor delay
Motor neuron disease
Exome/genome 
sequencing
Copy number 
analysis
Spinal cord?
MRI entire spine
Abnormal
Normal
Genetic
syndromes
Tumor
AVM
Abscess
Tethered cord
Chronic infection
Transverse myelitis
HSP
SMA
Fazio-Londe
BVVL
CK normal
EMG sensory and
motor abnormal
Sensation abnormal
Neuropathy
EMG myopathic
No pain with
muscle weakness
CK normal
3 Hz RNS decrementing
Fluctuating weakness
Muscle
disease
Autonomic
signs
Previously
healthy
Autoimmune
myasthenia
History of
feeding/respiratory
problems
CMS
Botulism
NMJ disorder
CMT
GAN
Other genetic
neuropathies
CIDP
GBS
CK 
CK variable
Previously healthy
Rash, calcinosis
Muscular dystrophy
Dermatomyositis
CK normal
Myopathy
Muscle biopsy
Congenital
myopathy
Mitochondrial
myopathy
Metabolic
CK > 10,000
Calf hypertrophy
Toe walking, male
+/– Autism spectrum
Proximal weakness
DMD
Mother w/distal
weakness, myotonia
Myotonic
dystrophy 1
CK 1,000-9,000
Calf hypertrophy
Male
Proximal weakness
Maybe asymptomatic
Abnormal brain MRI
Intellectual delay
Early contractures
Abnormal skin
Asymptomatic
or mild proximal
weakness
BMD
CMD
Late onset
Pompe
Metabolic screen, lactate,
pyruvate, ammonia, amino
acids, organic acids, VLCFA,
CK
Epilepsy syndromes
Inborn errors of metabolism
Mitochondrial disease
Leukodystrophies
Neurodegenerative disease
Fig. 35.8  Diagnostic approach to the child with weakness. AVM, arteriovenous malformation; BMD, Becker 
muscular dystrophy; BVVL, Brown–Vialetto–Van Laere syndrome; CHF, congestive heart failure; CIDP, chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; CK, creatine kinase; CMD, congenital muscular dystrophy; 
CMS, congenital myasthenic syndrome; CMT, Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease; CNS, central nervous system; 
DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy; EMG, electromyography with nerve conduction; FTT, failure to thrive; 
GAN, giant axonal neuropathy; GBS, Guillain-­Barré syndrome; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; NMJ, neuro­
muscular junction; PNS, peripheral nervous system; RNS, repetitive nerve stimulation; SMA, spinal muscular 
atrophy; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; VLCFA, very long-chain fatty acids.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
579
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
observation warrants a careful search for a systemic or metabolic 
abnormality in children with hypotonia, particularly (but not exclu­
sively) when the onset of hypotonia is acute (Fig. 35.9).
Frequently overlooked causes of hypotonia are those that are not 
traditionally considered neurologic disorders, though may mimic neu­
rologic disorders. Connective tissue disorders often produce a pheno­
type similar to those of neurologic causes of hypotonia in infancy and 
early childhood, with associated delay of developmental milestones. 
Connective tissue disorders are distinguished by joint hyperextensi­
bility disproportionate to the extent of weakness and by the absence 
of other neurologic abnormalities or microcephaly (velocardiofacial 
syndrome, achondroplasia, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syn­
drome). In several congenital disorders, hypotonia is a regular feature 
as a result of a combination of abnormalities of neurologic, muscle, and 
connective tissue function, including Sotos syndrome, Prader-­Willi 
syndrome, Angelman syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Rett syndrome, 
and Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome.
Diagnostic Considerations
Any child with hypotonia and weakness should be evaluated for a 
systemic disorder. Laboratory evaluation, such as electrolyte mea­
surements, renal function tests, thyroid function tests, and acid-­base 
balance assessment, should be considered. Laboratory evaluation 
should also be considered for uncommon metabolic disorders in chil­
dren with chronic hypotonia, especially those with other neurologic 
findings and those with recurrent bouts of lethargy, episodic severe 
hypotonia, vomiting, or acidosis. Appropriate metabolic screening 
tests include plasma and urine amino acid quantification, urine organic 
acid quantification, and measurements of blood ammonia, blood lac­
tate, pyruvate, and GDF-­15.
Genetic analysis should be performed for any hypotonic child who 
additionally demonstrates microcephaly, growth retardation, con­
genital malformations, dysmorphism, global developmental delay, or 
features of specific genetic disorders. If characteristic neurologic or 
dysmorphic features are present, specific disorders, such as Rett syn­
drome, Angelman syndrome, Prader-­Willi syndrome, Noonan syn­
drome, Sotos syndrome, and fragile X syndrome, must be considered.
Common Disorders
Trisomy 21. The child with trisomy 21 generally has recognizable 
features, including microcephaly, up-­slanted palpebral fissures, 
epicanthal folds, flat nasal bridge, protuberant tongue, excess posterior 
nuchal skin, and single palmar creases (see Chapter 29). Hypotonia and 
associated weakness are nearly universal findings. As the child grows, 
the muscle strength generally improves, but the hypotonia persists. The 
diagnosis is established by genetic analysis showing trisomy 21.
Prader-­Willi 
syndrome. 
Prader-­Willi 
syndrome 
manifests 
in early infancy with marked hypotonia and virtually no other 
identifiable symptoms, though cryptorchidism in males and features 
of hypogonadism in both males and females may be apparent. As the 
child grows, the phenotypic features become more apparent, including 
microbrachycephaly, almond-­shaped palpebrae, short stature, and 
small hands and feet. At 3–6 years of age, the child develops a disorder 
of appetite that results in ravenous food-­seeking behaviors, impaired 
satiety, and eventual marked obesity if access to food is not regulated. 
Weakness associated with the disorder is most prominent in the neonate 
and older infant and gradually lessens, whereas the hypotonia persists.
DNA methylation analysis is the only technique that accounts for 
paternal deletion, maternal uniparental disomy, and imprinting defects 
and identifies >99% of affected patients. Up to 75% of affected children 
Fevers
MRI abnormal
EEG abnormal
MRI brain, EEG
Weakness due to CNS disease
CNS dysfunction?
Encephalopathy,
seizures, lethargy,
hemibody signs
Yes
No
Acute weakness in
a child
Non-focal signs:
Generalized weakness
Fatigue
Systemic disorder
Hypothyroidism
CHF
Renal failure
Acidosis
FTT
Malnutrition
Chronic medical illness/infection
Connective tissue disease
Weakness due to
PNS disease
CBC, chemistry, Mg,
phosphorus, LFTs, CK
No fevers
MRI abnormal
Focal neuro findings
MRI abnormal in a
vascular distribution
Weakness distal or ascending
Antecedent illness
Absent reflexes
Abnormal sensation
Neuropathy
Post-infectious
AVM rupture
Multiple sclerosis
Stroke
Legs weaker than arms
Brain MRI normal
EEG normal
Spinal cord
MRI entire spine +/–
contrast abnormal
Transverse myelitis
Multiple sclerosis
Spinal tumor
Trauma
Dural AVF
Enterovirus (AFM)
GBS
Fluctuating weakness
Ptosis
Ophthalmoparesis
NMJ disorder
Painful
Significant sensory loss
Nerve
Traumatic nerve injury
Vasculitis
Autonomic
dysfunction
History of feeding/respiratory
difficulties of unknown origin
Botulism
Acute CMS crisis
History of exposure
to agent
Organophosphate poisoning
Magnesium
Neuromuscular blockers
Seropositive
Autoimmune
myasthenia
Immune and
infectious
encephalitis
Bacterial meningitis
Fig. 35.9  Diagnostic approach to the child with acute weakness. AFM, acute flaccid myelitis; AVF, arterio­
venous fistula; AVM, arteriovenous malformation; CHF, congestive heart failure; CK, creatine kinase; CMS, 
congenital myasthenic syndrome; CNS, central nervous system; FTT, failure to thrive; GBS, Guillain-­Barré 
syndrome; LFTs, liver function tests; NMJ, neuromuscular junction; PNS, peripheral nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
580
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
have a deletion of chromosome 15q11-­q13 of paternal origin, and 
20–25% have maternal disomy. Because the clinical findings are non­
specific during the early months, such testing should be performed in 
any neonate or infant with hypotonia of unknown cause.
Uncommon Disorders
Metabolic disorders. Metabolic disorders that are associated with 
hypotonia include the following (see Table 35.1):
 • Aminoacidopathies, organic acidurias, urea cycle defects, fatty acid 
oxidation defects
 • Lowe syndrome
 • Peroxisomal disorders (Refsum syndrome, adrenoleukodystrophy, 
Zellweger syndrome)
 • Acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiencies
 • Storage disorders (mannosidosis, Krabbe disease, sialuria, mucolip­
idosis type IV, Tay-­Sachs disease)
Genetic neurologic disorders. Neurologic disorders associated 
with hypotonia are often recognizable by unusual neurologic features 
that include the following:
 • Angelman syndrome: global developmental delay, wide-­based 
ataxic gait with arms flexed at elbows and hands flapping (“happy 
puppet”), little or no language, inappropriate laughter, and seizures. 
A characteristic dysmorphic feature includes a wide mouth with 
increased space between teeth. DNA methylation analysis reveals 
that up to 80% have abnormal methylation in the maternally inher­
ited 15q11.2-­q13 locus, the same chromosome that is affected in 
Prader-­Willi syndrome.
 • Rett syndrome: developmental regression characterized by partial 
or complete loss of previously attained fine motor abilities, lan­
guage and gait dysfunction, autism, characteristic hand-­wringing 
movements, mostly in females, though affected males present with 
severe neonatal-­onset encephalopathy that is progressive and typi­
cally fatal in infancy or early toddlerhood. Genetic sequencing of 
the MECP2 gene demonstrates heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
females and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in liveborn males.
Congenital malformation syndromes. Congenital malformation 
syndromes are recognizable by their characteristic features:
 • Sotos syndrome: prominent forehead with dolichocephaly; mac­
rosomia; down-­slanted palpebrae; long, narrow face; intellectual 
delay; mild ventriculomegaly.
 • Noonan syndrome: short stature, down-­slanted palpebrae, low-­set 
posteriorly rotated ears, hypertelorism, congenital heart disease, 
pectus deformities, webbed/short neck, ptosis, intellectual disabil­
ity in some. Diagnosis is based on clinical features combined with 
a comprehensive genetic panel or genomic sequencing demonstrat­
ing a disease-­causing pathogenic variant.
 • Lowe syndrome: congenital cataracts, aminoaciduria, meta­
bolic acidosis, hypotonia, global developmental delay, seizures in 
some, behavioral abnormalities (obsessive-­compulsiveness or self-­
stimulation). Pathogenic variants in the OCRL gene are responsible 
for this syndrome.
Connective tissue disorders. Connective tissue disorders associated 
with hypotonia, and particularly with joint hyperextensibility, can also 
generally be recognized by their associated symptoms:
 • Stickler syndrome: Pierre Robin sequence (micrognathia, cleft pal­
ate, glossoptosis), flattened facies, myopia
 • Velocardiofacial syndrome: congenital heart disease, microg­
nathia, hypocalcemia, T-­cell disorders, cleft palate
 • Achondroplasia: disproportionate short stature, risk of brainstem 
compression
 • Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome: skin bruising and scarring, skin hyper­
elasticity, smooth skin, joint hypermobility
 • Marfan syndrome: tall stature; long, thin arms and fingers; ectopic 
lens; blue sclera; aortic dissection; mitral valve prolapse
 • Osteogenesis imperfecta: frequent fractures, either atraumatic or 
associated with minimal trauma
Although many of these disorders may result in delayed motor 
milestones due to the hypotonia or skeletal abnormalities, and a sub­
sequent evaluation for presumed weakness, their underlying condition 
does not cause primary pathology affecting the neural axis.
Is the Problem in the Cerebrum or Cerebellum?
Diagnostic Considerations
Several clues suggest that hypotonia is caused by an abnormality of 
cerebral function. The presence of associated symptoms attributable to 
dysfunction of the cerebral cortex is the most useful and may include 
the following:
 • Acute impairment of consciousness
 • Acute or chronic impairment of cognitive abilities (mental status 
examination or poor school grades, respectively)
 • Seizures
 • Developmental regression
Delayed language and social development are typical of chronic 
disorders. The presence of microcephaly or macrocephaly is also an 
important clue. Brisk reflexes, clonus, an asymmetric tonic neck 
response, and pathologic Babinski signs suggest possible cerebral 
cortical dysfunction. The presence of dysmorphism or of congenital 
malformations suggests the possibility of an underlying cerebral mal­
formation. Congenital ocular malformations (e.g., microphthalmia or 
optic hypoplasia) are frequently associated with congenital brain mal­
formation as well.
Hypertonia mixed with signs of hypotonia strongly suggests a 
cerebral origin. Cerebral palsy is often characterized by hypotonia in 
infancy with later development of spasticity. In some children with 
cerebral dysfunction, the coexistence of hypotonia and hypertonia 
is persistent. Thus, an infant with hypotonia of the neck and trunk 
musculature who also exhibits scissoring of the lower extremities or 
persistent fisting of the hands (i.e., typical signs of hypertonia) can be 
presumed to have cerebral dysfunction.
Signs of cerebellar dysfunction (e.g., ataxia, nystagmus, titubation, 
dysmetria, and impairment of coordination) are often useful diagnos­
tic clues. The cerebellum helps maintain normal muscle tone and dis­
eases of the cerebellum typically are associated with some degree of 
hypotonia.
Common Disorders
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy. Brain injury resulting from 
asphyxia, hypoxia, or ischemia is an important cause of neonatal 
neurologic morbidity. Tissue oxygen deficiency is presumed to underlie 
the neurologic injury caused by hypoxic-­ischemic insults. An oxygen 
deficit may be incurred by either hypoxemia or ischemia. Hypoxemia 
is defined as diminished oxygen content of blood, while ischemia is 
characterized by reduced blood perfusion in a particular tissue bed. 
Hypoxemia and ischemia often occur simultaneously or in sequence. 
Ischemia is likely to be the more significant contributor of these two 
insults.
Asphyxia denotes an impairment in gas exchange, which results 
not only in a deficit of oxygen in blood but also in an excess of car­
bon dioxide with resultant acidosis. Furthermore, sustained asphyxia 
usually results in hypotension and ischemia, which is consistent with 
the likely predominant importance of ischemia as the final common 
pathway to brain injury. Asphyxia is the most common clinical insult 
resulting in brain injury during the perinatal period.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
581
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Evidence of hypoxic-­ischemic injury to the neonatal nervous sys­
tem is reflected by a constellation of signs noticed early after birth. The 
asphyxiating event or events may occur at any point in the antepar­
tum, intrapartum, or postpartum periods. It is estimated that insults 
sustained by the fetus during the antepartum period, such as maternal 
cardiac arrest or hemorrhage leading to transplacental and fetal hypo­
tension, account for approximately 20% of cases of HIE. Intrapartum 
events, such as placental abruption, uterine rupture, and traumatic 
delivery, may account for 35% of cases of HIE. In an additional 35% of 
infants displaying signs of HIE, markers of intrapartum fetal distress 
and antepartum risk, such as maternal diabetes, intrauterine growth 
restriction, or maternal infection, are found. Postpartum difficulties, 
such as cardiovascular compromise, persistent fetal circulation, and 
recurrent apnea, account for approximately 10% of HIE cases. Post­
partum difficulties are found more commonly in premature than in 
full-­term infants. Therefore, for at least 35% of cases of neonatal 
HIE, difficulties of the intrapartum period alone do not explain the 
encephalopathy.
Recognition of neonatal HIE requires careful observation and 
examination of the newborn in the context of a detailed history of 
pregnancy, labor, and delivery. Newborns who have sustained hypoxic-­
ischemic insults severe enough to cause permanent neurologic injury 
usually demonstrate abnormalities on neurologic examination. A com­
bination of low Apgar scores, fetal acidosis or distress, and abnormal 
neurologic examination findings help define HIE. Nonetheless, if the 
hypoxic-­ischemic damage has occurred well in advance of parturition, 
it may be asymptomatic in the neonate.
Mild HIE (stage 1) may be characterized by hyperalertness or by 
mild depression of the level of consciousness, which may be accom­
panied by uninhibited Moro and brisk deep tendon reflexes, signs of 
sympathetic activity (dilated pupils), and a normal or only slightly 
abnormal EEG. Typically, these symptoms last less than 24 hours. 
Moderate HIE (stage 2) may be marked by obtundation, hypotonia, 
diminished spontaneous movements, and seizures. Infants with severe 
HIE (stage 3) are ill for more than 24 hours and are comatose. These 
infants are also markedly hypotonic and display bulbar and autonomic 
dysfunction. The EEG is abnormal and may demonstrate a burst-­
suppression pattern or seizures, or may be isoelectric.
Neonates with moderate or severe HIE may show variation in the 
level of consciousness during the first days after birth. Initially, depres­
sion of the level of alertness may appear to improve after the first 12–24 
hours after birth. However, specific signs of improving alertness such 
as visual fixation or following are lacking. In addition, other persistent 
or progressive neurologic deficits, as well as functional deterioration of 
other extraneural systems, are inconsistent with a true improvement 
in neurologic state. Coma may persist, supervene, or even progress to 
brain death by 72 hours of life. If the infant survives 72 hours without 
losing all cerebral function, a variable amount of improvement may be 
observed.
Diffuse hypotonia accompanied by a lack of movement constitutes 
the most frequently observed motor deficit found early in the course 
of neonatal HIE. By the end of the first day, patterns of weakness that 
reflect the distribution of cerebral injury from a generalized hypoxic-­
ischemic insult may emerge. Affected full-­term infants may demon­
strate quadriparesis with predominant proximal limb weakness. This 
pattern of weakness derives from ischemia in the watershed or parasag­
ittal region of the brain, which corresponds to the border zones of cir­
culation between the anterior and the middle cerebral arteries and the 
middle and the posterior cerebral arteries. Affected premature infants 
may have weakness primarily in the lower extremities because of peri­
natal ischemic injury of motor fibers serving the legs. These fibers lie 
dorsal and lateral to the external angles of the lateral ventricles. Focal 
ischemia (stroke) may result in focal deficits reflective of the vascular 
territory in which the injury has occurred. These patterns are relatively 
subtle. As many as 70% of infants with moderate or severe HIE experi­
ence seizures by the end of the first day of life.
There is a direct relationship between motor and cognitive defi­
cits at 1 year of age and the severity of acidosis observed at birth in 
asphyxiated and symptomatic neonates. The extent of these sequelae is 
dependent not only on the occurrence of asphyxia but also on its dura­
tion. The three stages of HIE also correlate with outcome at 1 year of 
age. Those neonates with mild (stage 1) HIE or those who demonstrate 
moderate (stage 2) HIE for <5 days usually develop normally. Per­
sistence of moderate encephalopathy or appearance of severe (stage 3) 
HIE is associated with seizures and motor and cognitive delay during 
follow-­up. Children with mild HIE as neonates tend to be free of defi­
cits in motor and cognitive functioning or school performance. Greater 
impairment of performance in each of these developmental spheres is 
found among children who exhibited moderate or severe neonatal HIE.
The likelihood of long-­term neurologic sequelae after HIE is higher 
in neonates who have seizures. The EEG may provide valuable prog­
nostic information after the occurrence of seizure. Interictal back­
ground abnormalities, such as a burst-­suppression pattern, persistently 
low voltage, and electrocerebral inactivity, are highly correlated with 
poor outcome. Conversely, infants with normal EEGs or those reveal­
ing only maturational delay have much more favorable prognoses. 
Long-­term outcomes in moderate and severe HIE include cerebral 
palsy, hearing loss, visual impairment, poor memory and attention, 
hyperactivity, irritability, increased support requirements, lower stan­
dardized test scores, autism, and psychosis.
Neuroimaging is useful in determining prognosis. Head ultraso­
nography findings of severe periventricular intraparenchymal ech­
odensities followed by evidence of tissue injury (cyst formation) are 
correlated with later motor and cognitive deficits in premature infants. 
MRI performed early in the neonatal course of hypoxic-­ischemic brain 
injury provides useful prognostic information. Most infants with MRI 
evidence of basal ganglia hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, 
or multicystic encephalomalacia after asphyxia ultimately demon­
strate neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Diffusion-­weighted imaging 
(DWI) reveals evidence of neonatal brain injury earlier than T1-­ and 
T2-­weighted pulse sequences. Indeed, DWI reveals focal injury when 
standard MRI and CT are normal (Fig. 35.10).
Advances in neonatal neurocritical care, including the use of 
therapeutic hypothermia and aggressive seizure management, have 
improved long-­term outcomes in moderate and severe HIE, including 
children with sustained normal neurodevelopmental trajectories.
Brain malformations. Brain malformation can arise as a result of 
a chromosomal disorder, as a component of a multiple malformation 
syndrome, or as an isolated abnormality. When associated with a 
chromosomal disorder or multiple malformation syndromes, the 
other associated features are the primary clues to diagnosis. In isolated 
brain malformation, the primary features include cognitive and motor 
developmental impairment and, in most cases, microcephaly. The 
MRI scan can detect abnormalities of development of the hemispheric 
structures (e.g., agenesis of the corpus callosum, holoprosencephaly), 
abnormalities of cortical cellular migration (e.g., lissencephaly, 
pachygyria), and cerebral heterotopias as well as brainstem and 
cerebellar malformations (e.g., Joubert syndrome).
Uncommon Disorders
Progressive encephalopathies of infancy. Progressive encephalo­
pathies of infancy account for a small number of children with persistent 
hypotonia (see Chapters 27 and 28). These disorders are recognizable by 
a progressive deterioration of neurologic function and by diagnostically 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
582
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
specific clues. The infant’s development is normal for some time and 
then plateaus; this plateau is followed by developmental regression with 
loss of previously acquired skills. Hypotonia is a feature of many of 
these disorders, at least at some point during the course of the illness. 
Some disorders feature hypotonia as the result of the combination of 
CNS injury and an associated polyneuropathy (Krabbe disease and 
metachromatic leukodystrophy). Progressive disorders that may be 
associated with hypotonia include neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, 
mannosidosis, fucosidosis, Gaucher disease types 2 and 3, GM1 
gangliosidosis, infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, infantile Refsum 
disease, Krabbe disease, metachromatic leukodystrophy, mucolipidosis 
type IV, and Tay-­Sachs disease. The diagnosis of these disorders is based 
on recognition of clinically suggestive clues and on results of specialized 
biochemical and molecular genetic testing. If such a disorder is 
suspected, the infant should be referred to appropriate genetic and 
neurologic specialists.
Mitochondrial diseases. Mitochondrial diseases often affect both 
the brain and muscle and clinically manifest as hypotonia, likely as a 
combination of both cerebral dysfunction and myopathy (Tables 35.7 
and 35.8). The diagnosis is based on recognition of clinical symptoms, 
presence of lactic acidosis, an elevation in serum levels of GDF-­15, 
the presence of ragged red fibers on muscle histologic examination, 
and mitochondrial abnormalities identifiable on a muscle electron 
microscopic examination (Fig. 35.11). The diagnosis of many 
mitochondrial diseases is suggested by elevated GDF-­15 levels and is 
made possible by specific mitochondrial DNA testing or analysis of 
nuclear genes responsible for mitochondrial structure and function. Not 
all mitochondrial disorders have an identifiable responsible gene variant 
or an abnormal muscle biopsy. Other inborn errors of metabolism 
may produce hypotonia by central mechanisms (organic acidurias, 
hyperammonemia) or by interfering with muscle metabolism.
Brain malformation syndromes. Miller-­Dieker syndrome is 
characterized by severe lissencephaly (“smooth brain” with agyria), 
severe developmental impairment, hypotonia early in life, and 
hypertonia with age. Facial changes include bitemporal hollowing, 
upturned nares, thin vermilion border, and small jaw. Microdeletions 
of 17p13.3 affecting the PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE genes cause 80% of 
de novo cases, whereas the remaining 20% are inherited from a parent 
with a balanced chromosomal rearrangement.
Dystroglycanopathies (previously known as muscle-­eye-­brain 
disease) are a category of congenital muscular dystrophies with eye 
abnormalities and an assortment of brain malformations including 
cobblestone lissencephaly type II, focal pachygyria, polymicrogyria, 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia, and occipital encephalocele. These dis­
eases are characterized by hypotonia in infancy due to a concomi­
tant muscular dystrophy and CNS disease and variable degrees of 
intellectual disability. Walker-­Warburg syndrome is the most severe 
form of dystroglycanopathy, usually resulting with early demise. The 
list of genes associated with dystroglycanopathy includes POMT1, 
POMT2, POMGnT1, POMGnT2, FKTN, FKRP, LARGE, ISPD, GTDC2, 
B3GALNT2, B3GNT1, B4GAT1, TMEM5, POMK, DPM1, DPM2, 
DPM3, DOLK, GMPPB, RXYLT1, and DAG1.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 35.10  Predominant patterns of brain injury in newborns with hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury. These appar­
ent diffusion coefficient maps (A and C) performed on day 3 of life and T1-­weighted images (B and D) per­
formed on day 10 of life are typical of the two major predominant patterns of brain injury seen in term 
newborns with hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy. A, In the “watershed” pattern, areas of restricted diffusion 
are seen in the parasagittal regions (arrows). B, One week later, very subtle hyperintensities can be seen in 
the same areas on the T1-­weighted images (arrows). C, In the “basal nuclei” predominant pattern, the areas 
that show restricted diffusion are the thalami and basal ganglia (white star) bilaterally. In this example, part of 
the optic radiation is also affected (black arrow). D, On day 10, the injury in the thalami and basal ganglia (black 
star) appears as T1 hyperintensities bilaterally.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
583
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Is the Problem in the Spinal Cord?
Diagnostic Considerations
Depending on the location of the lesion, spinal cord dysfunction can 
produce a spectrum of motor findings, from spastic weakness of all four 
extremities to flaccid paraparesis of the lower extremities (Table 35.9). 
Different etiologies manifest as specific spinal cord syndromes, many 
of which are characterized by increased tone (Table 35.10). However, 
particularly after acute injury to the spinal cord and in some chronic 
disorders of the spinal cord, hypotonia may be the prominent motor 
sign. The typical associated findings of hyperreflexia, clonus, Babinski 
signs, and sensory loss with a sensory level are important clues, as is 
the disparity between the weakness and sensory impairment of the 
extremities in contrast to the normal strength and function of the head 
and neck.
Spinal cord injury resulting from birth trauma is a frequently 
overlooked cause of hypotonia in the newborn. A history of a lengthy 
or difficult (e.g., breech or vertex) delivery should suggest spinal 
cord injury, and care should be taken not to falsely attribute motor 
dysfunction in these infants to anoxic brain injury; however, many 
neonates with spinal cord injuries also have anoxic encephalopathy 
because of the traumatic nature of the delivery, potentially obscuring 
consideration of spinal cord injury in infants with more prominent 
signs of brain anoxia. The extent to which the hypotonia of neona­
tal hypoxic-­ischemic injury is caused by hypoxic injury to the spinal 
cord has not yet been fully elucidated. Any child with suspected spinal 
cord injury should undergo MRI. Radiographically, the bones of the 
cervical spine are normal, but MRI demonstrates the cord lesion. As 
acute neurosurgical intervention is often required, birth-­related spinal 
cord injury should always be considered in hypotonic neonates with 
prolonged or difficult deliveries. Additional categories of spinal cord 
disease are outlined in Table 35.11.
Common Disorders
Meningomyelocele. Meningomyelocele is a congenital malformation 
of the spine, spinal cord, and overlying meninges that affects up to 
0.2% of liveborn infants, with some degree of geographic variation 
in incidence. The spinal defect may be antenatally diagnosed or is 
obvious at birth, except in milder abnormalities that are covered by 
skin. The degree to which the lower extremities are hypotonic and 
flaccid depends on the location of the spinal defect. The presence of a 
Chiari malformation and associated hydrocephalus must be discerned 
in every affected patient. Antenatal diagnosis and fetal surgical 
correction are possible. Maternal screening reveals elevated serum α-­
fetoprotein, and fetal ultrasound can further delineate the extent of 
the defect.
Transverse myelitis. Transverse myelitis is a common cause of 
acute hypotonia and weakness that manifests over hours or several 
days. The localization is suggested by an identifiable motor-­sensory 
level and by impairment of bowel and bladder function. Reflexes 
are characteristically depressed at the onset of the disease and then 
become exaggerated with clonus and Babinski signs. The diagnosis 
is via MRI and CSF analysis; signal intensity of the involved cord 
segment is abnormal on MRI, and mild pleocytosis and elevated 
CSF protein levels are present. Myelitis may occur as part of acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), multiple sclerosis (MS), 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), or an autoimmune 
rheumatic disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjögren 
syndrome, or sarcoidosis. CSF assays that demonstrate immunologic 
activity unique to the intrathecal space, such as oligoclonal bands or 
an elevated immunoglobulin G (IgG) synthesis index, are clues to 
disorders such as ADEM, MS, and NMOSD; specific antibody testing 
of the serum and CSF can provide specific diagnosis. If myelitis is 
accompanied by severe limb weakness, indicative of motor neuron 
damage, then a diagnosis of West Nile virus (WNV) or enterovirus-­
causing acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) needs to be entertained via rapid 
imaging and microbiologic and serologic assays of the blood and CSF 
assessing for specific organisms. WNV classically causes a concomitant 
encephalopathy, unlike AFM. Clinical features of AFM are noted in 
Table 35.12 and distinguishing features in Table 35.13. Imaging of AFM 
is noted in Fig. 35.12.
Tethered cord syndrome. Pathologically, tethered cord syndrome 
(TCS) occurs when the lumbosacral spinal cord is fixed to the sacrum 
due to a thickened filum terminale, dermal sinus, or lipoma resulting 
in downward traction as the vertebrae elongate with vertical growth. 
Physiologically, this traction results in reduced blood flow and ischemia 
to the cord and cauda equina, causing Wallerian degeneration. In 
infants and neonates, evidence of spina bifida occulta may be evident 
externally due to various cutaneous findings such as lipomas, a hair 
tuft, nevi, hemangiomas, and dermal sinuses (Fig. 35.13). Typical 
presenting signs and symptoms are anorectal malformation, lower 
TABLE 35.7  Clinical Spectrum of 
Mitochondrial Disease
Nervous System
 • Hypotonia
 • Failure to thrive
 • Motor regression
 • Stroke (nonvascular)
 • Dementia
 • Episodic encephalopathy (elevated cerebrospinal fluid lactate)
 • Intellectual disability
 • Neuropathy (axonal, demyelinating, or sensory ganglionopathy)
 • Ophthalmoparesis (slowly progressive)
 • Ptosis (slowly progressive; little diurnal variation; asymmetric at onset)
 • Optic atrophy
 • Retinitis pigmentosa (perimacular; vision usually spared)
 • Ataxia
 • Central apnea
 • Epilepsy (focal or multifocal myoclonus; status epilepticus; triggered by 
sodium valproate)
 • Migraines
 • Sensorineural hearing loss (asymmetric; young onset; partial recovery 
possible)
Heart
 • Cardiomyopathy
 • Conduction block or arrhythmia
Skeletal Muscle
 • Myopathy (proximal, symmetric weakness; myalgia)
 • Exercise intolerance
 • Episodic rhabdomyolysis
Other
 • Lactic acidosis
 • Recurrent bowel obstruction (pseudoobstruction)
 • Short stature
 • Diabetes (young onset; nonobese)
Modified from Amato A, Russell J. Neuromuscular Disorders. 1st 
ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2008; Liang C, Ahmad K, Sue CM. The 
broadening spectrum of mitochondrial disease: shifts in the diagnostic 
paradigm. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1840:1360–1367.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
584
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.8  Select Mitochondrial Disorders with Hypotonia Classified by Clinical Phenotype and Genotype
Clinical Phenotype
Common Clinical Features
Associated Genetic Changes
Mode of Inheritance
MELAS syndrome (mitochondrial 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, 
and strokelike episodes)
Cardinal—strokelike episodes, intermittent encephalopathy, T2/FLAIR 
abnormalities on brain MRI that do not respect vascular territory, 
lactic acidosis
Other—hearing loss, diabetes, short stature, gastrointestinal issues
tRNA point mutations:
 • m.3243A>G in tRNALeu (∼80% of cases)
 • m.3217T>C in tRNALeu (∼7.5% of cases)
 • m.13513G>A encoding NADH-­ubiquinone (<15% of cases)
 • m.3252A>G in tRNALeu (<5% of cases)
 • Multiple other mtDNA point mutations
Maternal
MERRF syndrome (myoclonic 
epilepsy with ragged red fibers)
Cardinal—myoclonus, proximal weakness, generalized epilepsy, 
ataxia
Other—multiple lipomatosis, hearing loss, cognitive impairment, 
neuropathy
tRNA point mutations:
 • m.8344A>G in tRNALys (>80% of cases)
 • m.8356T>C in tRNALys
 • m.8363G>A in tRNALys
 • m.8361G>A in tRNALys
 • Multiple other mtDNA point mutations
Maternal
KSS (Kearns-­Sayre syndrome)
Cardinal—multisystemic disease with progressive external ophthal­
moplegia, pigmentary retinopathy, cardiomyopathy before age 20 yr
Other—short stature, proximal muscle weakness, hearing loss, 
dementia, ataxia, multiple endocrinopathies (diabetes, hypothyroid­
ism, hypoparathyroidism, hypogonadism
Single large mtDNA deletion (1.1–10 kb)
 • m.8470_13446del4977 (deletion of 4977 base pairs; most common)
 • Multiple other mtDNA deletions
Sporadic
CPEO (chronic progressive exter­
nal ophthalmoplegia)
Cardinal—skeletal muscle disorder with ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, 
+/− proximal muscle weakness
Single large mtDNA deletion (1.1–10 kb)
 • m.3243A>G in tRNALeu (most common; same as MELAS)
 • Multiple other mtDNA point mutations
 • Multiple mtDNA deletions caused by pathologic variants in the following 
nuclear genes: SLC25A4 encoding ANT1, C10orf2 encoding twinkle, POLG 
encoding mtDNA polymerase, POLG2, OPA1
Sporadic
Maternal
Autosomal dominant
Leigh syndrome (subacute necro­
tizing encephalomyelopathy)
Hypotonia, spasticity, movement disorders (chorea), cerebellar ataxia, 
neuropathy, bilateral basal ganglia lesions, seizures, lactic acidosis, 
psychomotor retardation/regression especially with illness between 
3 and 12 mo of age
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
mtDNA pathologic variants:
 • m.8993T>G or m.8993T>C in MT-­ATP6 (∼10% of cases)
 • Multiple other mtDNA point mutations
 • m.8470_13446del4977 (deletion of 4977 base pairs; also seen in KSS)
Nuclear gene variants resulting in respiratory chain complex deficiencies:
 • Complex I: NDUFS1, NDUFS2, NDUFS3, NDUFS4, NDUFS7, NDUFS8, 
NDUFV1, NDUFV2, NDUFA2, NDUFA9, NDUFA10, NDUFA12, NDUFAF2, 
NDUFAF4, NDUFAF5, NDUFAF6, NDUFAF8, FOXRED1, NUBPL, TIMMDC1
 • Complex II: SDHA, SDHAF1
 • Complex III: BCS1L, UQCRQ, TTC19
 • Complex IV: SURF1, COX8A, COX10, COX15, SCO2, NDUFA4, PET100, 
PET117, LRPPRC, TACO1
 • Complex V: ATP5MD; additional nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial 
DNA maintenance (e.g., POLG), mitochondrial gene expression, cofactor 
biosynthesis, and other aspects of mitochondrial structure and function 
have also been associated with Leigh syndrome.
Maternal
Sporadic
Autosomal recessive
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
585
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
NARP (neurogenic muscle 
weakness, ataxia, retinitis 
pigmentosa)
Proximal neurogenic muscle weakness, sensory neuropathy, seizures, 
ataxia, pigmentary retinopathy, learning difficulties, dementia with 
onset usually in childhood
 • m.8993T>G or m.8993T>C in MT-­ATP6 (50% of cases)
Maternal
Mitochondrial DNA maintenance 
defects (formerly categorized as 
mitochondrial DNA deple­
tion syndromes and deletion 
syndromes)
 • Encephalohepatopathy phenotype: developmental delay, 
seizures, hepatic dysfunction and failure, hearing impairment, 
hypotonia, hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis
 • Encephalomyopathy phenotype: early-­onset developmental 
delay, seizures, hypotonia, hearing impairment, optic atrophy, 
ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, ataxia
 • Encephaloneuropathy phenotype: hypotonia, vision impair­
ment, hearing impairment, epilepsy, optic atrophy
 • MNGIE (mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encepha­
lopathy): symmetric distal weakness, demyelinating peripheral 
neuropathy, paresthesia, ptosis, ophthalmoparesis or ophthalmo­
plegia, asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy, progressive gastroin­
testinal dysmotility, hypotonia, proximal muscle weakness, axial 
weakness, respiratory insufficiency, marked clinical variability with 
death in infancy to early adulthood due to respiratory insufficiency
 • Myopathy: hypotonia, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, cataracts, hyper­
trophic cardiomyopathy
 • Ophthalmoplegia: ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, generalized weak­
ness with easy fatigability, bulbar dysfunction, ataxia
 • Optic atrophy: vision impairment, optic nerve pallor, peripheral 
neuropathy, muscle weakness
 • Neuropathy: peripheral sensory and motor neuropathy
 • Encephalohepatopathy: DGUOK, MPV17, POLG, TFAM, TWNK
 • Encephalomyopathy: ABAT, FBXL4, OPA1, POLG, RNASEH1, RRM2B, 
SUCLA2, SUCLG1
 • Encephaloneuropathy: OPA1, POLG, TWNK
 • MNGIE: TYMP, POLG, RRM2B
 • Myopathy: AGK, DGUOK, DNA2, MGME1, POLG2, SLC25A4, TK2
 • Ophthalmoplegia: POLG, RRM2B, SLC25A4, TK2, TWNK
 • Optic atrophy: OPA1, MFN2
 • Neuropathy: MFN2
Varied
FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, reduced form; tRNA, transfer RNA.
Data from DiMauro S, Hirano M. MERRF. 2003 June 3. In: GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington; 2003; DiMauro S, Hirano M. MELAS. 2001 February 27. In: GeneR­
eviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington; 2001; Thorburn DR, Rahman S. Mitochondrial DNA-­Associated Leigh Syndrome and NARP. 2003 October 30. In: GeneReviews [Inter­
net]. Seattle: University of Washington; 2003; Liang C, Ahmad K, Sue CM. The broadening spectrum of mitochondrial disease: shifts in the diagnostic paradigm. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2014;1840:1360–1367. El-­Hattab AW, Craigen WJ, Wong LJC, et al. Mitochondrial DNA maintenance defects overview. 2018 Mar 8. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al (eds). Gene­
Reviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington; 1993–2021.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
586
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
extremity deformities or early-­onset scoliosis, and urinary dribbling, 
typically diagnosed on urodynamic studies.
Toddlers and adolescents with TCS usually do not have any cuta­
neous stigmata but develop slowly progressive gait dysfunction, spas­
ticity, difficulties running, foot deformities, and spastic bladder that is 
more noticeable after a growth spurt. Examination demonstrates upper 
motor neuron dysfunction with hyperreflexia and Babinski signs. 
Some patients also have variable involvement of the cauda equina as 
evidenced by a flaccid bladder and atrophy of the lower extremities 
and relatively reduced reflexes. Diagnosis is confirmed by MRI of the 
spine showing a low-­lying conus below the L1/L2 interspace, usually in 
association with a thickened filum or lipoma. Neurosurgical decom­
pression can improve gait and bowel and bladder function and prevent 
further progression of foot deformity.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 35.11  Pathologic changes seen in mitochondrial myopathy. Hematoxylin and eosin stain (A) demonstrat­
ing increased fiber size variation and subsarcolemmal basophilic deposits (arrows) correlating with ragged 
red fibers (arrows) on Gomori trichrome (B), oil red O (C), and toluidine (D) staining showing increased lipid 
deposition in the fibers (arrows) indicative of marked mitochondrial dysfunction due to defects in β-­oxidation. 
E, Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) (brown stain) with succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) counterstain (blue stain) 
showing many COX-­negative fibers (blue staining fibers) indicative of mitochondrial dysfunction since the 
COX enzyme is partly encoded within mitochondrial DNA. F, Electron microscopy showing classic paracrys­
talline “parking lot” inclusions within the mitochondria located immediately underneath the sarcolemma that 
correlate highly with mitochondrial dysfunction (arrows; inset with higher magnification) and increased lipid 
deposition (ars). (A, Courtesy Michael Lawlor, MD, PhD, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI; C, D, 
and F, courtesy Karra Jones, MD, PhD, UC San Diego, San Diego, CA; B, E, courtesy Chamindra Konersman, 
MD, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
587
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Hereditary spastic paraplegia. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is 
a large group of genetically and phenotypically heterogenous disor­
ders, with over 70 genetic subtypes, with the common feature of slowly 
progressive spasticity, hyperreflexia, and Babinski signs. Inheritance 
patterns include autosomal dominant, recessive, and X-­linked reces­
sive. The majority of pathogenic variants in HSP localize to proteins 
composing the upper motor neuron or oligodendrocyte (Fig. 35.14). 
In addition to pure spastic forms, patients may have varying degrees 
of motor and/or sensory neuropathy, cognitive dysfunction, urinary 
dysfunction, or optic neuropathy, resulting in complex phenotypes. 
Although most are adult onset, a handful are early onset, ranging 
from infancy to teenage years. MRI of the spine must be performed 
to exclude anatomical causes, and is normal in the vast majority of 
cases. Diagnosis is confirmed via molecular genetic testing. A mimic 
of cerebral palsy, HSP should be suspected if an infant with isolated 
spasticity and a presumed diagnosis of cerebral palsy appears to be 
worsening.
Uncommon Disorders
An epidural spinal abscess may manifest in a manner similar to trans­
verse myelitis, except with more back pain, neck pain, fevers, and local 
tenderness. Spinal cord tumor, either primary or metastatic, usually 
manifests with subacute onset of spastic weakness of the extremities 
though rarely can manifest as hypotonia (see Table 35.10). Rapid diag­
nosis with MRI is essential so that medical or neurosurgical interven­
tion can be promptly initiated in an attempt to preserve cord function.
Is the Problem in the Motor Unit?
Diagnostic Considerations
The motor unit is composed of the anterior horn cell (motor neuron), 
nerve, NMJ, and muscle fibers. Disorders that affect the motor unit 
produce a common clinical picture characterized by preservation of 
cognitive function and alertness, absence of seizures, characteristically 
diminished or absent muscle stretch reflexes, and hypotonia. Muscle 
atrophy is frequently associated with motor unit disorders, but it can 
also occur in chronic upper motor neuronal causes of hypotonia.
It is not always easy to determine which component of the motor 
unit is abnormal (anterior horn cell/motor neuron, nerve, NMJ, or 
muscle), but the following guidelines are useful:
 • Fasciculations: motor neuron
 • Distal-­to-­proximal pattern of weakness: nerve > muscle
 • Distal-­to-­proximal pattern of sensory loss: nerve
 • Proximal weakness: muscle
 • Cramps: motor neuron, muscle, nerve
 • Prominent pain: nerve
 • Fluctuating weakness: NMJ
 • Fluctuating droopy eyelids (ptosis): NMJ
 • Painless double vision: NMJ
TABLE 35.9  Motor Involvement in Spinal 
Cord Lesions
Affected Cord 
Segment
Motor Involvement
C1–C4
Paralysis of neck, diaphragm, intercostal muscles, and all 
four extremities
C5
Spastic paralysis of trunk, arms, and legs; partial shoul­
der control
C6–C7
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs; upper arm control; 
partial lower arm control
C8
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs; hand weakness only
T1–T10
Spastic paralysis of trunk and legs
T11–T12
Spastic paralysis of legs
L1–S1
Flaccid paralysis of legs
S2–S5
Flaccid paralysis of lower legs; bowel, bladder, and 
sexual function affected
From Swartz MH. Textbook of Physical Diagnosis: History and Exam­
ination. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:496; modified from 
Fenichel GM. Clinical Pediatric Neurology: A Signs and Symptoms 
Approach. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993:262.
TABLE 35.10  Spinal Cord Syndromes
Site
Mechanism
Manifestation
Complete—upper cord (above 
T10)
Space-­occupying lesion
Trauma
Flaccid symmetric weakness, paralysis, loss of sensation below lesion, areflexia (in 
spinal shock), reflexes return and are ↑ after recovery from spinal shock, distended 
bladder, positive Babinski sign, positive Beevor sign*
Conus medullaris (T10–L2)
Space-­occupying lesion
Trauma
Symmetric weakness, paralysis, ↑ knee deep tendon reflexes, ↑ ankle deep tendon 
reflexes, positive Babinski sign, spastic bladder and sphincter disturbance
Cauda equina (below L2)
Space-­occupying lesion
Tethered cord
Trauma (rare)
Asymmetric weakness, loss of lower extremity deep tendon reflexes, sensory saddle 
perineum sensory loss, no Babinski sign, distended atonic bladder with urinary 
retention and overflow incontinence and decreased rectal tone
Anterior cord
Flexion-­rotation force from anterior 
dislocation or compression fracture 
of vertebral body (+/− ischemia of 
anterior spinal artery)
Weakness and reduced pain and temperature sensation
Central cord
Hyperextension injury; tumor, hemor­
rhage, syringomyelia
Flaccid weakness of arms (lower motor neuron lesion) with strong and spastic lower 
extremities (upper motor neuron lesion); sacral sensation with bowel and bladder 
partially affected
Posterior cord
Hyperextension (fractures of posterior 
vertebra)
Significant ataxia (loss of proprioception); strength and pain and temperature sensa­
tions may be spared or less affected
Brown-­Séquard syndrome
Laceration (stabs), lateral space-­
occupying lesions: hemisection
Strength, position, and vibration sensations are affected on the side of the lesion; 
pain and temperature sensation are affected on the contralateral side
*Beevor sign: superior displacement of umbilicus during attempts to lift shoulders off an examining table, seen in paraplegia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
588
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
 • Stridor: motor neuron/nerve/NMJ/muscle
 • Foot deformity: motor neuron/nerve/muscle
On examination, the distribution of weakness, the presence or 
absence and quality of reflexes, and the presence of tongue fascicula­
tions should be assessed. CK, TSH, and EMG should be obtained, and 
if an acute infectious polyradiculoneuritis is suspected, a lumbar punc­
ture for CSF analysis is performed.
Is the Problem in the Motor Neuron/Anterior Horn Cell?
Diagnostic considerations. Motor neuron disease is suggested 
by hypotonia, weakness, absence of reflexes, and fasciculations. 
Muscle fasciculations are difficult to appreciate in infants because of 
the presence of subcutaneous fat. Fasciculations might be seen on 
the tongue, but they must be distinguished from normal quivering 
movements. Tongue protrusion tends to exaggerate normal quivering 
movements, and as such, examining the tongue in its neutral position 
is typically preferred. Muscle enzymes are usually normal but are 
occasionally elevated, and NCSs are usually normal (Table 35.14). The 
electromyogram may demonstrate fibrillations and large motor unit 
potentials that are reduced in number.
Common disorders. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized 
by degeneration of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and brainstem 
nuclei, leading to progressive loss of motor function. The disorder is 
inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is most often related to 
homozygous deletions in exon 7 of the SMN1 (survival motor neuron) 
gene, though less frequently is caused by a combination of a deletion 
in one copy of the gene and pathogenic sequence variants in the other. 
There is a wide spectrum of phenotypes with respect to age of onset, 
disease manifestations, severity, and prognosis; these phenotypes have 
been organized into clinical subtypes (Table 35.15). No correlation 
exists between the type of pathogenic change in SMN1 and the clinical 
subtype; however, a related gene, SMN2, can occasionally produce 
functional survival motor neuron gene product, and is considered 
disease-­modifying in a dose-­dependent fashion. SMA type I is the 
prototype for the spinal muscular atrophies. Manifestations begin early 
in life and even occasionally in the prenatal period (e.g., decreased 
fetal movements, congenital contractures, polyhydramnios caused by 
poor in utero swallowing, poor respiratory effort at birth). Neonates 
and young infants experience progressive weakness and hypotonia, 
which result in poor head and body control and a flaccid, motionless, 
extended posture with alert facies (see Fig. 35.4). Fasciculations may 
be noted in the tongue, over muscles with little subcutaneous fat, 
and as a fine tremor of the outstretched fingers. Bilateral paralysis of 
the diaphragm with difficulties breathing and poor feeding are the 
TABLE 35.11  Spinal Paraplegia
Congenital Malformations
	1.	Arachnoid cyst
	2.	Arteriovenous malformations
	3.	Atlantoaxial dislocation
	4.	Caudal regression syndrome
	5.	Dysraphic states
	 a.	Chiari malformations
	 b.	Meningomyelocele
	 c.	Tethered spinal cord
	6.	Syringomyelia
Familial Spastic Paraplegia
	1.	Autosomal dominant
	2.	Autosomal recessive
	3.	X-­linked recessive
Infections—Inflammatory
	1.	Spondylodiskitis
	2.	Epidural abscess
	3.	Herpes-­zoster myelitis
	4.	Polyradiculoneuropathy
	5.	Tuberculous osteomyelitis
	6.	Acute flaccid myelitis
Infarction
	1.	Arterial infarction
	2.	Dural arteriovenous malformation
Transverse Myelitis
	1.	Neuromyelitis optica
	2.	Encephalomyelitis
	3.	Idiopathic
Trauma
	1.	Concussion
	2.	Epidural hematoma
	3.	Fracture-­dislocation
	4.	Neonatal cord trauma
Tumors
	1.	Astrocytoma
	2.	Ependymoma
	3.	Neuroblastoma
	4.	Other
Modified from Piña-­Garza. Fenichel’s Clinical Pediatric Neurology: A 
Signs and Symptoms Approach. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013.
TABLE 35.12  Clinical Presentation of Acute 
Flaccid Myelitis
Estimated 
Frequency
Age <21 yr
80–90%
Prodromal fever or viral illness
85–95%
Neurologic onset to nadir <10 days
100%
Headache or neck stiffness at onset
12–60%
Asymmetric onset of weakness
65–95%
Limb weakness
85–95%
Upper limb weakness
60–85%
Flaccidity or hyporeflexia of affected limbs
95–100%
Neck, face, extraocular, or bulbar weakness
20–60%
Trunk weakness
30–70%
Requirement for mechanical ventilation
10–40%
Bladder or bowel dysfunction
5–40%
Nonspecific sensory symptoms (e.g., paresthesia)
10–20%
Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction
<10%
CSF pleocytosis (with testing <5 days after onset)
85–95%
Gray matter–predominant spinal cord lesion(s) on MRI
95–100%
Brainstem lesion(s) on MRI
35–45%
Cerebral deep gray matter lesion(s) on MRI
<5%
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
From Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, et al. Acute flaccid myelitis: 
cause, diagnosis, and management. Lancet. 2021;397:334–344 (Table 
1, p. 336).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
589
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
commonly noted symptoms that bring patients with later disease onset 
to medical attention.
The majority (95%) of affected individuals have homozygous dele­
tions in exon 7 of SMN1; the remainder are compound heterozygotes 
for a deletion coupled with a pathogenic sequence variant in SMN1. 
Both prenatal testing for at-­risk individuals and newborn screening 
are available. In symptomatic individuals, diagnosis is established by 
targeted analysis of SMN1 to determine copy number of exon 7: If 
two intact copies are found, then alternate diagnoses are explored; if 
no copies are found, the diagnosis is established; if one copy is found, 
then sequence analysis is performed to assess for a pathogenic variant 
in that copy that would then establish the diagnosis. In patients with 
an established diagnosis, SMN2 copy number analysis is performed 
to help prognosticate, since more copies of the SMN2 gene confer a 
milder phenotype (see Table 35.15; Fig. 35.15). Timely diagnosis is of 
paramount importance, as gene therapies can improve survival and 
motor development in certain affected individuals.
Rare disorders. Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (JALS) is a 
rare disorder caused by degeneration of both upper and lower motor 
neurons and is characterized by mild to moderate muscle atrophy, 
mostly in the legs and hands, beginning typically around 6 years of 
age and leading to loss of ambulation in early to mid-­adolescence. 
Additional features include facial muscle spasticity with dysarthria and 
uncontrolled laughter, as well as a spastic gait. Despite the presence of 
facial and bulbar symptoms, atrophy and fasciculation of the tongue 
are absent. Some patients may have bladder dysfunction and sensory 
disturbances as well. EMG shows a denervation pattern with normal 
nerve conduction velocity. Pathogenic variants in ALS2, SIGMAR1, 
SPG11, and SETX are associated with various subtypes of JALS, with 
varying modes of inheritance.
Is the Problem in the Nerve?
Diagnostic considerations. Neuropathies are characterized by 
hypotonia, weakness, and diminished or absent reflexes. Neuropathies 
may be primarily motor or sensory, and the child’s symptoms may be 
either acute or chronic weakness or discomfort caused by paresthesia 
and dysesthesia. The pattern of weakness in most neuropathies is 
in a distal-­to-­proximal gradient with foot deformity and atrophy 
resulting in pes cavus and hammer toe deformities. Pes planus may be 
a common feature in a neuropathy during infancy or early childhood 
due to low tone, with high-­arched feet developing only as the patient 
ages. In chronic sensory neuropathies (with insensitivity to pain), 
the child may sustain injuries (e.g., burns or even fractures) that are 
unnoticed. Autonomic symptoms associated with some neuropathies 
include orthostatic hypotension, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and 
abnormalities of sweating. In general, the reflexes in neuropathies are 
diminished disproportionately to the extent of muscle weakness; that 
is, the reflexes may be markedly reduced or absent, whereas the muscle 
TABLE 35.13  Differentiating Acute Flaccid Myelitis from Clinical Mimics
Acute Flaccid Myelitis
Guillain-­Barré Syndrome
Acute Transverse Myelitis 
(Demyelinating or 
Idiopathic)
Spontaneous Spinal 
Cord Infarction
Prodromal illness
+++
+++
+/−
−
Temporal evolution
Hours to days
Days to weeks
Days to weeks
Minutes to hours
Pattern of weakness
Asymmetric, arms > legs
Symmetric, ascending
Variable
Symmetric, severe
Facial/bulbar weakness
++
++
+/−
+/−
Respiratory failure
++
++
+/−
+/−
Numbness/paresthesia
+/−
+++ (except AMAN)
+++
+
Sensory level
−
−
++
++
Encephalopathy
−
−
+/− (e.g., ADEM)
−
Bowel/bladder dysfunction
+/−
+/−
++
+++
Possible associated symptoms or 
syndromes
Headache, neck pain/stiff­
ness, neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain
Optic neuritis, encephalitis, 
seizures
Severe back/limb pain at 
onset
MRI spinal cord
Ill-­defined gray matter–pre­
dominant lesion, +/− nerve 
root enhancement
Normal cord, +/− nerve root 
enhancement
Variable, but usually a well-­
defined enhancing white > 
gray matter lesion
No-­enhancing anterior cord 
or gray matter lesion
CSF
Mild–moderate pleocytosis
Elevated protein
Mild–moderate pleocytosis
Sometimes elevated protein 
or mild pleocytosis
Microbiologic tests
Nasopharyngeal, rectal 
swabs and CSF for entero­
viruses including polio and 
live polio vaccine virus if 
indicated. West Nile virus 
titers
Stool sample: bacterial culture, 
viral RT-­PCR panel; respiratory 
sample: viral RT-­PCR panel; 
serum: Campylobacter 
jejuni and Mycoplasma pneumo­
niae IgM/IgG; other organisms 
according to region and season
If indicated based on clinical 
presentation
Not usually indicated
Other useful tests
+/− EMG/NCS
EMG/NCS; serum: anti-­
ganglioside antibodies
Serum: MOG-­IgG, aquaporin-­4-­
IgG; CSF: oligoclonal bands
Angiography
AMAN, acute motor axonal neuropathy subtype; ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG/NCS, electromyogra­
phy and nerve conduction studies; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein.
Modified from Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, et al. Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management. Lancet. 2021;397:334–344 
(Table 2, p. 337).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
590
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
strength is only mildly diminished. NCSs and EMGs demonstrate 
slowing of nerve conduction velocities and features that suggest either 
primary axonal involvement (fibrillations, normal or mildly slow 
nerve conduction velocity) or demyelination (marked slowing of nerve 
conduction velocity) (see Table 35.14). The differential diagnosis for 
neuropathy based on category can be remembered by the mnemonic 
“CHANCE-­IT” (Table 35.16). Neuropathies with onset in infancy 
based on the most salient feature are described in Table 35.17; genetic 
pediatric-­onset neuropathies are noted in Table 35.18.
Common disorders
Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Guillain-­Barré syndrome (GBS) is an 
acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) that is 
often associated with an antecedent upper respiratory tract infection 
or an illness with diarrhea, especially those caused by Campylobacter. 
The disorder can occur in childhood or adolescence, though is rare 
in infancy and is characterized by ascending motor weakness and 
areflexia. The weakness is usually symmetric, ascends and progresses 
over time (usually 1–2 weeks), and may cause serious respiratory 
compromise by producing weakness of the respiratory muscles, often 
necessitating hospitalization and frequent assessments of respiratory 
function (e.g., negative inspiratory forces and vital capacity) in affected 
patients. Children complain of difficulty walking, rising from the floor, 
and climbing stairs, and become irritable and noticeably clumsier, 
fall frequently, and may refuse to bear weight. More commonly than 
adults, children present with acute-­onset ataxia with multiple falls 
and poor balance stemming from sensory disturbance with milder 
weakness. Children often have more paresthesia and discomfort 
than adults, with neck, back, leg, and buttock pain in at least 50% 
of cases, presumably mimicking a radiculopathy due to nerve root 
inflammation. In addition to an abnormal nerve conduction velocity, 
the CSF protein level is usually elevated out of proportion to the white 
cell count (cytoalbuminologic dissociation) after the first week of 
illness, indicative of an inflammatory process occurring within the 
CSF space. Postgadolinium enhancement of edematous nerve roots 
and peripheral nerves as seen on MRI in the cervical and lumbosacral 
regions is found in ∼95% of children with GBS and is highly suggestive, 
although not specific, for the disease.
Classic AIDP is not commonly associated with an antiganglioside 
antibody (Table 35.19). The triad of ophthalmoplegia, areflexia, and 
ataxia without overt weakness characterizes Miller ­Fisher syndrome 
(MFS), a variant of GBS. This variant is associated with the GQ1b IgG 
antiganglioside antibody. A severe pure motor variant of GBS called 
acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) is associated with profound 
weakness, severe disability, and protracted need for rehabilitation and 
is associated with GM1 antiganglioside antibodies. The poorer prog­
nosis and slow recovery of AMAN are related to axonal damage and 
the slow regeneration of axons at 1 mm/day (∼1 inch per month). 
Autonomic nervous system involvement may produce hypotension or 
hypertension and bradyarrhythmias or tachyarrhythmias. Therefore, 
due to the risk of respiratory and autonomic dysfunction, all patients 
suspected of having GBS or its variants should be monitored in the 
intensive care unit or other setting capable of providing cardiac mon­
itoring, frequent respiratory monitoring, and high-­frequency nursing 
care. The differential diagnosis is noted in Tables 35.12 and 35.16.
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 35.12  Typical MRI findings in the acute phase of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM). Spinal MRIs are shown 
of an 8-­year-­old child with AFM, acquired 24 hours after onset of neurologic symptoms. A, Sagittal T2 image 
showing an ill-­defined longitudinally extensive central/anterior spinal cord lesion. B, Axial T2 image from 
C5–C6 shows hyperintensity of the entire gray matter of the spinal cord, with associated edema and some 
surrounding white matter hyperintensity. C, Axial T2 image from T7 shows asymmetric hyperintensity of the 
gray matter (right more than left). D, Axial T2 image from T10 shows hyperintensity of the entire gray mat­
ter. E, Axial fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image at the level of the middle cerebellar peduncle 
demonstrates hyperintensity of the dorsal pons (arrow). (From Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, et al. 
Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management. Lancet. 2021;397:334–344 [Fig. 1, p. 338].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
591
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Fig. 35.13  Cutaneous signs of spina bifida and MRI of spine demonstrating various forms of tethered cord 
syndrome. A, Hair tuft. B, Hemangioma. C, Lipomatous mass with dermal sinus tract. D, Skin appendage. 
MRI showing low-­lying conus (E), fatty filum terminale (F), lumbosacral lipoma (G), and lipomyelomeningocele 
(H). (Modified from Lew SM, Kothbauer KF. Tethered cord syndrome: an updated review. Pediatr Neurosurg. 
2007;43[3]:236–248.)
Lipid/sterol metabolism
Myelin/oligodendrocytes
Mitochondria
Golgi-to-ER
transport
Anterograde
transport
Microtubules
Tubular ER
Lysosomes/endosomes
autophagosomes
ER-to-Golgi vesicle transport
(SLC33A1, CYP7B1, B4GALNT1, DDHD1,
DDHD2, GBA2, CYP2U1, CPT1C)
(PLP, CX47, FA2H, MAG)
(paraplegin, HSP60,
IBA57, C12orf65,
FARS2, spartin)
(KIF1C)
(Trk-fused gene)
(KIF1A, KIF5A)
(spastin,
REEP1, REEP2)
(atlastin-1, spastin,
REEP1, REEP2,
ERLIN1, ERLIN2,
seipin, ARL6IP1,
RAB3GAP2,
reticulon 2, CPT1C,
protrudin)
(NIPA1, spastizin, spatacsin,
spastin, strumpellin,
maspardin, AP4, AP5,
USP8, WDR48, VPS37A,
TECPR2, ATP13A2)
Fig. 35.14  Location of pathologically altered proteins seen in hereditary spastic paraplegia on upper motor 
neuron with oligodendrocyte demonstrating common pathogenic theme for entire group. (Modified from 
Blackstone C. Cellular pathways of hereditary spastic paraplegia. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2012;35:25–47, Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
592
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.14  Typical Electrophysiologic Features of Nerve and Muscle Diseases
Motor Nerve 
Conductions
Sensory Nerve 
Conductions
F Response
H Reflex
Needle Electromyography
Myopathy (dystrophic, 
inflammatory)
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
 • Spontaneous activity: fibrillation potentials and posi­
tive sharp waves (muscle membrane irritability)
 • Volitional activity: small-­amplitude myopathic units
Myopathic (mitochon­
drial, congenital 
myopathy)
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
 • Spontaneous activity: usually none
 • Volitional activity: small-­amplitude, short-­duration 
units with rapid recruitment
Axonal neuropathy
 • ↓ Amplitude
 • Normal or mildly 
slow conduction 
velocities
↓ Amplitude
Normal
Normal
 • Spontaneous activity: fibrillation potentials and 
positive sharp waves (muscle membrane irritability) 
especially in distal muscles
 • Volitional activity: large-­amplitude, long-­duration units 
with reduced recruitment
Demyelinating neu­
ropathy
 • Markedly slow 
conduction velocities
 • Prolonged latencies
 • ↓ or normal ampli­
tude
 • Prolonged 
latencies
 • ↓ Amplitude or 
no response
Delayed or 
absent
Delayed or 
absent
 • Spontaneous activity: usually none
 • Volitional activity: large-­amplitude, long-­duration units 
with reduced recruitment
Radiculopathy
Normal or ↓ amplitude
Normal
Delayed or 
absent
Delayed or 
absent 
if S1 is 
involved
 • Spontaneous activity: fibrillation potentials and 
positive sharp waves (muscle membrane irritability); 
fasciculations
 • Volitional activity: large-­amplitude, long-­duration units 
with reduced recruitment
Motor neuron disease
Normal or ↓ amplitude
Normal
Normal
Normal
 • Spontaneous activity: fibrillation potentials and 
positive sharp waves (muscle membrane irritability); 
fasciculations
 • Volitional activity: large-­amplitude, long-­duration units 
with reduced recruitment
TABLE 35.15  Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA): Clinical and Genetic Characteristics
Phenotype
Age of Onset
Natural Age of 
Death
Highest Motor 
Milestones
Other Findings
SMN2 Copy 
Number
SMA 0
Prenatal
2–6 mo
None achieved
 • Arthrogryposis
 • Facial diplegia
 • Decreased fetal movements
 • Polyhydramnios
 • Breech presentation
 • Respiratory failure in early infancy
1
SMA I
<6 mo
Usually ≤2 yr, but may 
survive longer
Sitting with support
 • Prominent tongue fasciculations
 • Mild joint contractures
 • Facial weakness
 • Poor suck and swallow
 • Small bell-­shaped chest
 • Paradoxical breathing
1–2
SMA II
6–18 mo
70% alive at age 25 yr
Independent sitting 
when placed
 • Legs more affected than arms, with failure to 
sit alone by 9–12 mo and stand by 1 yr
 • Postural hand/finger tremor
 • Lose ability to sit independently by mid-­teens
2–3
SMA III
>12 mo
Normal
Independent ambulation  • Legs more affected than arms, manifesting as 
difficulty walking
 • Distal then proximal contractures
≥3
SMA IV
Second or third 
decade
Normal
Walking during adult­
hood
 • May lose ambulation with time
≥4
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
593
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is the treatment of choice 
for all variants of GBS; plasma exchange is equally efficacious, though 
IVIG is typically the preferred method due to ease of administration. 
Both modalities allow faster recovery and shorten hospital stay. Prog­
nosis in children is more favorable than adults, with shorter duration 
of illness and more complete recovery. In children, approximately 60% 
lose ambulation and 20% require ventilation during their illness, which 
reaches its nadir within 2 weeks of onset, but few have significant dis­
ability by 4 months postillness.
Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth hereditary neuropathy. Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth 
disease (CMT) refers to a group of slowly progressive hereditary motor and 
sensory neuropathies. The disorders are genetically and phenotypically 
heterogeneous though share certain characteristic features, primarily 
a slowly progressive distal motor neuropathy of the extremities with 
varying degrees of sensory neuropathy. Various classification schemata 
have been adopted historically, principal among these a system based 
on the mechanism of neuropathy and mode of inheritance, though 
with evolving understanding of the underlying genetic mechanisms 
and associated genes, classification according to underlying genetic 
abnormality has become more conventional. Over 90% of CMT cases are 
caused by pathogenic variants in the following four genes, all of which 
can lead to presentation in infancy or childhood: peripheral myelin 
protein 22 (PMP22), mitofusin 2 (MFN2), myelin protein zero (MPZ), 
and gap junction protein beta 1 (GJB1) (Table 35.20). Most CMT cases 
are autosomal dominant, while the remainder are X-­linked dominant 
and autosomal recessive. CMT has considerable clinical variability from 
mild to severe phenotypes between patients and even within siblings 
(Fig. 35.16). Infants and children with CMT manifest with hypotonia. 
The classic CMT phenotype has slowly progressive weakness out of 
proportion to pain or sensory disturbance, with onset in adulthood 
presenting with foot drop, hearing loss, frequent falls, and difficulties 
running, walking long distances, climbing stairs, and walking in the dark. 
In comparison, childhood-­onset CMT exhibits moderate to severe motor 
delays, moderate to severe foot deformities with pes cavus and hammer 
UGA
SMN2 gene
Transcription
Pre-mRNA splicing
Translation
Translation
Exon 7
skipping
Less stable and
partially functional
Highly stable and
fully functional
Exon 7
inclusion
mRNA (SMN2FL)
1
2A
2B
3
3
4
5
6
8
1
2A
2B
3
4
5
6
7
8
2B
2A
1
4
5
GUAAGUCUG
Protein
ISS-N1
CCAGCAUUAUGAAAG
SpinrazaTM (nusinersen)
6
7
8
3’ ss
5’ ss
Protein
mRNA (SMN27)

SMN7
SMN7
SMN7
SMN
SMN
SMN
Fig. 35.15  Genetics of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and mechanism of action for nusinersen. Patients with 
SMA typically have homozygous deletions of SMN1 and a variable number of SMN2 copies. SMN2 exons are 
represented by colored boxes, whereas introns are shown as broken lines. Normally, SMN2 pre-­mRNA splic­
ing results in exon 7-­included (SMN2FL, SMN2 full length) 10% of the time and exon 7-­skipped (SMN2Δ7) 
transcripts 90% of the time, translation of which leads to production of the full-­length functional SMN protein 
and a truncated, less stable isoform, respectively. The intronic sequence immediately downstream of exon 
7 is shown with the critical splicing region, ISS-­N1, highlighted in the red box. Nusinersen (blue box) binds 
and blocks the ISS-­N1 region to include exon 7 in the final transcript, resulting in full-­length SMN2 transcript. 
Positions to which nusinersen anneals are indicated. (Modified from Singh NN, Howell MD, Androphy EJ, 
Singh RN. How the discovery of ISS-­N1 led to the first medical therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. Gene 
Ther. 2017;24[9]:520–526.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
594
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.16  Mnemonic for Neuropathy: CHANCE-­IT
Collagen Vascular 
Diseases
Hereditary
Autoimmune
Nutrition
Cancer
Endocrine
Infectious
Toxin or Trauma
Polyarteritis nodosa
SLE
Vasculitis
Angiitis
Granulomatous 
(sarcoidosis)
Granulomatosis with 
­polyangiitis
ADA-­2 deficiency
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Mononeuritis multiplex
CMT
HSAN
Metabolic (porphyria)
Refsum disease
Leukodystrophies (e.g., 
Krabbe disease, 
­adrenoleukodystrophy, 
metachromatic)
Amyloid (familial)
Congenital abetalipopro­
teinemia
Fabry disease
Tangier disease
Tyrosinemia
GBS
Immunizations
Chronic inflammatory demye­
linating polyneuropathy
Vitamin deficiencies 
(B1, B2, B6, B12, E), 
hypokalemia
Lambert-­Eaton
Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism
Acromegaly (entrapment)
Campylobacter (GBS)
Diphtheria
Lyme
Leprosy
HIV
Herpes-­zoster
Rabies
Tick toxin
INH
DDI
DDC
Organophosphates
Lead
Mercury
Thallium
Arsenic
Vincristine
Uremia
Nitrofurantoin
Chloramphenicol
Acrylamide
Cyanide
N-­Hexane
Glue sniffing
Buckthorn toxin
Puffer fish toxin
Snake bite
Carbon monoxide
Entrapment
Obstetric trauma
ADA, adenosine deaminase; CMT, Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease; DDC, dideoxycytidine; DDI, dideoxyinosine; GBS, Guillain-­Barré syndrome; HSAN, hereditary sensory-­autonomic neuropathy; 
INH, isoniazid; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
595
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
TABLE 35.17  Neuropathies with Onset in Infancy
Salient Clinical Feature
Clinical Phenotype
Gene
Mode of Inheritance
Axonal Neuropathies
Pes cavus with foot drop
CMT2E
NEFL
AD, AR
Optic atrophy
CMT2A
MFN2
AD, AR
CMT4A
GDAP1
AR
IOSCA
C10orf2
AR
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy
PLA2G6
AR
Ophthalmoparesis
Mitochondrial disorders
SCO2
C10orf2
TK2
AR
Skeletal abnormalities
CMT2C, SPSMA, congenital dSMA
TRPV4
AD
Arthrogryposis
Congenital dSMA
TRPV4
AD
SMARD1
IGHMBP2
AR
X-­linked SMA
UBE1
X-­linked
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1
EXOSC3, VRK1, TSEN54, RARS2
AR
SMA with congenital fractures
Unknown
Unknown, presumed AR
Congenital fractures
X-­linked SMA
UBE1
X-­linked
SMA with congenital fractures
Unknown
Unknown, presumed AR
Vocal cord paresis
CMT2A
MFN2
AD, AR
CMT2C, SPSMA, congenital dSMA
TRPV4
AD
CMT4A
GDAP1
AR
BVVL/Fazio-­Londe disease
SLC52A3
AR
Early infantile respiratory failure
SMA1
SMN1
AR
SMARD1
IGHMBP2
AR
X-­linked SMA
UBE1
X-­linked
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1
EXOSC3, VRK1, TSEN54, RARS2
AR
SMA with congenital fractures
Unknown
Unknown, presumed AR
Lethal neonatal AR axonal sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy
Unknown
AR
Congenital axonal neuropathy with 
encephalopathy
Unknown
Unknown, presumed AR
Predominant motor involvement
Congenital dSMA, SPSMA
TRPV4
AD
SMA1
SMN1
AR
X-­linked SMA
UBE1
X-­linked
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1
EXOSC3, VRK1, TSEN54, RARS2
AR
SMA with congenital fractures
Unknown
Unknown, presumed AR
Mitochondrial disorders
SCO2, TK2
AR
Kinky hair hepatopathy
Giant axonal neuropathy
GAN
AR
Mitochondrial disorders
DGUOK
C10orf2
AR
MTP/LCHAD deficiency
HADHA/HADHB
AR
Cardiomyopathy
Mitochondrial disorders
SCO2
AR
TK2
AR
DGUOK
AR
MTP/LCHAD deficiency
HADHA/HADHB
AR
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
596
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.17  Neuropathies with Onset in Infancy—cont’d
Salient Clinical Feature
Clinical Phenotype
Gene
Mode of Inheritance
Axonal Neuropathies—cont'd
CNS involvement
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1
EXOSC3, VRK1, TSEN54, RARS2
AR
Giant axonal neuropathy
GAN
AR
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy
PLA2G6
AR
HMSN/ACC
KCC3
AR
IOSCA
C10orf2
AR
CMTX1
GJB1
X-­linked
Mitochondrial disorders
SCO2
AR
TK2
AR
DGUOK
AR
Adrenoleukodystrophy
ABCD1
X-­linked
Developmental regression
Adrenoleukodystrophy
ABCD1
X-­linked
Dysautonomia, chronic skin ulceration
HSAN III (Riley-­Day syndrome)
IKBKAP
AR
Demyelinating Neuropathies
Acute sensory ataxia, walking difficul­
ties in a previously well child
GBS
Slowly progressive weakness, ataxia in 
a previously well child; responsive to 
steroids
CIDP
Developmental regression
MLD
ARSA
AR
Krabbe disease
GALC
AR
Irritable, stiff, crying infant; occasional 
unexplained fevers
Krabbe disease
GALC
AR
Pes cavus with foot drop, marked diffi­
culties walking
CMT1A
PMP22 point mutations or duplication
De novo (AD), AR
CMT1B
MPZ
De novo (AD)
CMT1F
NEFL
AD, AR
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
CMT4E
EGR2
AR, AD
CMT4F
PRX
AR
CMT4H
FGD4
AR
Early respiratory insufficiency
CMT1A
PMP22 point mutations or duplication
De novo (AD), AR
CMT1B
MPZ
De novo (AD)
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
CMT4E
EGR2
AR, AD
Severe scoliosis requiring surgery in 
infancy
CMT1B
MPZ
De novo (AD)
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
Facial weakness
CMT4B1
MTMR2
AR
CMT4B2
SBF2
AR
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
Sensorineural hearing loss
CMT1A
PMP22 point mutations or duplication
De novo (AD), AR
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
CMT4F
PRX
AR
Congenital nystagmus
CMT1B
MPZ
De novo (AD)
CMT4C
SH3TC2
AR
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BVVL, Brown–Vialetto–Van Laere syndrome; CMT, Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease; CIDP, chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; CNS, central nervous system; dSMA, distal spinal muscular atrophy; GBS, Guillain-­Barré syndrome; 
HMSN/ACC, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum; HSAN, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropa­
thy; IOSCA, infantile-­onset spinocerebellar ataxia; MLD, metachromatic leukodystrophy; MTP/LCHAD, mitochondrial trifunctional protein/long-­chain 
3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SMARD, spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1; SPSMA, sca­
puloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
597
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
TABLE 35.18  Genetic Disorders Associated with Pediatric-­Onset Neuropathy: Clinical Features, Diagnostic Findings, and 
Molecular Genetics
Disorder
Age of Onset
Neuromuscular Findings
Systemic Findings
Diagnostic Evaluation
Course
Inheritance
Molecular Genetics
Monogenic Neuropathy Disorders
Hereditary motor-­
sensory neu­
ropathies (also 
referred to as 
Charcot-­Marie-­
Tooth [CMT] 
hereditary 
neuropathies)
Typically 
childhood or 
adolescence, 
though infan­
tile hypotonia 
and develop­
mental delays 
possible
 • Chronic, progressive motor and 
sensory polyneuropathy
 • Wasting and weakness of distal 
extremities
 • Distal sensory loss
 • Decreased or absent tendon 
reflexes
 • Skeletal deformities (e.g., pes 
cavus, hammer toes)
 • Hearing loss, dysphagia (MPZ 
pathologic variants)
 • Acrocyanosis
 • Optic atrophy (MFN2 
pathologic variants)
 • Vocal cord and respi­
ratory involvement 
(CMT2c subtype)
 • Early-­onset glaucoma 
(MTMR13 pathologic 
variants)
 • Vocal cord paresis 
(GDAP1 pathologic 
variants)
 • EMG/NCV: axonal or demyelinat­
ing sensorimotor polyneuropathy, 
depending on subtype
 • MRI: nerve roots on spinal MRI 
may show the “onion bulb” sign, 
with T2 hyperintensity and bulbous 
tapering from the root to the nerve 
fiber
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: neutropenia (DNM2 patho­
logic variants)
 • Other: sural nerve biopsy no longer 
routinely performed but may show 
onion bulb formation
Chronic, 
progressive
Autosomal 
dominant, 
autosomal 
recessive, 
or X-­linked, 
depending on 
subtype
Numerous genes are implicated 
in the pathogenesis of CMT. 
CMT1 accounts for up to 50% 
of all cases, and the most 
common form of CMT1, CMT1a, 
is caused by duplications in the 
PMP22 gene. Duplications have 
also been identified in subtypes 
of CMT4. Deletions are impli­
cated in subtypes of CMT2, 
CMT4, and CMTX. Pathogenic 
variants detected by sequence 
analysis will detect most other 
subtypes
Hereditary 
sensory and 
autonomic 
neuropathies 
(HSAN)
Early child­
hood to late 
adulthood. 
Symptoms of 
HSAN4 begin 
in infancy
 • Severe, progressive peripheral 
sensory loss. Profound and early 
insensitivity to pain in HSAN4
 • Severe, shooting pain in the extrem­
ities early in disease
 • Distal then proximal muscle weak­
ness and atrophy. Strength may be 
preserved in HSAN5
 • Decreased or absent tendon 
reflexes
 • Skeletal deformities (e.g., pes 
cavus)
 • Dysautonomic crises with gastro­
intestinal and bladder symptoms, 
hypotension, temperature and 
sweating disregulation (HSAN3, 
also known as familial dysautono­
mia or Riley-­Day syndrome)
 • Skin ulcerations and 
bone necrosis in 
affected extremities 
with possible sponta­
neous amputation
 • Fractures, infections, 
and unwitnessed 
injuries in the 
extremities second­
ary to decreased 
sensation (HSAN2, 
HSAN4)
 • Small stature, 
smooth tongue, 
cognitive delays, 
glomerulosclerosis 
(HSAN3)
 • Self-­mutilating 
behaviors (HSAN4)
 • EMG/NCV: axonal sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy with chronic 
denervation changes. Typically 
normal in HSAN5
 • MRI: brain atrophy possible in 
HSAN3
 • Urine: decreased vanillylmandelic 
acid excretion (HSAN3)
 • Other: sural nerve biopsy no longer 
routinely performed but may show 
loss of myelinated axons without 
demyelination; abnormal hista­
mine and methacholine challenge 
responses (HSAN3)
Chronic, 
progressive
Autosomal 
dominant, 
autosomal 
recessive 
depending on 
subtype
Numerous genes are implicated 
in the pathogenesis of HSAN. 
Subtypes of HSAN1 are 
associated with pathologic 
variants in the SPTLC1 and 
SPTLC2 genes, as well as other 
genes. Subtypes of HSAN2 are 
caused by pathologic variants 
in WNK1, FAM134B, and other 
genes. HSAN3 is caused by 
pathologic variants in IKBKAP. 
HSAN4 is caused by pathologic 
variants in NTRK1
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
598
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.18  Genetic Disorders Associated with Pediatric-­Onset Neuropathy: Clinical Features, Diagnostic Findings, and 
Molecular Genetics—cont’d
Disorder
Age of Onset
Neuromuscular Findings
Systemic Findings
Diagnostic Evaluation
Course
Inheritance
Molecular Genetics
Monogenic Neuropathy Disorders—cont’d
Hereditary neural­
gic amyotrophy
Second or 
third decade 
(median: 28 yr)
 • Sudden-­onset severe pain in the 
arms or shoulders
 • Unilateral or bilateral brachial plex­
opathy developing within weeks of 
pain onset
 • Motor > sensory symptoms
 • Absent or diminished tendon 
reflexes in affected limbs
 • Paresthesia and hypoesthesia in 
affected limb
 • Atrophy of the upper extremity
 • Autonomic symptoms possible, 
primarily vasomotor changes
 • Precipitants: infec­
tion, immunization, 
surgery, childbirth, 
overuse of affected 
limb, cold exposure
 • Variable findings: 
bifid uvula, cleft 
palate, short stature, 
partial syndactyly, 
ocular hypotelorism
 • EMG/NCV: chronic denervation 
changes
 • MRI: evidence of myelopathy or 
inflammatory plexopathy possible
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: elevated transaminases 
possible early in attacks
 • Other: sural nerve biopsy is rarely 
performed but may show reduction 
in number of myelinated fibers
Relapsing-­
remitting/
episodic. 
Persistent 
and cumula­
tive deficits 
possible
Autosomal 
dominant
SEPT9: Up to 55% of affected 
patients have an abnormality in 
the SEPT9 gene identified either 
by sequencing or deletion/
duplication analysis
Hereditary 
neuropathy 
with liability 
to pressure 
palsies (HNPP)
Second or third 
decade (range: 
2–70 yr; mean: 
37 yr)
 • Acute-­onset sensory and motor 
mononeuropathy in areas of 
compression (in decreasing order of 
frequency: peroneal nerve causing 
foot drop, ulnar nerve at the elbow, 
median nerve at the wrist causing 
carpal tunnel syndrome, brachial 
plexus and radial nerve)
 • Paresthesia in affected distribution
 • Reduced or absent tendon reflexes
 • Mild polyneuropathy (focal 
weakness, atrophy, or sensory loss) 
possible
 • Mild to moderate pes cavus defor­
mity
 • None reported
 • EMG/NCV: bilateral slowing of 
distal sensory and motor nerve 
conduction velocities at the 
carpal tunnel and at least one 
additional abnormal finding for 
motor conduction in one peroneal 
nerve; abnormal conduction across 
entrapment sites is supportive
 • MRI: asymptomatic white matter 
lesions on brain MRI possible, 
decreased brain white matter 
volume possible
 • Other: sural nerve biopsy shows 
tomaculous changes though is not 
specific
 • Recurrent 
acute 
attacks
 • Attacks 
last days to 
months
 • Full recovery 
in approxi­
mately 50% 
of episodes
 • Incomplete 
recovery 
with mild 
residual 
deficits is 
common
 • Severe 
disability is 
rare
Autosomal 
dominant
PMP22: contiguous gene deletion 
of chromosome 17p11.2 in 
80% of affected probands; 
pathogenic variant in 20% of 
affected probands
Riboflavin trans­
porter
Brown–Vialetto–
Van Laere 
syndrome
Early childhood
 • Chronic progressive motor and 
sensory neuropathy
 • Ataxia
 • Bulbar weakness
 • Sensorineural deafness
 • Upper extremity weakness > lower 
extremity
 • Optic atrophy
 • Respiratory insuffi­
ciency
 • Abnormal acylcarnitine panel
 • EMC/NC axonal sensory neuropa­
thy
 • Chronic, 
progressive, 
unless 
treated with 
high-­dose 
riboflavin
Autosomal 
recessive
SLC52A2 and SLC52A3
Encoding riboflavin transporters
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
599
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Mitochondrial Neuropathy Disorders—cont'd
Mitochondrial 
neurogas­
trointestinal 
encephalop­
athy (MNGIE) 
disease
Between the 
first and fifth 
decades (60% 
of affected 
individuals 
present before 
age 20 yr)
 • Mixed demyelinating > axonal 
sensorimotor neuropathy
 • Paresthesia in a stocking-­glove 
distribution
 • Symmetric distal muscle weakness
 • Unilateral or bilateral foot drop
 • Ptosis
 • External ophthalmoplegia
 • Asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy
 • Severe gastrointes­
tinal dysmotility and 
malabsorption
 • Cachexia
 • EMG/NCV: decreased motor and 
sensory nerve conduction veloc­
ities, prolonged F-­wave latency, 
partial conduction block
 • MRI: diffuse white matter abnor­
malities on T2 or FLAIR series
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: markedly reduced levels 
of thymidine phosphorylase 
enzyme activity; elevated plasma 
thymidine and deoxyuridine; lactic 
academia and hyperalaninemia 
possible
 • Urine: increased deoxyuridine and 
thymidine
 • Other: evidence of mitochondrial 
dysfunction in affected tissues
Chronic, 
progressive, 
degenerative
Autosomal 
recessive
TYMP: pathogenic variants on 
sequence analysis
Neurogenic 
muscle weak­
ness, ataxia, 
and retinitis 
pigmentosa 
(NARP)
Early childhood
 • Proximal muscle weakness
 • Sensory or sensorimotor axonal 
polyneuropathy that can be 
clinically unapparent with episodic 
worsening in the setting of viral 
illnesses
 • Cerebellar ataxia
 • Seizures
 • Learning difficulties
 • Variable retinitis 
pigmentosa
 • Short stature
 • Cardiac conduction 
defects
 • EMG/NCV: axonal sensory or 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy
 • MRI: cerebral and cerebellar 
atrophy
 • CSF: elevated lactate
 • Blood: elevated lactate; elevated 
alanine concentrations on plasma 
amino acid analysis
 • Urine: lactic aciduria
 • Other: isolated defects of mito­
chondrial complex I or IV enzymes
Chronic, 
progressive, 
degenerative
Mitochondrial
MT-­ATP6: pathogenic variants 
in MT-­ATP6 are identified in 
approximately 50% of affected 
individuals
Ataxia neuropa­
thy spectrum 
(POLG-­related 
disorders)
Infancy to adult­
hood
 • Sensory ataxia
 • Cerebellar ataxia
 • Sensorimotor polyneuropathy
 • Most affected individuals have 
encephalopathy and seizures
 • Variable ophthalmoplegia and 
dysarthria
 • Gastrointestinal 
dysmotility reported 
with some pathologic 
variants
 • Liver disease: ele­
vated transaminases, 
mild liver synthetic 
dysfunction, or even 
liver failure possible
 • EMG/NCV: axonal sensory, motor, 
or mixed polyneuropathy
 • MRI: hyperintense lesions in the 
thalami, cerebellar white matter, 
and inferior olivary nuclei on T2-­
weighted imaging
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: elevated transaminases, 
mild liver synthetic dysfunction, or 
even liver failure possible
 • Other: functional assays may show 
respiratory chain defects
Chronic, 
progressive
Autosomal 
recessive
POLG, which encodes DNA 
polymerase gamma, the only 
DNA polymerase found in 
mitochondria
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
600
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.18  Genetic Disorders Associated with Pediatric-­Onset Neuropathy: Clinical Features, Diagnostic Findings, and 
Molecular Genetics—cont’d
Disorder
Age of Onset
Neuromuscular Findings
Systemic Findings
Diagnostic Evaluation
Course
Inheritance
Molecular Genetics
Metabolic and Other Neuropathy Disorders—cont'd
Refsum disease
Infancy to adult­
hood
 • Asymmetric, waxing-­waning though 
chronically progressive sensory and 
motor polyneuropathy
 • Distal weakness and paresthesia 
with muscular atrophy
 • Late-­onset cerebellar ataxia
 • Sensorineural hearing loss
 • Anosmia
 • Early-­onset retinitis 
pigmentosa
 • Ichthyosis
 • Congenitally short 
metacarpals and 
metatarsals in ∼35% 
of individuals
 • Cardiac arrhythmias 
and cardiomyopathy
 • EMG/NCV: primarily demyelinating 
polyneuropathy with secondary 
axonal degeneration
 • MRI: progressive symmetric signal 
change in the corticospinal tracts, 
cerebellar dentate nuclei, and 
corpus callosum
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: elevated plasma phytanic 
acid concentration (typically >200 
μmol/L; normal <10 μmol/L)
 • Other: deficiency of phytanoyl-­CoA 
hydroxylase or PTS2 receptor
 • If molecular genetic testing is 
negative or ambiguous in patients 
with elevated plasma phytanic 
acid levels and a consistent 
phenotype, enzyme analysis of 
phytanoyl-­CoA hydroxylase should 
be performed
Chronic, 
progressive
Autosomal 
recessive
 • >90% of identified affected 
individuals have pathogenic 
variants or deletions/duplica­
tions in PHYH, which encodes 
phytanoyl-­CoA hydroxylase
 • <10% of identified affected 
individuals have pathogenic 
variants or deletions/duplica­
tions in PEX7, which encodes 
the PTS2 receptor
Krabbe disease 
(globoid cell 
leukodystrophy)
Infantile form 
presents 
prior to 6 mo. 
Late-­onset 
forms present 
between 6 mo 
and adulthood
 • Infantile form presents with 
irritability, stiffness, seizures, and 
developmental delays or regression. 
A subset of patients present with 
isolated peripheral neuropathy 
with absent tendon reflexes and 
weakness prior to appearance of 
other symptoms. Affected patients 
then develop spasticity and severe 
developmental regression that 
progresses to decerebrate posturing 
and blindness
 • Late-­onset forms may present with 
distal weakness and paresthesia. 
Hypertonicity and developmental 
regression follow but may vary in 
severity
 • Sterile pyrexias in 
infantile form
 • Fist clenching
 • EMG/NCV: slow motor conduction 
velocities
 • MRI: diffuse severe demyelination
 • CSF: elevated protein possible
 • Blood: decreased (0–5% of nor­
mal) galactocerebrosidase enzyme 
activity
 • Other: EEG with diffuse slowing of 
background rhythm
Infantile form 
is severe 
and rapidly 
progressive, 
with death 
prior to 2 yr. 
Late-­onset 
forms are 
chronic, 
progressive, 
and variable 
in severity
Autosomal 
recessive
GALC: pathogenic variants and 
deletions
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
601
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
Metabolic and Other Neuropathy Disorders—cont'd
Acute intermit­
tent porphyria
Adolescence to 
young adult­
hood
 • Episodic neurovisceral attacks: 
sudden-­onset severe abdominal 
pain, muscular weakness, auto­
nomic changes (tachycardia, hyper­
tension), mental status changes, 
possible seizures and hyponatremia
 • Progressive peripheral neuropathy, 
primarily motor, that can progress 
in an ascending fashion to include 
respiratory insufficiency or failure
 • Hypertension
 • Chronic kidney 
disease
 • Risk of hepatocellular 
carcinoma
 • Attack triggers: 
numerous medica­
tions, alcohol intake, 
fluctuations in repro­
ductive hormones, 
fasting, stress
 • EMG: axonal motor neuropathy
 • MRI: findings consistent with pos­
terior reversible encephalopathy 
syndrome possible
 • Urine: increased concentration of 
porphobilinogen during attacks
 • Biochemical confirmation via urine 
with specific quantitative assay 
necessary for diagnosis due to 
asymptomatic heterozygotes
Recurrent 
attacks of 
variable 
length and 
recovery 
(days to 
months)
Autosomal 
dominant
HMBS: encodes hydroxymeth­
ylbilane synthase. Pathogenic 
variants and deletions/duplica­
tions, with variable penetrance
Myofibrillar 
myopathies
Infancy through 
adulthood
 • Proximal and distal muscle weak­
ness (proximal > distal in up to a 
third of affected individuals, distal > 
proximal in up to a third of affected 
individuals)
 • Peripheral neuropathy with weak­
ness and paresthesia
 • Cardiomyopathy in up 
to 30% of affected 
individuals
 • Muscle aches and 
cramps
 • Restrictive lung 
disease
 • EMG/NCV: fibrillation potentials, 
positive sharp waves, and other 
signs of electrical irritability. 
Mixed myopathic and neurogenic 
features
 • MRI: muscle inflammation possible
 • Blood: mild elevations in serum 
creatine kinase
 • Other: muscle histology with 
abnormal trichrome staining, 
decreased oxidative enzyme 
activity, and intense congophilia; 
muscle immunohistochemistry 
with ectopic expression of various 
proteins; muscle electron micros­
copy with myofibrillar degenera­
tion commencing at the Z-­disk
Chronic, 
progressive, 
resulting 
in severe 
disability or 
death
Autosomal 
dominant, 
with the 
exception of 
X-­linked FHL1 
pathologic 
variant and 
autosomal 
recessive 
CRYAB 
pathologic 
variants
Sequence variants in the follow­
ing genes have been identified. 
Deletions or duplications have 
not been reported:
 • DES
 • CRYAB
 • MYOT
 • LDB3
 • FLNC
 • BAG3
 • FHL1
 • DNAJB6
CD59 deficiency
Infancy through 
young adult­
hood
 • Recurrent immune-­mediated 
polyneuropathy following febrile 
illnesses
 • Risk for strokes
 • Coombs-­negative 
hemolysis during 
episodes
 • EMG/NCV: demyelinating, axonal, 
or mixed polyneuropathy
 • MRI: spinal root enhancement
 • CSF: increased protein during 
episodes
 • Blood: elevated CRP during 
episodes
Relapsing, 
chronic, 
progressive. 
Individual 
episodes 
respond to 
immuno­
modulatory 
therapy
Autosomal 
recessive
CD59: pathogenic variant 
CYS89TYR in the CD59 gene on 
chromosome 11p13
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG, electromyogram; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; NCV, nerve conduction velocity.
Modified from Bordini BJ, Monrad P. Differentiating familial neuropathies from Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64(1):231–252 (Table 2, pp. 241–248).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
602
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.19  Class and Variant Forms of Guillain-­Barré Syndrome (GBS) in Pediatrics: Clinical 
Features That Distinguish from Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy and 
Key Diagnostic Features, Including Antiganglioside Antibody Profiles
Variant
Clinical Features
Diagnostic Features
Classic GBS
AIDP
Acute-­onset ascending weakness
Frequent falls
Refusal to walk, run, climb
Numbness, tingling, pain
May involve respiration, swallowing, facial muscles, 
autonomic nervous system
EMG/NCV
CSF protein elevation, no pleocytosis
MRI bright spinal nerve roots
Ophthalmoplegia-­Ataxia-­Areflexia Constellation
Miller Fisher syndrome
Ophthalmoplegia, ataxia out of proportion to sensory loss, 
absent weakness
Clumsiness, dysesthesia, numbness
EMG/NCV studies showing axonopathy, although some patients 
may have demyelinating features, also with reduced or absent 
sensory nerve action potentials; antibodies isolated include 
anti-­GT1a, GQ1b, GD1b
Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis
Considered a subtype of Miller Fisher syndrome; includes 
ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, encephalopathy, and hyperre­
flexia
EMG/NCV studies similar to Miller Fisher; MRI findings vari­
able but may include hyperintense foci in the brainstem on 
T2-­weighted imaging, thalamic or cerebellar lesions possible; 
antibodies isolated include anti-­GT1a, GQ1b, GD1b
Plegia/Paresis with or Without Sensory and Autonomic Symptoms Constellation
Paraparetic GBS
Weakness and paresthesia restricted to the lower extrem­
ities
EMG/NCV studies similar to AIDP
Facial diplegia and distal limb 
paresthesia
Similar to AIDP but with bifacial weakness; rare in children 
but may present in adolescents
No ophthalmoplegia
EMG/NCV studies similar to AIDP; antibodies isolated include 
anti-­GM2; association with cytomegalovirus infection
Polyneuritis cranialis
Multiple bilateral cranial nerve palsies (often sparing the 
optic nerve); severe peripheral sensory loss
MRI showing enhancement of cranial nerves; antibodies isolated 
include anti-­GQ1, GT1
Pharyngeal-­cervical-­brachial 
weakness
Swallowing dysfunction; weakness of oropharyngeal, neck, 
and shoulder muscles
EMG/NCV studies showing axonopathy; antibodies isolated 
include anti-­GT1a, GQ1b, GD1a
Acute motor axonal neuropathy
Absence of sensory or autonomic symptoms; rapid progres­
sion of ascending symmetric weakness; higher likelihood 
of respiratory failure
Ascending weakness may involve respiration, swallowing, 
or facial muscles
EMG/NCV studies showing motor axonopathy without demyelinat­
ing features; antibodies isolated include anti-­GM1, GM1b, GD1a, 
GalNac-­GD1a; strong association with Campylobacter 
jejuni infection
Acute motor-­sensory axonal 
neuropathy
Absence of autonomic symptoms; prolonged course with 
possible muscle wasting; rare in children
EMG/NCV studies showing motor and sensory axonopathy without 
demyelinating features; antibodies isolated include anti-­GM1, 
GM1b, GD1a; strong association with C. jejuni infection
Pure sensory GBS
Significant sensory ataxia with absent reflexes and minor 
motor involvement
EMG/NCV studies with demyelinating features; antibodies isolated 
include anti-­GD1b
AIDP, acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG, electromyogram; GBS, Guillain-­Barré syndrome; 
NCV, nerve conduction velocity.
Modified from Bordini BJ, Monrad P. Differentiating familial neuropathies from Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64(1):231–252 
(Table 1, pp. 237–238).
toes, claw-­hand deformities, respiratory insufficiency, and early-­onset 
scoliosis that may need surgical correction. Nerve biopsy shows onion-­
bulb formation and axons without evidence of myelination. A severe 
infancy or childhood-­onset phenotype is associated with pathogenic 
variants in the following genes: MPZ, EGR2, PMP22, PRX, NEFL, MFN2, 
and GDAP1.
Uncommon disorders
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. Chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is a chronic 
immune-­mediated neuropathy with a childhood incidence of <1 in 
200,000. CIDP is more common in childhood and is unlikely to occur 
in neonates or infants. Unlike GBS/AIDP, there is no antecedent illness. 
Immune-­mediated targeting of myelin in the motor and sensory 
neurons is the mechanism of disease.
This neuropathy is characterized by progressive proximal weak­
ness with the nadir reached within 2 months of onset. Symptoms ini­
tially manifest in the legs and can progress to the arms and face and 
then involve swallowing or breathing function. Complete absence of 
reflexes is typically seen. Diagnosis is conferred when EMG demon­
strates multiple segments of motor nerves with conduction velocities 
in the demyelinating range, with abnormal or absent sensory nerve 
conductions in the setting of a consistent clinical history. CSF shows 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
603
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
TABLE 35.20  Classification of HMSN or Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth (CMT) Disease
Type
Gene or Cytogenetic 
Location
Age of Onset
Evocative Phenotypes
Autosomal Dominant CMT1 (AD-­CMT1)
CMT1A
PMP22  (duplication)
All ages
Classic form. Hypertrophy of nerves
HNPP
PMP22  (deletion)
2–64 yr
Recurrent entrapment neuropathies. Multifocal neuropathies
CMT1B
MPZ
First to second decade
Clinically more severe than CMT1A
CMT1C
LITAF
Childhood
Abnormal gait. Occasional nerve hypertrophy. Rarely deafness
CMT1D
EGR2
First decade
DSS/CHN. Possible cranial nerve involvement. Scoliosis
CMT1E
PMP22
Childhood
Associated with deafness
CMT1F
NEFL
1–13 yr
CMT1 with early onset. Severe disease
CMT “plus”
FBLN5
Fourth to fifth decade
Skin hyperelasticity. Age-­related macular degeneration
Autosomal Dominant CMT2 (AD-­CMT2)
CMT2A
MFN2
6 mo–50 yr
Prominent distal weakness. Late proximal weakness. Optic 
atrophy. CNS involvement
CMT2B
RAB7
Second decade
Severe sensory loss. Foot ulcers. Arthropathy and amputations
CMT2C
TRPV4
Birth to 60 yr
Younger more severe. Motor predominance. Vocal cord, dia­
phragm, respiratory involvement/dHMN
CMT2D
GARS
16–30 yr
Distal upper limb predominance dHMN
CMT2E
NEFL
First to fifth decade
Hearing loss. Hyperkeratosis
CMT2F
HSPB1
Adult
Classic/dHMN
CMT2G
12q12-­q13.2
Second decade
Classic
CMT2I
MPZ
Late
Classic
CMT2J
MPZ
Late
Deafness and pupillary abnormalities
CMT2K
GDAP1
Variable
Vocal paralysis and pyramidal features
CMT2L
HSPB8
15–33 yr
Classic/dHMN
CMT2M
DNM2
First to second decade
Tremor
CMT2N
AARS
15–50 yr
Classic
CMT2O
DYNC1H1
Early childhood
Sometimes learning difficulties
CMT2P
LRSAM1
27–40 yr
Mild. Sometimes asymmetry
CMT2Q
DHTKD1
13–25 yr
Classic CMT
HMSN-­P
TFG
17–55 yr
Proximal involvement. Tremor. Diabetes mellitus
CMT2
HARS
Late onset
Sensory predominant
CMT2
MARS
Late onset
Motor-­sensory
CMT2
MT-­ATP6
First to second decade
Motor predominant. Pyramidal signs
Dominant and Recessive X-­Linked CMT
CMTX1
GJB1
First to second decade
Classic. Occasional deafness
CMTX4
AIFM1
Early childhood
Intellectual disability. Deafness
CMTX5
PRPS1
Childhood
Mild–moderate neuropathy. Deafness. Late optic atrophy
CMTX6
PDK3
Childhood
Classic CMT
Dominant Intermediate CMT
DI-­CMTA
10q24.1-­q25.1
7–72 yr
Classic CMT
DI-­CMTB (CMT2M)
DNM2
First to second decade
Classic CMT with neutropenia and early-­onset cataract
DI-­CMTC
YARS
7–59 yr
Classic CMT
DI-­CMTD
MPZ
30–50 yr
Sensory loss and weakness. Deafness/pupil disorders
DI-­CMTE
INF2
5–28 yr
Glomerulosclerosis and proteinuria
DI-­CMTF
GNB4
5–45 yr
Classic CMT
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
604
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
cytoalbuminologic dissociation, similar to GBS. When the diagnosis 
is under consideration, infectious and neoplastic etiologies must be 
excluded.
Unlike GBS, this syndrome requires prolonged, typically lifelong, 
treatment with immunosuppressants. Good functional recovery 
is possible with adequate early immunosuppression, with the goal 
being to maintain the patient on a single steroid-­sparing drug long 
term.
Is It a Problem at the Neuromuscular Junction?
Diagnostic considerations. NMJ disorders are characterized by 
hypotonia and weakness with preserved reflexes, except in the case 
of botulism, in which reflexes may be diminished or even absent. 
The hypotonia and weakness in NMJ disorders are characterized 
by fatigability and diurnal fluctuations, with symptoms typically 
worsening over the course of the day, as well as acute exacerbations, 
sometimes in conjunction with identifiable triggers such as stress 
or a febrile illness. Weakness may be generalized or concentrated 
primarily in proximal muscle groups. Commonly affected are the 
small muscles of the eyes that are continually contracting when 
awake, such as the levator palpebrae superioris, resulting in ptosis, 
as well as the extraocular muscles, resulting in ophthalmoparesis, 
producing the symptom of diplopia (Fig. 35.17). Diagnostic 
investigations that help localize hypotonia and weakness to the 
NMJ include EMG of an affected muscle, which demonstrates 
a decrementing response to 3-­Hz RNS (Fig. 35.18 and Table 
35.21), though if the disease is severe and has resulted in static 
weakness, the needle EMG may be normal or appear myopathic. 
Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities are normal, as is 
the CK, helping suggest against nerve or muscle involvement, 
respectively. NMJ disorders are difficult to distinguish from 
each other on clinical grounds. All patients with NMJ disorders 
should undergo testing for the presence of acetylcholine receptor 
and muscle-­specific kinase antibodies, as positive antibodies are 
TABLE 35.20  Classification of HMSN or Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth (CMT) Disease—cont’d
Type
Gene or Cytogenetic 
Location
Age of Onset
Evocative Phenotypes
Autosomal Recessive CMT1 AR-­CMT1 (CMT4)
AR-­CMT1A
GDAP1
<2 yr
Severe and progressive. Vocal cord and diaphragm paralysis in 
some cases
AR-­CMT1B1
MTMR2
3 yr
Severe CMT1. Facial/bulbar weakness. Scoliosis
AR-­CMT1B2
MTMR13 (SBF2)
4–13 yr
Severe CMT1. Glaucoma. Kyphoscoliosis
AR-­CMT1B3
MTMR5 (SBF1)
5–11 yr
Pes planus. Scoliosis
AR-­CMT1C
SH3TC2
Early onset first to second decade
Severe to moderate CMT1. Scoliosis. Deafness
AR-­CMT1D
NDRG1
<10 yr
Severe CMT1. Deafness. Tongue atrophy
AR-­CMT1E
EGR2
Birth
Congenital hypotonia. Respiratory failure. Arthrogryposis
AR-­CMT1F
PRX
Birth to first decade
CMT1. Prominent sensory involvement
AR-­CMT1G (HMSN-­Russe)
HK1
8–16 yr
Severe to moderate CMT1
AR-­CMT1H
FGD4
<2 yr
Delayed milestones. Scoliosis. Severe course
AR-­CMT1J
FIG4
Congenital, childhood, or adult
Severe disorder. Similarities to motor neuron disease
AR-­CMT1
SURF1
Childhood
Severe. Associated to cerebellar ataxia, brain MRI abnormali­
ties, and lactic acidosis
Autosomal Recessive CMT2 AR-­CMT2 (CMT2)
AR-­CMT2A (CMT2B1)
LMNA
Second decade
Severe course. Distal and proximal weakness
AR-­CMT2B (CMT2B2)
MED25
28–42 yr
Classic CMT2
AR-­CMT2C (CMT2B5)
NEFL
First decade
Severe form
AR-­CMT2F/dHMN
HSPB1
Variable
Sometimes proximal leg weakness
AR-­CMT2H
GDAP1
First decade
Pyramidal involvement. Vocal cord involvement
AR-­CMT2K (rarely AD)
GDAP1
Early-­onset form
Severe form. Vocal cord paralysis. Skeletal deformities. Milder 
dominant form
AR-­CMT2P
LRSAM1
Third to fourth decade
Cramps. Erectile dysfunction
(HMSN VI)
MFN2
Early onset
Optic atrophy
ARAN-­NM
HINT1
First decade
Neuromyotonia
GAN
GAN
Childhood
Severe axonal neuropathy with early-­onset CNS involvement. 
Milder form CMT-­like
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CHN, congenital hypermyelinating neuropathy; CNS, central nervous system; HMSM, hereditary 
motor and sensory neuropathy; HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
From Tazir M, Hamadouche T, Nouioua S, et al. Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies or Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth diseases: an update. J Neurol 
Sci. 2014;347:14–22 (Table 2, pp. 16–17).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
605
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 35.16  Patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. (A-B) Muscle wasting of the legs and the lower third 
of the thigh. (C-E) Foot deformities of different severities, with high arches, hammer toes, and callosities. (F) 
Severe atrophy of intrinsic hand muscles (main en griffe ["claw hand"]). (From Pareyson D, Marchesi C. Diag­
nosis, natural history, and management of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8[7]:654–667 
[Fig. 1, p. 655].)
Fig. 35.17  Left ptosis and ophthalmoparesis in nearly all directions of gaze in a 17-­year-­old female adolescent 
with acetylcholine receptor antibody–positive generalized myasthenia diagnosed at 12 years of age. Left 
ptosis is evident on primary gaze (center), with near-­complete ophthalmoparesis on up gaze (top), right gaze 
(left), and left gaze (right) with relatively preserved down gaze (bottom). (Photographs courtesy Dr. Chamindra 
Konersman, used with permission.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
606
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
diagnostic of autoimmune myasthenia and provide indication for 
immunomodulating therapy. Negative antibody status does not 
preclude autoimmune myasthenia, however.
Common disorders
Autoimmune myasthenia gravis. Up to 15% of all autoimmune 
myasthenia is pediatric onset. Symptoms include acute diplopia, 
ptosis, respiratory distress, and feeding difficulties in a previously 
healthy infant or child, with symptoms that tend to worsen or be more 
pronounced later in the day (see Fig. 35.17). Infants may also have 
stridor. Onset can occur in infancy through adolescence; neonatal 
presentation is rare. Categorizing each patient into either generalized or 
ocular myasthenia is clinically helpful, as the generalized form can be 
associated with respiratory or swallowing compromise, is potentially 
life-­threatening, and requires hospitalization. Up to 35% of pediatric 
cases are categorized as ocular at onset, though a proportion of these 
progress to generalized disease within 2 years of symptom onset; 
frequent surveillance and reassessment are required.
Autoimmune myasthenia is caused by antibodies directed against 
specific antigens within the NMJ. The most common antibody is the 
acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody, which mediates disease by 
binding acetylcholine receptors at the postsynaptic membrane and 
inducing complement activation, which results in destruction of the 
receptor, distortion of the membrane, and interference with binding 
sites on remaining receptors. The AChR antibodies are present in 
approximately 75% of generalized pediatric myasthenia cases and 40% 
of ocular cases, similar to adult rates. The next most common auto­
antibody is the muscle-­specific kinase (MuSK) antibody, occurring 
in approximately 10% of pediatric myasthenia cases, again similar to 
adult rates. The prevalence of other more recently identified antibodies, 
such as the lipoprotein receptor-­related membrane protein 4 (LRP-­4), 
is yet to be determined. The presence of either AChR or MuSK anti­
bodies in a patient with symptoms of myasthenia is diagnostic and 
obviates the need for further diagnostic studies. Seronegative patients 
should undergo 3-­Hz RNS in a clinically weak muscle. A decrementing 
response confirms that disease is localized to the NMJ and provides 
evidence for a presumptive diagnosis of myasthenia. RNS has largely 
replaced edrophonium (Tensilon) testing due to its superior sensi­
tivity and specificity, as well as the relative impracticality of Tensilon 
testing due to need for cardiac monitoring. Patients who are initially 
seronegative should be retested at the time of any exacerbations, as 
approximately 40% of initially seronegative patients become seropos­
itive within 2 years. Childhood autoimmune myasthenia has a higher 
remission rate than adults; remission is associated with conversion to 
antibody-­negative status. Distinguishing between autoimmune and 
A
B
Fig. 35.18  Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) at a rate of 3 Hz in a 
15-­year-­old female adolescent with ptosis and generalized weakness 
diagnosed with seropositive myasthenia. RNS of a clinically strong mus­
cle, the abductor digiti minimi, shows no decremental response (A); 
however, when performed on a clinically weak muscle, the trapezius, 
a decremental response of 44% between the first and fifth responses 
(B) is seen.
TABLE 35.21  Differentiating Between Types of Neuromuscular Junction Disorders
Botulism
Autoimmune 
Myasthenia
Transient Neonatal 
Myasthenia
Congenital Myasthenic 
Syndrome
Sudden onset in a previously healthy 
infant
+
+
−
+/− usually present at birth
Generalized hypotonia and weakness
+
+
+
+
Facial weakness, ptosis
+
+
+
+
Dilated, poorly reactive pupils
+
−
−
− (rare exception)
Constipation
+
−
−
−
Response to anticholinesterases
−
+
+
+/−
3 Hz (low frequency) RNS
Decremental response
Decremental response
Decremental response
Decremental response
High-­frequency RNS
Incremental response in 
mild cases
Decremental response
Decremental response
Decremental response
Family history
−
+/−
+
+/−
*Congenital myasthenia includes congenital myasthenic syndromes, infantile (autoimmune) myasthenia, and transient acquired neonatal myasthenia.
+, present; −, absent; +/−, variable; RNS, repetitive nerve stimulation.
Modified from Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008:791.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
607
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
genetic forms of myasthenia can be challenging in children, though 
responsiveness to immunosuppression strongly suggests autoimmune 
myasthenia.
Evaluation for thymic hyperplasia or thymoma via CT of the 
chest is necessary in all autoimmune myasthenia. Children are 
rarely found to have thymomas, but thymectomy is recommended 
in pediatric seropositive myasthenia, especially if response to med­
ical therapy is poor. Unlike adults, thymectomy may prevent pro­
gression from ocular to the generalized form and may be beneficial 
in ocular myasthenia. Thymectomy is not recommended for adult 
ocular myasthenia. A thymectomy does not preclude the need for 
medical therapy but affords better disease control and reduced doses 
of immunosuppression. Symptomatic treatment includes long-­acting 
cholinesterase inhibitors such as pyridostigmine; however, very few 
patients have complete and sustained resolution of symptoms solely 
on this drug. Most ocular and nearly all generalized myasthenia 
patients require early and sufficient disease-­modifying treatment 
with immunosuppressants such as oral prednisone, which has been 
beneficial in controlling symptoms, reducing permanent weakness, 
and decreasing progression from ocular to generalized forms. Pred­
nisone is harmful long term; therefore, all patients who respond to 
steroids should be offered steroid-­sparing immunosuppression with 
azathioprine as the first-­line agent for maintenance therapy. Ritux­
imab can also be considered for long-­term disease control. IVIG is 
only recommended for maintenance therapy if a patient cannot tol­
erate steroids and is added to the regimen if high-­dose steroids yield 
suboptimal disease control.
Acute crises can be life-­threatening and should be treated with 
prompt hospitalization, respiratory support as needed, and either IVIG 
or plasma exchange for disease control. Good functional recovery is 
possible with adequate immunosuppression and the goal is to maintain 
the patient on a single steroid-­sparing drug long term.
Botulism. Infantile botulism is caused by the ingestion of 
Clostridium botulinum organisms that germinate in the infant’s 
gastrointestinal tract and release botulinum neurotoxin into the 
bloodstream. The toxin, composed of a heavy and light chain, 
prevents the release of acetylcholine at motor and autonomic NMJs 
through a series of steps (Fig. 35.19). Reduced acetylcholine release 
into the synaptic cleft results in flaccid paralysis of skeletal muscle, 
flaccid paralysis of smooth muscles of the gut, and autonomic ganglia 
dysfunction. Symptoms evolve over the course of several days and 
include constipation, followed then by lethargy, reduced spontaneous 
movement, hypotonia, and poor feeding. Subsequently, head drop 
develops, as do ptosis, a weak cry and smile, and mydriasis, as well 
as a descending paralysis that can compromise respiratory function. 
Reflexes are often preserved though can be diminished or even absent. 
Decreased physiologic variability in heart rate can occur in severe cases.
Infantile botulism affects neonates from younger than 1 week of age 
to 1 year, with 95% of cases occurring in infants younger than 6 months 
old. The sources of C. botulinum include honey, corn syrup, soil, and 
dust. The immaturity of the gut microbiome in infants is presumed to 
increase their susceptibility to colonization by C. botulinum. Exposure 
to soil from active construction, whether via a parent who works in 
construction or via proximity to a construction site, has also been pro­
posed as a means of contracting the disease.
Diagnosis is made by detecting toxin in stool using a neutralizing 
bioassay. Serum studies for botulinum toxin are unreliable. EMG can 
help exclude mimics and demonstrates low-­amplitude motor conduc­
tions at baseline, with an increase of >40% above baseline following 
exercise or tetanic stimulation at 30–50 Hz.
Prompt diagnosis allows for rapid treatment with intravenous bot­
ulism immunoglobulin, allowing for significantly reduced durations of 
hospital stay and lower durations of mechanical ventilation, enteral feed­
ing tube requirement, or need for parenteral nutrition. Recovery takes 
Healthy Neuromuscular Transmission
Effect of Botulinum Neurotoxin (BoNT)
ACh vesicle
VAMP
Membrane
fusion
Presynaptic
terminal
SNARE
complex
Muscle cell
SNAP-25
Syntaxin
Synaptic
cleft
ACh receptor
Na
BoNT
light chain
Heavy
chain
Light chain
dissociates
and targets
SNARE 
complex
Membranes
do not fuse
B
A
Fig. 35.19  Neuromuscular transmission in botulism compared to normal. A, Healthy neuromuscular transmis­
sion. Acetylcholine (ACh)-­containing vesicles bind to the presynaptic terminal membrane via formation of the 
soluble N-­ethylmaleimide-­sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNARE) complex, leading to mem­
brane fusion and release of ACh into the synaptic cleft. ACh molecules then bind to receptors on the muscle 
cell, allowing influx of sodium and muscle contraction. B, Effect of botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT). BoNT binds 
receptors on the presynaptic terminal and is endocytosed. The light chain is dissociated from the heavy chain 
and translocates into the cytoplasm, where it cleaves specific SNARE proteins according to BoNT subtype. 
Subtypes A, C, and E target SNAP-­25; subtypes B, D, F, and G target vesicle-­associated membrane protein 
(VAMP); and subtype C further targets syntaxin. (From Rosow LK, Strober JB. Infant botulism: review and 
clinical update. Pediatr Neurol. 2015;52[5]:487–492.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
608
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
weeks to months, with the diaphragm recovering faster than peripheral 
muscles. Prognosis is generally excellent if there are no complications.
Food-­borne botulism develops after ingestion of preformed toxin in 
poorly canned foods. Affected children have nausea and vomiting with 
dilated pupils, diplopia, dysphagia, dysarthria, dry mouth, and hypoto­
nia. Wound botulism is uncommon.
Uncommon disorders
Transient neonatal myasthenia. Transient neonatal myasthenia 
(TNM) is caused by transplacental transfer of maternal antibodies, 
even if the mother is seronegative, and occurs in up to 30% of neonates 
born to mothers with autoimmune myasthenia. The neonate will 
likely be seropositive for maternal autoantibody. Affected patients 
usually demonstrate generalized hypotonia, weak cry, respiratory 
distress, ophthalmoparesis, and difficulty feeding a few hours after 
birth. Notably, affected neonates are alert with normally reactive 
pupils.
Treatment is supportive and most infants recover completely within 
4–6 weeks. Some require respiratory support until symptoms resolve. 
Anticholinesterase inhibitor therapy with neostigmine may be needed 
for a few days to a few weeks. Plasma exchange may also be required for 
severe cases. Clearance of antibody from the infant’s serum correlates 
with resolution of symptoms. No long-­term treatment is necessary.
Rare cases of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita have been 
described in TNM due to early transplacental transfer of maternal 
AChR antibodies binding fetal acetylcholine receptors, resulting in 
reduced fetal movements and development of contractures.
Congenital myasthenic syndrome. Congenital myasthenic syndrome 
(CMS) is a rare set of genetic disorders stemming from pathogenic 
variants in over a dozen different genes causing either defective 
release of acetylcholine (presynaptic), lack of acetylcholinesterase or 
abnormal clustering of acetylcholine receptors (synaptic), or abnormal 
acetylcholine receptor response (postsynaptic) (Fig. 35.20).
Clinically, all CMSs are seronegative for AChR and MuSK antibodies 
and can manifest with ophthalmoparesis, ptosis, and feeding and respi­
ratory difficulties, making them indistinguishable from the autoimmune 
myasthenia (Fig. 35.21). Lack of a response to immunomodulatory 
therapy is suggestive, while genetic confirmation of disease is necessary 
for definitive diagnosis. Treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 
needs to be tailored based on the nature of the genetic defect, since a sub­
set of patients will respond with worsening weakness to pyridostigmine.
Is It a Problem in the Muscle?
Diagnostic considerations. The muscle diseases are broadly 
categorized into muscular dystrophies or myopathies based on clinical 
and pathologic features. Muscular dystrophies, or dystrophinopathies, 
are a group of relentlessly progressive disorders characterized 
by ongoing muscle degeneration and regeneration, elevated CK, 
and a dystrophic pattern on muscle biopsy light microscopy that 
consists of rounded large and small fibers, many degenerating and 
regenerating fibers, internal nuclei, and prominent fibrosis between 
fibers, indicative of scarring. The dystrophic pattern is uniform for all 
dystrophinopathies, and specialized staining is necessary to distinguish 
between different types of muscular dystrophy (Fig. 35.22). Variable 
involvement of other organs, such as the heart, can occur in muscular 
dystrophies, though a thoughtful approach to assessing for involvement 
of other organ systems is advised. Notably, concomitant elevations in 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
will occur whenever CK is markedly elevated, since AST/ALT are not 
enzymes specific to the liver and are also found in muscle. Recognition 
of this laboratory abnormality pattern may prevent an unnecessary 
liver biopsy or other investigations, as disease restricted to the muscle 
will lack other markers of hepatic dysfunction, such as elevations in 
alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase and bilirubin, or 
coagulation abnormalities.
A myopathy, on the other hand, has a structural or functional 
abnormality in the myofiber resulting from pathogenic genetic vari­
ants. Generally, myopathies are less progressive than dystrophinopa­
thies but have the potential to be similarly disabling. Most importantly, 
myopathies lack the characteristic scarring and muscle turnover on 
muscle biopsy and instead exhibit unusual features such as cores, rods, 
vacuoles, or centrally placed nuclei. Due to the lack of increased muscle 
turnover relative to dystrophinopathies, CK is typically normal. Vari­
able involvement of other organs can occur with myopathies as well.
A stepwise evaluation generally consists of first obtaining a CK to 
distinguish between muscular dystrophies and myopathies. Lactate, 
pyruvate, thyroid studies, and a muscle biopsy to differentiate between 
muscular dystrophy, myopathy, metabolic myopathy, inflammatory 
myopathy, and mitochondrial disease are subsequent steps in diagnosing 
a muscle disease. Based on the results of these initial investigations, fur­
ther genetic and metabolic studies may be necessary for a definitive diag­
nosis. Metabolic disorders that affect muscle are outlined in Table 35.22.
Common disorders
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy. Duchenne and Becker 
muscular dystrophy (DMD and BMD) are X-­linked disorders caused by 
pathogenic variants in the DMD gene, which encodes dystrophin. The 
majority of pathogenic changes consist of deletions of one or more exons 
within the gene, while sequence variants account for the remainder. 
While DMD is characterized by the absence of dystrophin in muscle, 
BMD has a partially functional protein product. The difference between 
the two phenotypes is based on the nature of the underlying genetic 
abnormality. Typically, copy number or sequence variants causing DMD 
are “out-­of-­frame,” resulting in a premature termination of translation 
and subsequent degradation of the protein product, while variants 
that cause BMD are “in-­frame,” producing a partly functional, albeit 
truncated, protein. As an X-­linked disorder, biological males are affected 
far more frequently than females, who are typically carriers though may 
rarely manifest partial or even complete symptoms.
Axon
Presynaptic
terminal
AcetylCoA
 choline
ChAT AcetylCholine
Synaptic vesicles
Postsynaptic
membrane
(sarcolemma)
ColQ-AChE
Agrin
LRP4
MuSK
Rapsyn
Dok-7
Postsynaptic
membrane
(sarcolemma)
Nav1.4
AChR
AChR
AChR
AChR
AChR
Fig. 35.20  Congenital myasthenic syndrome classified by location of 
defective protein. (From Shieh PB, Oh SJ. Congenital myasthenic syn­
dromes. Neurol Clin. 2018;36[2]:367–378.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
609
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
A
B
C
D
Fig. 35.21  Congenital myasthenic syndrome. This child was referred at 4 years of age with a history of swal­
lowing difficulty. By 2 years, his walking had not progressed further, and he was unable to run or climb stairs. 
His parents had also noted some ptosis in the first year. On examination, he had obvious ptosis, limited ocular 
movement, associated weakness of facial movement, an expressionless face, open mouth, and an inability to 
close the eyes tightly (A). There was general hypotonia with joint laxity. The child got up from the floor with a 
Gower sign and could not stand on one leg or run. A diagnosis of myasthenia was confirmed by demonstrat­
ing a response decrement to repeated ulnar nerve stimulation. A definite improvement in the ptosis and his 
ability to get up from the floor was noted after intravenous edrophonium chloride (Tensilon). He was treated 
with pyridostigmine and showed a definite improvement, but with time, he needed an increased dosage and 
frequency. His performance improved after each dose and tended to wane as the next dose became due. He 
still had a Gower sign on rising from the floor, marked ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, and facial weakness 
(B–D). A history of consanguinity suggested a possible diagnosis of autosomal recessive infantile (congenital) 
myasthenia. (From Dubowitz V. Muscle Disorders in Childhood. 2nd ed. London: WB Saunders; 1995:414.)
A
B
C
D
Fig. 35.22  Muscle biopsy in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) showing prominent dystrophic changes 
consisting of fiber size variation, thick endomysial (around each myofiber) and perimysial connective tissue, 
increased internal nucleation, and fatty replacement of muscle tissue on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (A). 
Higher magnification on H&E (B) shows mild inflammation consisting of myophagocytes consuming degen­
erating muscle fibers (arrows) and hypercontracted fibers (yellow asterisks). Dystrophin immunohistochem­
istry demonstrates the normal staining pattern outlining the sarcolemma (C) in normal muscle, whereas the 
absence of staining in nearly all the fibers is seen in a DMD patient (D). A few fibers within the muscle, called 
“revertant fibers,” may have their reading frame spontaneously restored, thus enabling them to express 
dystrophin (red asterisk). (Courtesy Michael Lawlor, MD, PhD, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
610
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 35.22  Metabolic Diseases That Affect Muscle
Name(s)
Enzyme Deficiency Clinical Features
Diagnostic Testing
Glycogen storage disease 
type II (Pompe disease)
α-­1,4-­Glucosidase (GAA 
enzyme)
 • Infantile-­onset Pompe—poor feeding, motor 
delay and hypotonia with weakness, respi­
ratory difficulties, cardiac issues (short P-­R 
interval with wide QRS complex, cardiomeg­
aly, LV outflow obstruction, cardiomyopathy)
 • Late-­onset Pompe—limb-­girdle pattern of 
weakness, respiratory insufficiency without 
clinical heart disease
 • GAA enzyme replacement therapy available
 • Measure acid α-­glucosidase (GAA) enzyme activity on 
dried blood spot to screen
 • Confirm via GAA gene sequencing demonstrating 
biallelic pathogenic variants for definitive diagnosis
 • Baseline elevated CK (∼10× normal) in infantile-­onset 
form; baseline CK may be normal in adult-­onset form
 • Muscle biopsy may show vacuoles (lysosomes) and 
glycogen accumulation with positively staining PAS; 
20–30% of patients with adult-­onset form may not 
show specific changes on biopsy
Glycogen storage disease 
type IIIa (Debrancher 
deficiency, Cori disease, 
Forbes disease)
Amylo-­1,6-­glucosidase
 • Ketotic hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, 
hyperlipidemia, elevated liver enzymes, 
cardiomyopathy in childhood, limb-­girdle 
pattern of weakness in 20s–30s
 • Baseline elevated CK (2–20× normal)
 • Triglycerides, cholesterol, and liver enzymes are 
elevated
 • AGL gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
Glycogen storage disease 
type IV (Brancher defi­
ciency, Andersen disease)
Glycogen branching 
enzyme (GBE)
 • Fatal perinatal neuromuscular subtype—
fetal akinesia, polyhydramnios, fetal hydrops
 • Congenital neuromuscular subtype—hypo­
tonic newborn, respiratory distress, dilated 
cardiomyopathy, death in infancy
 • Childhood neuromuscular subtype—chronic 
progressive myopathy, dilated cardiomyopa­
thy
 • Demonstrate deficiency of GBE in the liver, muscle, or 
skin fibroblasts
 • GBE1 gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
Glycogen storage disease 
type V (McArdle disease)
Myophosphorylase
 • Exercise-­induced muscle cramps and pain, 
especially early in exercise, that improve 
with rest or lower intensity (“second-­wind 
phenomenon”)
 • Recurrent myoglobinuria +/− rhabdomyolysis
 • Baseline elevated CK (>5× normal)
 • PYGM gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
 • Quantitative or qualitative (stain) on muscle biopsy 
shows virtual absence of enzyme activity
 • Subsarcolemmal glycogen accumulation on muscle 
biopsy on LM (either PAS positive or vacuoles on H&E) 
and EM
Glycogen storage disease 
type VII (Tarui disease)
Phosphofructokinase
 • Classical form—muscle aching, cramping, 
exercise intolerance, myoglobinuria, nau­
sea/vomiting after intense exercise, starting 
in childhood; hemolytic anemia
 • Late-­onset form—cramps, myalgia, mild 
proximal weakness in adulthood
 • Infantile form—hypotonia, arthrogryposis, 
intellectual disability, fatal in infancy
 • Baseline elevated CK
 • PFK gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
Glycogen storage disease 
VIII (phosphorylase kinase 
[PhK] deficiency)
Phosphorylase b kinase
 • Exercise intolerance, cramps, myoglobinuria, 
progressive muscle weakness in childhood 
to adulthood
 • Hepatomegaly, growth retardation, fasting 
ketosis and hypoglycemia
 • Baseline elevated CK
 • PhK enzyme activity reduced in muscle
 • PHKA1 gene sequencing and/or PHKB gene sequencing 
demonstrating biallelic pathogenic variants for defini­
tive diagnosis
Phosphorylase a1 
kinase
 • Same as above but X-­linked and very rare
Glycogen storage disease IX 
(phosphoglycerate kinase 
deficiency)
Phosphoglycerate 
kinase
 • Myopathic form—muscle weakness, pain, 
cramping, especially with exercise with 
myoglobinuria +/− rhabdomyolysis
 • Baseline mildly elevated CK
 • PGK1 gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
Glycogen storage disease X 
(phosphoglycerate mutase 
deficiency)
Phosphoglycerate 
mutase
 • Strenuous exercise intolerance, cramps, 
myoglobinuria
 • Baseline mildly elevated CK
 • PGAM2 gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic 
pathogenic variants for definitive diagnosis
Glycogen storage disease 
XI (lactate dehydrogenase 
deficiency)
Lactate dehydrogenase
 • Exercise intolerance, cramping, recurrent 
myoglobinuria
 • Normal CK between attacks
 • LDHA gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
611
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
The diagnoses of DMD and BMD are suspected from the history 
(including the family history), physical examination findings, and an 
elevated serum CK (often 10,000–30,000 IU/L). Genetic testing via 
DMD deletion/duplication with reflexive sequencing analysis confirms 
the diagnosis. Although muscle biopsy is no longer necessary in DMD, 
it may still be useful in certain cases of BMD (see Fig. 35.22).
Rarely, infants with DMD may present with failure to thrive and 
global developmental delay. Some affected individuals have mild delays 
in their motor or cognitive milestones, but most have normal early 
milestones and do not come to clinical attention until 2–5 years of age 
when they are noted to be slower in walking or running, rising from 
the floor, or climbing stairs compared to their peers. Early in the dis­
ease, there is usually calf pseudohypertrophy because of a proliferation 
of fat and collagen and even some small degree of muscle hypertrophy. 
The classic maneuver employed to rise from the floor is a Gower sign, 
indicative of proximal hip extensor weakness, and is typically seen by 
7 years of age (Fig. 35.23). The characteristic phenotype of toe-­walking 
with a waddling Trendelenburg gait, hyperlordosis, and enlarged calves 
is usually seen by 5–6 years of age. However, atrophy of all muscles 
occurs with age. Language and cognitive abnormalities are seen in 
many patients with a high incidence of autism and attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder.
With time, proximal muscle weakness makes ambulation difficult, 
necessitating assistive devices such as wheelchairs. With the standard 
use of steroids, the age of wheelchair dependence ranges between 9 and 
14 years. Respiratory muscle failure develops by late adolescence. The 
pulmonary insufficiency may be aggravated by thoracic kyphoscolio­
sis. Nocturnal bilevel ventilation with progression to daytime use to 
treat hypercapnia due to advancing restrictive lung disease has been 
instrumental in prolonging life expectancy. Most patients develop 
cardiomyopathy starting in adolescence; screening with serial echo­
cardiograms or cardiac MRI begins at 10 years of age. Most affected 
patients die by 25–35 years of age.
Oral corticosteroids slow progression of disease by improving mus­
cle strength, which results in prolonged time to loss of ambulation, less 
scoliosis, preservation of respiratory function, and possible reduction 
in cardiac fibrosis. Despite these benefits, the side effects of long-­term 
steroids serve as a deterrent to initiation. More novel therapies include 
the use of a synthetic antisense oligonucleotide, eteplirsen, that can 
allow for the restoration of the reading frame and production of a 
shortened but functional dystrophin protein that can lead to modest 
delays in disease progression. This medication is only beneficial for 
DMD patients with a specific though common pathogenic change in 
exon 51 that disturbs the reading frame, which is approximately 14% 
of all DMD cases. Future therapies for DMD are centered on gene 
replacement with a shortened functional version of the DMD gene 
called microdystrophin.
Becker muscular dystrophy has marked clinical heterogeneity with 
a variable age of onset ranging from childhood to adulthood. Affected 
patients also have calf pseudohypertrophy, eventually exhibit a Gower 
maneuver, and have variable degrees of proximal muscle weakness. 
Other phenotypes in BMD include isolated quadriceps weakness, 
childhood cramps–myalgia syndrome, exercise-­induced myoglobin­
uria, and, rarely, asymptomatic elevated CK levels. Childhood-­onset 
weakness typically results in loss of ambulation in the third or fourth 
decade. Cognition is usually normal but cardiomyopathy occurs fre­
quently in this population and rarely may be the heralding symptom. 
Corticosteroids are not beneficial in most cases of BMD.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is a 
common muscle disorder of childhood that is distinct in that it causes 
primarily a distal distribution of muscle weakness and is associated 
with myotonia, a phenomenon characterized by persistent muscular 
contraction with apparent delay in relaxation of muscles. A child 
with myotonia has difficulty letting go of a doorknob or releasing a 
ball after gripping it tightly. Myotonia usually is present by 10 years of 
age, but significant distal muscle weakness is not usually evident until 
the end of the second decade. In congenital myotonic dystrophy, 
the newborn infant has severe generalized hypotonia and weakness, 
often with swallowing and sucking difficulty, facial diplegia, a down-­
turned tented mouth, moderate to severe intellectual disability, and 
congenital joint contractures (e.g., talipes equinovarus, arthrogryposis) 
(Fig. 35.24). Usually there is a history of polyhydramnios and reduced 
fetal movements in utero (Table 35.23). If these features are present at 
birth, then assessing for distal weakness and myotonia in the mother, 
followed by the father, may aid in the diagnosis.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is a slowly progressive disorder with 
multisystem involvement, including the development of cataracts, 
premature male-­pattern baldness, facial muscle atrophy resulting in 
a “hatchet face” appearance, cervical kyphosis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
diabetes, pilomatrixomata, increased risk of thyroid cancer, thy­
roid dysfunction, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and testicular atrophy. 
EMG in children reveals a characteristic myotonic discharge (termed 
“dive bomber”), but EMG in the neonatal period may not show this 
characteristic finding. Genetic testing demonstrating a pathologic 
Name(s)
Enzyme Deficiency Clinical Features
Diagnostic Testing
Systemic primary carnitine 
deficiency
Solute carrier family 22 
(sodium-­dependent 
carnitine transporter)
 • Childhood myopathic form—hypotonia, 
dilated cardiomyopathy that could result in 
death, proximal muscle weakness in early 
childhood (2–4 yr)
 • Adult form—fatigability
 • Baseline CK elevated
 • Reduced plasma carnitine levels
 • Increased lipid deposition on muscle biopsy
 • SLC22A5 gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic 
pathogenic variants for definitive diagnosis
Carnitine palmitoyltransfer­
ase II deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyl­
transferase II (CPT II)
 • Myopathic form—recurrent myalgia and 
myoglobinuria after prolonged exercise, 
cold, or fasting; weakness during attacks; 
onset from childhood to adulthood
 • Severe infantile form—liver failure, cardio­
myopathy, seizures, hypoketotic hypoglyce­
mia, myopathy before 1 yr of age (rare)
 • Normal CK between attacks
 • CPT II gene sequencing demonstrating biallelic patho­
genic variants for definitive diagnosis
 • Muscle biopsy can be normal
CK, creatine kinase; EM, electron microscopy; H&E, hematoxylin and eosin; LM, light microscopy; LV, left ventricular; PAS, periodic acid–Schiff.
TABLE 35.22  Metabolic Diseases That Affect Muscle—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
612
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
cytosine-­thymine-­guanine (CTG) trinucleotide repeat expansion in 
the DMPK gene of chromosome 19q13.3 establishes the diagnosis. This 
abnormality, inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, will demon­
strate genetic anticipation, resulting in earlier and more severe disease 
every generation.
Surveillance by a cardiologist for cardiac arrhythmia with timely 
placement of a pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator in 
these patients can prevent significant morbidity and mortality.
Juvenile dermatomyositis. Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is a 
childhood-­ to adolescent-­onset, systemic autoimmune disease caused 
by inflammation of small vessels of various organs including muscle, 
skin, and other major organs. Clinically, JDM presents with subacute-­
onset proximal muscle weakness and a characteristic heliotrope rash, 
Gottron papules, and cutaneous calcinosis. Involvement of the lung 
is a major cause of death in JDM and there is an association with 
malignancy. CK may be mildly elevated or normal. Autoantibodies 
are found in more than 60% of children, with each patient being 
seropositive for a single antibody. Each antibody likely has a specific 
phenotype and associated prognosis. Anti-­tRNA synthetase and 
anti-­MDA5 autoantibodies are associated with interstitial lung 
disease, anti-­NXP-­2 autoantibodies are associated with calcinosis, 
while anti-­Mi2 is associated with “classic” JDM. Fundamentally, 
end-­organ tissue is damaged by humoral and cell-­mediated immune 
mechanisms including antibody-­mediated destruction, complement 
activation, neutrophil activation, and small-­vessel infarction resulting 
in necrosis.
Muscle biopsy remains essential for the diagnosis and demonstrates 
extensive myopathic changes with variability in muscle fiber size, peri­
mysial and perivascular lymphocytic inflammation, membrane attack 
complex (MAC) deposition on microvasculature, muscle infarction 
with necrosis, and pathognomonic perifascicular atrophy—smaller 
muscle fibers on the edge of the fascicle compared to the center (Fig. 
35.25).
Uncommon disorders
Pompe disease. Pompe disease, also known as acid maltase 
deficiency or glycogen storage disease type II, is a severe metabolic 
disease due to acid α-­glucosidase (GAA) enzyme deficiency, resulting 
in impaired lysosomal glycogen breakdown. Accumulation of glycogen 
in lysosomes results in rupture and eventual myofibrillar breakdown.
Pompe disease is classified by age of onset, rate of progression, 
severity, and organ system involvement. The spectrum of disease is 
related to the level of enzyme activity, with severe early-­onset infantile 
cases having little (<1%) to no enzyme function and late-­onset disease 
having up to 30% enzyme function. Infantile-­onset Pompe disease 
(IOPD) presents before 1 year with a rapidly progressive hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, hypotonia, 
proximal muscle weakness, respiratory distress requiring ventilatory 
support, and feeding difficulties. Marked motor developmental delay, 
macroglossia, and normal intellect are typical. Patients typically die 
from respiratory failure. Late-­onset Pompe disease (LOPD) refers to 
any infant who presents prior to 12 months of age without cardiomy­
opathy, or presentation after 12 months of age with or without cardio­
myopathy, and can range from having mild proximal weakness and 
preserved ambulation though significant restrictive lung disease, to 
asymptomatic elevated CK found on routine blood testing. Patients 
with LOPD do not have severe cardiomyopathy.
Treatment with exogenously administered enzyme replacement 
therapy (ERT) has changed the course of IOPD and is the standard of 
care to treat Pompe disease, resulting in improved cardiac function, 
reduced risk of death, and decreased risk of invasive ventilation in 
the first few years of life, though most patients still remain at risk of 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Fig. 35.23  The Gower maneuver in a 7-­year-­old male child with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy: the sequence of postures used in get­
ting up from the ground. 1, Lying prone. 2–4, Getting onto the hands 
and knees. 5–6, Legs and arms extended and legs brought as close 
as possible to the arms. 7, Hand placed on the knee. 8, Both hands on 
the knees, knees extended. 9, Hands moving alternately up the thighs, 
“climbing up himself.” 10, Erect posture.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
613
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
requiring invasive ventilation and losing the ability to ambulate as they 
age. In patients with LOPD, ERT stabilizes but does not improve motor 
and respiratory function.
Congenital myopathies. Congenital myopathies are genetically 
and clinically heterogeneous (Table 35.24). These myopathies have 
characteristic muscle biopsy findings that narrow the differential 
diagnosis and guide targeted genetic evaluation. Distinguishing 
features on muscle biopsy include the presence of cores, nemaline 
rods, central nuclei, or congenital fiber type disproportion 
(CFTD) (Fig. 35.26). Cores are areas devoid of oxidative enzyme 
activity, best seen on oxidative stains such as nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide or ATPase. Nemaline rods are red, purple, 
or blue inclusions best seen on Gomori trichrome stain and 
vary per fiber, by fiber type, and in their distribution within the 
myofiber. Centrally placed nuclei are usually large in relation to 
the myofiber, present in a disproportionate number of fibers, and 
may be centrally placed along the length of the fiber. CFTD refers 
to the relative atrophy of type 1 fibers by 35–40% compared to 
type 2 fibers in the absence of other structural changes such as 
rods, cores, and central nucleation.
Although onset of weakness is usually at birth, symptoms can 
develop at any age. A wide range of severity is possible for each sub­
type, even within the same family. If manifesting in infancy, patients 
have diffuse weakness, congenital hip dysplasia, and breathing and 
swallowing dysfunction, with delays in motor milestone development 
and variable levels of facial involvement. If manifesting in childhood or 
adolescence, then proximal muscle weakness with a Gower maneuver 
A
B
C
Fig. 35.24  A, A 6-­year-­old with congenital myotonic dystrophy with 1975 cytosine-­thymine-­guanine (CTG) 
repeats in the DMPK gene showing the characteristic elongated facies, left ptosis, and an open, down-­
turned (tented) mouth with dental malocclusion. The tracheostomy scar is evidence of the severe respiratory 
distress requiring intubation at time of birth. B, Neonate with congenital myotonic dystrophy also with an 
open, down-­turned mouth and frog-­leg position of lower extremities. C, A neonate with congenital myotonic 
dystrophy with severe respiratory distress and arthrogryposis. (B, From Johnston H. The floppy weak infant 
revisited. Brain Dev. 2003;25:155–158; C, from Echenne B, Bassez G. Congenital and infantile myotonic dys­
trophy. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1387–1393.)
TABLE 35.23  Clinical Features of 
Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy
Clinical Feature
% of Cases 
Exhibiting Feature
Hypotonia
100
Muscle atrophy
100
Transmission via mother
100
Intellectual disability in survivors
100
Facial diplegia
100
Feeding difficulties
92
Respiratory distress
88
Hyporeflexia or areflexia
87
Arthrogryposis
82
Polyhydramnios
80
Reduced fetal movements
68
Edema
54
Premature birth (<36 wk)
52
Elevated right hemidiaphragm
49
Neonatal mortality
41
Infant death in siblings
28
From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2008:802.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
614
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
A
B
*
*
*
Fig. 35.25  Characteristic histopathologic findings on muscle biopsy in a 15-­year-­old female adolescent with juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM). A, 
Pathognomonic finding of perifascicular atrophy showing smaller regenerating (purple, basophilic) fibers along the edges of the center and left 
fascicles compared to the normal-­appearing pink fibers in the center of the fascicles. Isolated pale staining necrotic fibers are seen (asterisks). B, 
Perivascular inflammation with many lymphocytes surrounding small vessels. (Images courtesy of Dr. Denise Malicki, University of California, San 
Diego, and Rady Children’s Hospital.)
TABLE 35.24  Specific Congenital Myopathies: Distinguishing Clinical Features
Subcategory
Distinguishing Clinical Features
Associated Genes
Central core disease
 • Facial weakness mostly with RYR1
 • Ophthalmoparesis and ptosis with RYR1
 • High incidence of malignant hyperthermia with RYR1
 • Severe axial/respiratory weakness out of proportion to limb weakness with SEPN1
 • Prominent early fixed kyphoscoliosis with RYR1
 • Rigid spine in older childhood with SEPN1
 • High incidence of club feet, pes cavus, foot drop, and distal hand/foot muscle atrophy with RYR1
RYR1, SEPN1, TTN, MYH7, 
CCDC78
Nemaline myopathy
 • Prominent facial weakness
 • Severe bulbar weakness, feeding difficulties, and respiratory compromise in neonatal period or early 
infancy in some
ACTA1, NEB, TPM3, TPM2, 
TNNT1, CFL2, KBTBD13, 
KLHL40, KLHL41, LMOD3
Centronuclear myopathy
 • Prominent facial weakness
 • Prominent ophthalmoparesis and ptosis (in infancy)
 • Prominent bilateral ptosis
 • Severe bulbar weakness, feeding difficulties, and respiratory compromise in neonatal period or early 
infancy
 • Infant that is long for age with elongated hands/feet
 • High incidence of neonatal/infantile death with MTM1
 • High incidence of club feet, pes cavus, foot drop, and distal hand/foot muscle atrophy with DMN2
MTM1 (causes myotubular 
myopathy), DNM2, BIN1, 
RYR1
Congenital fiber type 
disproportion
 • Severe axial/respiratory weakness out of proportion to limb with SEPN1
 • Rigid spine in older childhood with SEPN1
TPM3, RYR1, TPM2, SEPN1, 
ACTA1
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
615
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
and variable degrees of mobility, restrictive lung disease, scoliosis, rigid 
spine, thin body habitus, and pectus deformities are typical; intellect is 
normal. Nemaline rod myopathy has a distinctive facial weakness char­
acteristic by elongated facies and an open mouth that is due to weak­
ness of jaw closure muscles, a phenotype referred to as “myopathic” 
facies (Fig. 35.27). The centronuclear myopathies characteristically 
cause ptosis and ophthalmoparesis. One subtype, myotubular myop­
athy due to pathogenic variants in MTM1, is particularly severe, pre­
senting in the neonate with difficulties swallowing and breathing, often 
requiring enteral feeding tube placement and mechanical ventilation 
in early infancy. Pathogenic variants in RYR1 can lead to malignant 
hyperthermia with exposure to halothane-­derived anesthetic agents.
Congenital muscular dystrophies. The congenital muscular 
dystrophies (CMDs) are another group of clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous disorders (Table 35.25). These disorders are also 
typically congenital onset, though symptoms may start later in life. 
CMDs have elevated CK levels with nonspecific dystrophic changes on 
muscle biopsy. Inheritance pattern is variable.
Weakness is typically proximal and axial more than appendicular 
and results in restrictive lung disease, rigid spine, contractures, and 
variable ability to ambulate. Some CMDs, such as FKRP-­related CMD, 
can cause cardiomyopathy. Collagen VI–related dystrophies have char­
acteristic early-­onset contractures with skin findings; infantile-­onset 
patients typically never achieve ambulation. LAMA2-­related dystro­
phies also result in early-­onset proximal contractures and white matter 
abnormalities on brain MRI. The dystroglycanopathies cause varying 
degrees of CNS involvement, ranging from severe intellectual disabil­
ity due to lissencephaly to normal cognition. Salient features of CMDs 
are highlighted in Table 35.23. The phenotypic spectrum of CMDs are 
shown in Fig. 35.28.
A
B
C
A
C
D
Fig. 35.26  Pathologic changes seen on muscle biopsy in congenital myopathies. Centronuclear myopathy 
is characterized by a centrally placed nucleus (A) seen in a disproportionate number of myofibers on the 
background of fiber size variability shown here on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Core myopathy has 
well-­demarcated centrally or eccentrically placed cores, best visualized on oxidative stains such as succi­
nate dehydrogenase (SDH) (B). Nemaline rods are purple-­blue staining rods (few are labeled by arrows) best 
visualized on Gomori trichrome located in a subsarcolemmal position (C). Congenital fiber-­type disproportion 
showing small, dark-­staining type 1 fibers (average diameter, 20–40 μm) on ATPase at pH 4.3 relative to the 
larger, pale-­staining type 2 fibers (average diameter, 80–100 μm) (D). (A, Courtesy Karra Jones, MD, PhD, Uni­
versity of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA; B, from North KN, Wang CH, Clarke N, et al. Approach to the 
diagnosis of congenital myopathies. Neuromuscular Disord. 2014;24:97–116, with permission; C, courtesy 
Michael Lawlor, MD, PhD, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI; D, courtesy Chamindra Konersman, 
MD, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 35.25  Specific Congenital Muscular Dystrophies: Distinguishing Clinical Features
Subcategory
Distinguishing Clinical Features
Associated Genes
Collagen VI–related dystro­
phies
 • Proximal muscle weakness in childhood
 • Severe hypotonia and diffuse weakness in infancy
 • Infantile onset typically never achieves ambulation
 • Early-­onset proximal contractures diffusely
 • Distal joint hyperlaxity
 • Hyperkeratosis pilaris on skin (legs and arms)
 • Keloids
 • Atrophic, wide scars
 • Scoliosis (early)
 • Very thin body habitus
 • Severe restrictive lung disease early requiring bilevel ventilation
 • Normal intellect
 • CK usually elevated (100–several 1,000 U/L)
COL6A1, COL6A2, COL6A3
LAMA2-­related dystrophies
 • Proximal muscle weakness in childhood
 • Severe hypotonia and diffuse weakness in infancy
 • Infantile onset typically never achieves ambulation
 • Early-­onset proximal contractures diffusely
 • Brain MRI demonstrates white matter disease (clinically not significant)
 • Some develop seizures
 • Very thin body habitus
 • Severe restrictive lung disease early requiring bilevel ventilation
 • Nerve conductions demonstrate slowing
 • Normal intellect
 • CK usually 1,000s
LAMA2
Dystroglycan-­related dis­
orders (dystroglycanopa­
thies, previously known as 
muscle-­eye-­brain disease)
 • Mild to severe proximal muscle weakness and hypotonia in infancy
 • Varying degrees of CNS involvement
 • Brain MRI may be abnormal—lissencephaly, pachygyria, cerebellar hypoplasia, or dysplasia
 • FKRP and FKTN may cause a cardiomyopathy, if late onset
 • Varying degree of eye involvement—severe myopia, retinal hypoplasia
 • Intellectual delay ranging from normal to severe disability
POMT1, POMT2, POMGnT1, 
POMGnT2, FKTN, FKRP, LARGE, 
ISPD, GTDC2, B3GALNT2, 
B3GNT1, B4GAT1, TMEM5, 
POMK, DPM1, DPM2, DPM3, 
DOLK, GMPPB, RXYLT1, and DAG1
Myofibrillar myopathy
 • Distal and proximal muscle weakness developing in adolescence or early adulthood
 • Respiratory muscle weakness often necessitating noninvasive or invasive ventilatory support
 • Rigid spine
 • Possible sensory neuropathy
BAG3, CRYAB, DES, FLNC, KY, 
LDB3, MYOT, PYROXD1
Selenon-­related myopathy
 • Severe axial weakness
 • Early-­onset scoliosis
 • Early-­onset restrictive lung disease requiring bilevel noninvasive ventilation, prior to loss of 
ambulation (characteristic)
 • Normal intellect
SEPN1
A
B
Fig. 35.27  Facial involvement in congenital myopathies. A, Pronounced facial weakness, particularly affecting 
the lower face and mouth resulting in craniofacial dysmorphism (“myopathic facies”) in sisters aged 6 years 
and 3 months with autosomal recessive nemaline myopathy (likely due to nebulin). B, Ptosis and ophthalmo­
plegia in a patient with DNM2-­related centronuclear myopathy at age 9 years. (From North KN, Wang CH, 
Clarke N, et al. Approach to the diagnosis of congenital myopathies. Neuromusc Disord. 2014;24[2]:97–116.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
617
CHAPTER 35  Hypotonia and Weakness
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
F
I
Fig. 35.28  Phenotypic spectrum of congenital muscular dystrophy. A, Hand of a patient with collagen VI–
related dystrophy. Note the significant hyperlaxity even in the most distal interphalangeal joints. B, Foot of 
an infant with collagen VI–related dystrophy. Note the ability to dorsiflex the foot back to the shin, the soft 
palmar skin, the pes planus (loss of arch), and the prominent calcaneus. C, Patient with collagen VI–related 
dystrophy. Note flexible fingers and round face with facial erythema. He also has contractures in the elbows 
and knees. D, Patient with LMNA-­related dystrophy. Note the dropped head, hyperlordosis, and adducted 
foot indicative of peroneal weakness, and overall thinness. E, Patient with selenon-­related myopathy. Note 
atrophy of inner thigh muscles and lateral deviation of spine (status after surgical rod placement). F, Twins 
with LAMA2-­related dystrophy. Note hypotonic posture with splayed legs (“frog-­leg” posture), weak arms, 
flexed fingers, and foot contractures. G, Patient with LAMA2-­related dystrophy. Note facial weakness and 
foot contracture. She has no antigravity strength in the upper extremity. H, Patient with dystroglycan-­related 
dystrophy (POMT1). Note weak sitting posture and hypotonic lower face with open mouth characteristic of 
congenital myopathic disorders. I, Same patient with dystroglycan-­related dystrophy (POMT1) at an older age. 
Note calf and quadriceps hypertrophy and mild forearm hypertrophy. (Modified from Bönnemann CG, Wang 
CH, Quijano-­Roy S, et al. Diagnostic approach to the congenital muscular dystrophies. Neuromuscul Disord. 
2014;24[4]:289–311.)
Subcategory
Distinguishing Clinical Features
Associated Genes
LMNA-­related dystrophy
 • Severe hypotonia and diffuse weakness in infancy
 • Proximal muscle weakness in childhood
 • Prominent head drop in infancy (dropped-­head syndrome); may achieve ambulation despite 
head drop
 • At risk of cardiac arrhythmia
 • Early diffuse contractures
 • Severe restrictive lung disease requiring bilevel ventilation
LMNA
TABLE 35.25  Specific Congenital Muscular Dystrophies: Distinguishing Clinical Features—
cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
618
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Hypotonia and weakness may be manifestations of lesions through­
out the neuromuscular axis; the primary responsibility of the cli­
nician is to determine from where along this axis low tone and 
weakness are originating. History can help differentiate congenital 
from acquired causes and suggest a mode of inheritance or route 
of exposure to an inciting trigger. Associated findings, such as sei­
zures, encephalopathy, multisystem organ dysfunction, sensory 
levels, paresthesia, fatigability, and elevated CK, provide additional 
clues in localization. Once this initial evaluation has suggested or 
established a particular station along the neuromuscular axis, more 
in-­depth investigations can provide definitive diagnosis. Major red 
flags include diffuse encephalopathy, seizures, metabolic crisis, and 
signs of respiratory weakness, though some patients may be too 
weak to manifest clinically apparent external signs of respiratory dis­
tress despite impending respiratory failure. Prompt identification of 
an etiology allows for initiation of appropriate supportive measures, 
prognostication, and, in some instances, introduction of targeted 
therapies.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
618.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hypotonic Infant
Barohn RJ. A pattern recognition approach to the patient with a suspected 
myopathy. Neurol Clin. 2014;32(3):569.
Birdi K, Prasad AN, Prasad C, et al. The floppy infant: retrospective analysis 
of clinical experience (1990-­2000) in a tertiary care facility. J Child Neurol. 
2005;20:803–808.
Bodensteiner JB. The evaluation of the hypotonic infant. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 
2008;15:10–20.
Johnston H. The floppy weak infant revisited. Brain Dev. 2003;25:155–158.
Jones KL, Adam MP. Evaluation and diagnosis of the dysmorphic infant. Clin 
Perinatol. 2015;42(2):243‐261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clp.2015.02.002.
Kwon JM, D’Aco KE. Clinical neurogenetics: neurologic presentations of 
metabolic disorders. Neurol Clin. 2013;31(4):1031–1050. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ncl.2013.04.005.
Laugel V, Cossee M, Matis J, et al. Diagnostic approach to neonatal hypotonia: 
retrospective study on 144 neonates. Eur J Pediatr. 2008;167:517–523.
Lisi EC, Cohn RD. Genetic evaluation of the pediatric patient with hypotonia: 
perspective from a hypotonia specialty clinic and review of the literature. 
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53:586–599.
Paro-­Panjan D, Neubauer D. Congenital hypotonia: is there an algorithm? J 
Child Neurol. 2004;19:439–442.
Prasad AN, Prasad C. The floppy infant: contribution of genetic and metabolic 
disorders. Brain Dev. 2003;25:457–476.
Richer LP, Shevell MI, Miller SP. Diagnostic profile of neonatal hypotonia: an 
11-­year study. Pediatr Neurol. 2001;25:32–37.
Sparks SE. Neonatal hypotonia. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:363–371.
Arthrogryposis
Bamshad M, Van Heest AE, Pleasure D. Arthrogryposis: a review and update. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(suppl 4):40–46.
Haliloglu G, Topaloglu H. Arthrogryposis and fetal hypomobility syndrome. 
Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1311–1319.
Hall JG, Aldinger KA, Tanaka KI. Amyoplasia revisited. Am J Med Genet. 
2014;164A:700–730.
Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy
Ahearne CE, Boylan GB, Murray DM. Short and long term prognosis in peri­
natal asphyxia: an update. World J Clin Pediatr. 2016;5(1):67–74. https://
doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v5.i1.67.
Azzopardi D, Strohm B, Marlow N, et al. Effects of hypothermia for perinatal 
asphyxia on childhood outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(2):140–149. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1315788.
Chau V, Poskitt KJ, Dunham CR, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging in the 
encephalopathic term newborn. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2014;10:28–36.
Huppi PS, Inder TE. Magnetic resonance techniques in the evaluation of the 
perinatal brain: recent advances and future directions. Semin Neonatol. 
2001;6:195.
Jacobs SE, Berg M, Hunt R, et al. Cooling for newborns with hypoxic 
ischaemic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;2013(1):CD003311. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003311.
pub3.
Rafay MF, Cortez MA, de Veber GA, et al. Predictive value of clinical and EEG 
features in the diagnosis of stroke and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy in 
neonates with seizures. Stroke. 2009;40:2402–2407.
Shankaran S, Pappas A, McDonald SA, et al. Childhood outcomes after hypo­
thermia for neonatal encephalopathy [published correction appears in N 
Engl J Med. 2012;367(11):1073]. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(22):2085–2092. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1112066.
Central Nervous System
Absoud M, Greenberg BM, Lim M, et al. Pediatric transverse myeli­
tis. Neurology. 2016;87(9 suppl 2):S46–S52. https://doi.org/10.1212/
WNL.0000000000002820.
Blackstone C. Hereditary spastic paraplegia. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;148:633–
652. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-­0-­444-­64076-­5.00041-­7.
Cardoso C, Leventer RJ, Ward HL, et al. Refinement of a 400-­kb critical region 
allows genotypic differentiation between isolated lissencephaly, Miller-­
Dieker syndrome, and other phenotypes secondary to deletions of 17p13.3. 
Am J Med Genet. 2003;72:918–930.
Lew SM, Kothbauer KF. Tethered cord syndrome: an updated review. Pediatr 
Neurosurg. 2007;43(3):236–248. https://doi.org/10.1159/000098836.
Systemic Disorders
Area-­Gomez E, Schon EA. Mitochondrial genetics and disease. J Child Neurol. 
2014;29:1208–1215.
Bosch AM, Abeling NG, Ijlst L, et al. Brown-­Vialetto-­Van Laere and Fazio 
Londe syndrome is associated with a riboflavin transporter defect mim­
icking mild MADD: a new inborn error of metabolism with potential treat­
ment. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2011;34:159–164.
Bosch AM, Stroek K, Abeling NG, et al. The Brown-­Vialetto-­Van Laere and 
Fazio Londe syndrome revisited: natural history, genetics, treatment and 
future perspectives. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012;7:83.
Cassidy SB, Dykens E, Williams CA. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes: 
sister imprinted disorders. Am J Med Genet. 2000;97:136–146.
Conte MI, Pescatore A, Paciolla M, et al. Insight into IKBKG/NEMO locus: 
report of new mutations and complex genomic rearrangements leading to 
incontinentia pigmenti disease. Hum Mutat. 2014;35:165–177.
DiMauro S, Hirano M. MELAS. Seattle (WA): University of Washington: 
GeneReviews (Internet); 2001.
DiMauro S, Hirano M. MERRF. Seattle (WA): University of Washington: 
GeneReviews (Internet); 2003.
Liang C, Ahmad K, Sue CM. The broadening spectrum of mitochondri­
al disease: shifts in the diagnostic paradigm. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2014;1840:1360–1367.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy
Finkel RS, Mercuri E, Darras BT, et al. Nusinersen versus sham control in 
infantile-­onset spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(18):1723–
1732. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1702752.
Lunn MR, Wang CH. Spinal muscular atrophy. Lancet. 2008;371:2120–
2133.
Mendell JR, Al-­Zaidy S, Shell R, et al. Single-­dose gene-­replacement thera­
py for spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(18):1713–1722. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1706198.
Mercuri E, Darras BT, Chiriboga CA, et al. Nusinersen versus sham control in 
later-­onset spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med. 2018;378(7):625–635. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1710504.
Singh NN, Howell MD, Androphy EJ, et al. How the discovery of ISS-­N1 
led to the first medical therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. Gene Ther. 
2017;24(9):520–526.
Neuropathy
Baets J, Deconinck T, De Vriendt E, et al. Genetic spectrum of hereditary neu­
ropathies with onset in the first year of life. Brain. 2011;134:2664–2676.
Callaghan BC, Price RS, Chen KS, et al. The importance of rare subtypes in di­
agnosis and treatment of peripheral neuropathy – a review. JAMA Neurol. 
2015;72(12):1510–1518.
Callaghan BC, Price RS, Feldman EL. Distal symmetric polyneuropathy – a 
review. J Am Med Assoc. 2015;314(2):2172–2181.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Acute flaccid paralysis 
syndrome associated with West Nile virus infection—Mississippi and 
­Louisiana, 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2002;51:825–828.
De Jonghe B, Sharshar T, Lefaucheur JP, et al. Paresis acquired in the intensive 
care unit. J Am Med Assoc. 2002;288:2859–2867.
Dyck PJ, Dyck PJB. Atypical varieties of chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
neuropathies. Lancet. 2000;355:1293–1294.
Foley AR, Menezes MP, Pandraud A, et al. Treatable childhood neuronopathy 
caused by mutations in riboflavin transporter RFVT2. Brain. 2014;137:44–
56.
Gallardo E, García A, Combarros O, et al. Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease type 
1A duplication: spectrum of clinical and magnetic resonance imaging 
features in leg and foot muscles. Brain. 2006;129(Pt 2):426–437.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
618.e2
Garone C, Tadesse S, Hirano M. Clinical and genetic spectrum of mitochondrial 
neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy. Brain. 2011;134:3326–3332.
Harada Y, Herrmann DN, Logigian EL. Pediatric CIDP: clinical features and 
response to treatment. J Clin Neuromuscul Dis. 2017;19(2):57‐65.
Hughes RAC. Peripheral neuropathy. BMJ. 2002;324:466–469.
Johnson-­Kerner BL, Roth L, Greene JP, et al. Giant axonal neuropathy: an 
updated perspective on its pathology and pathogenesis. Muscle Nerve. 
2014;50:467–476.
Levin KH. Variants and mimics of Guillain Barré syndrome. Neurol. 
2004;10(2):61–74.
Morena J, Gupta A, Hoyle JC. Charcot-Marie-Tooth: from molecules to 
­therapy. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20(14):3419.
Ramchandren S. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and other genetic polyneuropa­
thies. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2017;23(5, Peripheral Nerve and Motor 
Neuron Disorders): 1360–1377.
Ryan MM. Pediatric Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Curr Opin Pediatr. 
2013;25:689–693.
Simon LV, West B, McKinney WP. Tick Paralysis. 2019. StatPearls. Treasure 
Island (FL). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29262244.
Sung CC, Cheng CJ, Chiang WF, et al. Etiologic and therapeutic analysis in pa­
tients with hypokalemic nonperiodic paralysis. Am J Med. 2015;128:289–296.
Tabarki B, Coffinieres A, Van den Bergh P. Critical illness neuromuscular dis­
ease: clinical, electrophysiological, and prognostic aspects. Arch Dis Child. 
2002;86:103–107.
Vedanarayanan VV, Evans OB, Subramony SH. Tick paralysis in chil­
dren: electrophysiology and possibility of misdiagnosis. Neurology. 
2002;59:1088–1090.
Wakerly BR, Yuki N. Mimics and chameleons in Guillain-­Barré and Miller 
Fisher syndrome. Pract Neurol. 2015;15:90–99.
Willison HJ, Jacobs BC, van Doorn PA. Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Lancet. 
2016;388:717–727.
Yiu EM, Ryan MM. Genetic axonal neuropathies and neuronopathies of pre-­
natal and infantile onset. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2012;17:285–300.
Neuromuscular Junction Disorders
Amato A, Russell J. Neuromuscular Disorders. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2008.
Gilhus NE, Tzartos S, Evoli A, et al. Myasthenia gravis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 
2019;5(1):30.
Hamel J, Ciafaloni E. An update: myasthenia gravis and pregnancy. Neurol 
Clin. 2018;36(2):355–365.
Ionita CM, Acsadi G. Management of juvenile myasthenia gravis. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2013;48:95–104.
Mercuri E, Bonnemann CG, Muntoni F. Muscular dystrophies. Lancet. 
2019;394:2025–2038.
Peragallo JH. Pediatric myasthenia gravis. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 
2017;24(2):116–121.
Rosow LK, Strober JB. Infant botulism: review and clinical update. Pediatr 
Neurol. 2015;52:487–492.
Shieh PB, Oh SJ. Congenital myasthenic syndromes. Neurol Clin. 
2018;36(2):367–378.
Muscle Diseases
Bönnemann CG, Wang CH, Quijano-­Roy S, et al. Diagnostic approach to the 
congenital muscular dystrophies. Neuromuscul Disord. 2014;24:289–311.
Conte MI, Pescatore A, Paciolla M, et al. Insight into IKBKG/NEMO locus: 
report of new mutations and complex genomic rearrangements leading to 
incontinentia pigmenti disease. Hum Mutat. 2014;35:165–177.
Dagli A, Sentner CP, Weinstein DA. Glycogen Storage Disease Type III. Seattle 
(WA): University of Washington: GeneReviews (Internet); 2010.
Dagli AI, Weinstein DA. Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI. Seattle (WA): 
University of Washington: GeneReviews (Internet); 2009.
Darras BT, Friedman NR. Metabolic myopathies: a clinical approach; part I. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2000;22:87–97.
Darras BT, Friedman NR. Metabolic myopathies: a clinical approach; part II. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2000;22:171–181.
Dasouki M, Jawdat O, Almadhoun O, et al. Pompe disease: literature review 
and case series. Neurol Clin. 2014;32:751–776, ix.
Echenne B, Bassez G. Congenital and infantile myotonic dystrophy. Handb 
Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1387–1393.
Emery AEH. The muscular dystrophies. Lancet. 2002;359:687–695.
Findlay AR, Goyal NA, Mozaffar T. An overview of polymyositis and dermato­
myositis. Muscle Nerve. 2015;51:638–656.
Ghosh PS, Sorenson EJ. Diagnostic yield of electromyography in children with 
myopathic disorders. Pediatr Neurol. 2014;51:215–219.
Goldstein J, Austin S, Kishnani P, et al. Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency. Seat­
tle (WA): University of Washington; 2011. GeneReviews (Internet).
Griggs RC, Herr BE, Reha A, et al. Corticosteroids in Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy: major variations in practice. Muscle Nerve. 2013;48(1):27–
31.
Huber AM. Update on the clinical management of juvenile dermatomyositis. 
Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2018;14(12):1021–1028.
Kohler L, Puertollano R, Raben N. Pompe disease: from basic science to thera­
py. Neurotherapeutics. 2018;15(4):928–942.
Leslie N, Tinkle TB. Glycogen Storage Disease Type II (Pompe Disease). Seat­
tle (WA): University of Washington: GeneReviews (Internet); 2007.
Lim KR, Maruyama R, Yokota T. Eteplirsen in the treatment of Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2017;11:533–545.
Magoulas PL, El-­Hattab AW. Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV. Seattle (WA): 
University of Washington: GeneReviews (Internet); 2013.
Mainetti C, Terziroli Beretta-­Piccoli B, Selmi C. Cutaneous manifestations 
of dermatomyositis: a comprehensive review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 
2017;53(3):337–356.
Manole A, Fratta P, Houlden H. Recent advances in bulbar syndromes: genetic 
causes and disease mechanisms. Curr Opin Neurol. 2014;27:506–514.
Martín MA, Lucia A, Arenas J, et al. Glycogen Storage Disease Type V. Seattle 
(WA): University of Washington: GeneReviews (Internet); 2006.
Mendell JR. Congenital muscular dystrophy: searching for definition after 98 
years. Neurology. 2001;56:993–994.
North KN, Wang CH, Clarke N, et al. Approach to the diagnosis of congenital 
myopathies. Neuromuscul Disord. 2014;24:97–116.
Sharp LJ, Haller RG. Metabolic and mitochondrial myopathies. Neurol Clin. 
2014;32:777–799, ix.
Topham C, Haynes D, Frigerio A, et al. Linear amyopathic dermatomyositis 
with calcinosis cutis responsive to topical sodium thiosulfate. Pediatr 
Dermatol. 2019;36(4):e102–e103.
Wein N, Alfano L, Flanigan KM. Genetics and emerging treatments for 
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2015;62:723–742.
Wienke J, Deakin CT, Wedderburn LR, et al. Systemic and tissue inflammation 
in juvenile dermatomyositis: from pathogenesis to the quest for monitoring 
tools. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2951.
Wu Q, Wedderburn LR, McCann LJ. Juvenile dermatomyositis: latest advances. 
Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2017;31(4):535–557.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
