482
With advancing genomic technology, disorders previously identified 
to be unique phenotypes are now recognized as sharing common 
pathways or developmental mechanisms. The clinical diagnostic 
paradigm is evolving to a “genomic” first approach and is less reli­
ant on the detailed phenotype to select single-­gene tests to reach a 
diagnosis. Technology has also introduced machine learning in the 
form of facial recognition linked to diagnostic databases to facilitate 
syndromic diagnosis. Dysmorphology is not losing its relevance. 
It remains a key component of an evaluation to identify and char­
acterize the dysmorphic phenotype, which can help to inform or 
interpret the outcome of genomic testing and resolve indeterminate 
variants.
Dysmorphology evolved as a subset of clinical genetics that 
focused on standardizing the descriptive terminology used to define 
deviations from normal structural development in the context of syn­
dromic disorders. These traits were termed birth defects and result 
from malformations, deformations, or disruptions, which generally 
have a significant and obvious effect on appearance (Table 29.1 and 
Fig. 29.1). The incidence of congenital birth anomalies is common, 
with estimates that up to 15% of newborns have one minor anomaly. 
If more than one anomaly is present, the likelihood of an underlying 
major malformation is up to fivefold that of the general population. If 
there are three or more minor anomalies, the risk of a major anomaly 
is 20–30%. A careful and detailed evaluation is thus necessary if mul­
tiple minor anomalies are present. Minor anomalies are typically not 
of medical importance and are more of a cosmetic nature; a common 
example would be an accessory nipple. Additional examples are pro­
vided in Table 29.2; major malformations, conversely, are of clinical 
importance and more frequently impact the health care management 
of an affected individual (Table 29.3). To identify the abnormal state, 
one has to be familiar with normal developmental stages, the timing 
of specific organ development, and developmental vulnerable periods 
(Fig. 29.2). The dysmorphic physical examination is directed to over­
come some of the clinical challenges of identifying and describing 
birth defects by providing a framework in which to differentiate nor­
mal human variable morphology from the abnormal in the context of 
a specific diagnosis.
An international initiative to standardize the nosology used in 
clinical dysmorphology has been adapted to the Internet as an online 
resource supported by the National Human Genome Research Insti­
tute (NHGRI): https://elementsofmorphology.nih.gov/. These terms 
in themselves are of no clinical utility (aside from communicating the 
appropriate malformation to other providers) but, when used with 
available database tools, can be a powerful adjunct to determining the 
final diagnosis. Examples of these terms are noted in Table 29.4. The 
importance of reaching a diagnosis is to provide insight into the nature 
of the condition, enable appropriate counseling of recurrence risk, 
guide the necessary management recommendations, and provide the 
family with an overall framework of the natural history and prognosis 
of the disorder.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACHES
Often the geneticist-­dysmorphologist is asked to view a child with the 
expectation that the total picture will lead to an instant identification 
of a syndrome or condition. Instant identification happens more fre­
quently with the common or better-­known conditions, but most often, 
making a diagnosis is more challenging with complex disorders. The 
diagnostic process frequently relies on additional technologic tools in 
combination with review of literature.
Human Variation
Human variation is the norm. A common-­sense argument can be 
made for variation by pointing out the ability of people to recog­
nize and differentiate thousands of individuals whom they have 
met; computer programs for facial recognition are based on this 
premise. Nonetheless, humans differ little from one another at their 
DNA level; variation is currently estimated at approximately 0.1% 
or 1 base of DNA/1,000 bases, which equates to roughly 6 coding 
variants/gene.
The advent of molecular and biochemical diagnostic methods for 
identifying genes and gene products has begun to ease the burden 
on the geneticist by providing diagnostic and confirmatory tests for 
syndrome identification. Sequencing of the Human Genome clar­
ified many prior preconceived notions regarding human genetics. 
Prior to the completion of the project, it was estimated that humans 
had approximately 100,000 genes, whereas this number is closer to 
23,000 genes. Of these genes, less than half have been associated with 
human disease and many have no clear function assigned to them at 
this time. This gene coding portion of the genome only accounts for 
approximately 1% of the total genomic code, which consists of roughly 
3 billion nucleotides. DNA analysis when available may provide the 
genotype and confirm the diagnosis, but it cannot unerringly define 
the phenotype.
There is still much to learn about our genetic code and how genes 
are expressed and regulated; even if we could perform genomic 
sequencing on every patient, there would be a number of patients in 
whom the molecular diagnosis remained elusive. One meta-­analysis 
of the outcomes of genomic sequencing applied to children presenting 
with both syndromic and nonsyndromic intellectual disability sup­
ported a mean diagnostic rate of 36% with the range extending from 
15% through 80%.
There are common genetic pathways that relate genes within 
a pathway to common groups of disorders. This has provided an 
Dysmorphology
Donald Basel
29
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
483
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
explanation to clinicians why seemingly disparate disorders share 
certain disease associations but remain clinically distinct. An exam­
ple of this is the RASopathies (Fig. 29.3), in which germline patho­
genic variants in KRAS can result in the classic Noonan phenotype 
or cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. There is genetic heterogeneity 
in this group of disorders that share several overlapping features. 
In addition, somatic mosaicism for genes in this pathway has been 
identified to cause several capillary/vascular malformation disor­
ders and KRAS is a frequently identified somatic variant in cancer/
tumor tissue. Another example is the allelic disorders involving the 
TRPV4 gene, which include brachyolmia type 3, digital arthropa­
thy–brachydactyly, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type 
IIc, metatropic dysplasia, parastremmatic dwarfism, scapulopero­
neal spinal muscular atrophy, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maro­
teaux type, spinal muscular atrophy, and spondylometaphyseal 
dysplasia Kozlowski type. The wide phenotypic variability ranging 
from primary skeletal dysplasias to isolated neuromuscular disease 
speaks to the complexities of gene regulation and tissue-­specific 
expression. Another example is seen in the sonic hedgehog pathway 
(Fig. 29.4).
In addition to the primary gene code, there are tertiary elements 
that can be imprinted, in which gene expression is controlled by parent 
of origin, or can even be affected by the environment, the concept of 
epigenetic control. Further variability exists in genomic copy num­
ber variations, some of which are considered normal variants, while 
others result in recognizable microdeletion or microduplication dis­
orders such as velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) and Smith–Magenis 
syndrome.
Not all congenital malformations or birth defects are primarily 
genetic. Teratogenic exposure, vascular events, and extrinsic factors, 
TABLE 29.1  Mechanisms, Terminology, and Definition of Dysmorphology
Terminology
Definition
Example
Malformation sequence
Single, local tissue morphogenesis abnormality that 
produces a chain of subsequent defects
DiGeorge sequence of primary 4th brachial arch and 3rd and 4th pharyn­
geal pouch defects that lead to aplasia or hypoplasia of the thymus and 
parathyroid glands, aortic arch anomalies, and micrognathia
Deformation sequence
Mechanical (uterine) forces that alter structure of intrin­
sically normal tissue
Oligohydramnios produces deformations by in utero compression of limbs 
(dislocated hips, equinovarus foot deformity), crumpled ears, dislocated 
nose, or small thorax
Disruption sequence
In utero tissue destruction after a period of normal 
morphogenesis
Amnionic membrane rupture sequence, leading to amputation of fingers/
toes, tissue fibrosis, and destructive tissue bands
Dysplasia sequence
Poor organization of cells into tissues or organs
Neurocutaneous melanosis sequence with poor migration of melanocyte 
precursor cells from the neural crest to the periphery, manifesting as 
melanocytic hamartomas of skin, meninges, and so forth
Malformation syndrome
Appearance of multiple malformations in unrelated 
tissues without an understandable unifying cause; 
with enhanced genetic investigation, a single etiology 
may become identified
Trisomy 21
Teratogens
Nature of Problem
Deformation
(mechanical)
Malformation
(poor formation)
Deformation,
deformation
sequence
Single
localized
defects
Multiple
localized
defects
Malformation
syndrome
Malformation,
malformation
sequence
Malformation
association
?
Disruption,
disruption
sequence
Disruption
(destructive)
Dysplasia
(deregulation)
Dysplasia,
dysplasia
sequence
Fig. 29.1  Most patients with multiple structural defects will fall into one of these categories (e.g., malforma­
tion, deformation, disruption, or dysplasia). The prognosis, management, and recurrence-­risk counseling may 
vary considerably among these categories. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recog­
nizable Patterns of Human Malformation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:3.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
484
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
such as amniotic bands, all have the potential to result in deviations 
from normal morphologic development (Fig. 29.5).
TERATOLOGY
Teratogens are agents that affect normal development and can 
give rise to congenital anomalies. It is not uncommon for the par­
ents of a child born with birth defects to attribute the cause to 
themselves, looking for answers in events preceding or during the 
pregnancy. They frequently question benign infections and rou­
tine medication; it is important to address these concerns because 
guilt can impair the critical bonding between parent and child. 
Teratogens are usually considered chemical agents, such as tha­
lidomide or alcohol. However, perinatal infections with cytomeg­
alovirus would fall into this broad category, as would significant 
radiation exposure. The minority of fetuses exposed to potential 
teratogens show effects, even if exposed at the same time with 
the same dose of the agent (e.g., alcohol, 30%; thalidomide, 20%; 
hydantoins, 10%; warfarin, 8%; lithium, 7%; and diazepam, 1%). 
The exact determinants why some fetuses are affected are poorly 
understood. It is estimated that approximately 10% of birth defects 
are caused by recognizable teratogens and up to 40% remain with­
out an identifiable cause.
Embryologic timing is one of the critical elements that define the 
final outcome. There are broadly three periods identified in fetal devel­
opment (see Fig. 29.2):
Implantation: Period of fertilization through gastrulation and forma­
tion of the embryonic plate (first 2 weeks after fertilization). Signifi­
cant interference with development during this time usually results 
in loss of conceptus.
Embryonic: This is the period of primary tissue differentiation, and 
thus, the period at greatest risk for major malformations (weeks 
3–8).
Fetal: At this time, primary organogenesis is complete, but growth and 
neuronal migration proceed. The central nervous system (CNS) is 
at risk and many of the minor birth defects arise during this time (9 
weeks through birth).
Some teratogens may have delayed effects, and these do not result 
in an overt congenital malformation; diethylstilbestrol (DES) expo­
sure in a female fetus can predispose to vaginal clear cell carcinoma 
in puberty.
Embryogenesis
The developmental timing of the event that results in the final phe­
notype is one of the critical determinants of the phenotypic outcome. 
The timing is important because multiple developmental processes are 
occurring at the same time and thus a number of malformations pres­
ent concomitantly as a result of interference with everything developing 
at the same embryonic time; radial ray defects may be seen with cardiac 
septal defects as in Holt–Oram syndrome. The common embryologic 
origin of various elements can give rise to overlapping disorders with 
TABLE 29.2  Minor Anomalies and 
Phenotype Variants
Craniofacial
 • Large fontanel
 • Flat or low nasal bridge
 • Saddle nose, upturned nose
 • Micrognathia
 • Cutis aplasia of scalp
Eye
 • Palpebral fissures
 • Telecanthus
 • Slanting of palpebral 
fissures
 • Hypertelorism
 • Brushfield spots
Ear
 • Lack of helical fold
 • Posteriorly rotated pinna
 • Preauricular tags with or 
without auricular skin tags
 • Small pinna
 • Auricular (preauricular) pit or 
sinus
 • Folding of helix
 • Darwinian tubercle
 • Crushed (crinkled) ear
 • Asymmetric ear sizes
 • Low-­set ears
Skin
 • Dimpling over bones
 • Capillary hemangioma (face, 
posterior neck)
 • Dermal melanosis (African-­
Americans, Asians)*
 • Sacral dimple
 • Pigmented nevi
 • Redundant skin
 • Cutis marmorata
Hand
 • Simian creases
 • Bridged upper palmar creases
 • Clinodactyly of 5th digit
 • Hyperextensibility of thumbs
 • Single flexion crease of 5th digit 
(hypoplasia of middle phalanx)
 • Partial cutaneous syndactyly
 • Polydactyly
 • Short, broad thumb
 • Narrow, hyperconvex nails
 • Hypoplastic nails
 • Camptodactyly
 • Shortened 4th digit
Foot
 • Partial syndactyly of 2nd and 3rd toes
 • Asymmetric toe length
 • Clinodactyly of 2nd toe
 • Overlapping toes
 • Nail hypoplasia
 • Wide gap between hallux and 2nd toe
 • Deep plantar crease between hallux 
and 2nd toe
Others
 • Mild calcaneovalgus
 • Hydrocele
 • Shawl scrotum
 • Hypospadias
 • Hypoplasia of labia majora
*Congenital dermal melanocytosis.
TABLE 29.3  Major Anomalies
Neurologic
 • Severe hydrocephalus
 • Lissencephaly
 • Schizencephaly
 • Megalencephaly
 • Neural tube defect
 • Spina bifida
 • Meningomyelocele
 • Encephalocele
Cardiovascular
 • Various congenital heart malfor­
mations
 • Cardiomyopathy
 • Severe arrhythmia
Genitourinary
 • Ambiguous genitalia
 • Kidney malformations
 • Urachal defects
Craniofacial
 • Craniosynostosis
 • Facial cleft
 • Cleft lip and palate
 • Structural eye defects
 • Coloboma
 • Aniridia
 • Structural ear defects
 • Microtia
 • Aplasia of the auditory canal
Limb
 • Amelia
 • Split hand/split foot malformation
 • Significant syndactyly requiring 
surgery
Respiratory
 • Congenital pulmonary airway 
malformation (CPAM)
 • Tracheoesophageal fistula
Abdominal Wall
 • Gastroschisis
 • Omphalocele
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
485
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
Main Embryonic Period (in weeks)
Period of dividing 
zygote, implantation, 
and bilaminar embryo
Not susceptible to
teratogenesis
Death of embryo and 
spontaneous abortion common
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
16
32
38
Fetal Period (in weeks)
Neural tube defects (NTDs)
Embryonic disc
Embryonic disc
Amnion
Morula
Blastocyst
TA, ASD, and VSD
Amelia/Meromelia
Amelia/Meromelia
Cleft lip
Upper lip
Low-set malformed ears and deafness
Microphthalmia, cataracts, glaucoma
Enamel hypoplasia and staining
Cleft palate
Palate
Masculinization of female genitalia
Major congenital anomalies
Functional defects and minor anomalies
External genitalia
Teeth
Eyes
Ears
Lower limb
Upper limb
Heart
Intellectual disability
CNS
Common site(s) of action
of teratogens
Less sensitive period
Highly sensitive period
Fig. 29.2  Critical periods in human prenatal development. During the first 2 weeks of development, the embryo is usually not susceptible to teratogens; 
a teratogen damages all or most of the cells, resulting in death of the embryo, or damages only a few cells, allowing the conceptus to recover and the 
embryo to develop without birth defects. During highly sensitive periods (mauve), major birth defects may be produced (e.g., amelia, absence of limbs, 
neural tube defects, spina bifida cystica). During stages that are less sensitive to teratogens (green), minor defects may be induced (e.g., hypoplastic 
thumbs). ASD, atrial septal defect; CNS, central nervous system; TA, truncus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect. (From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, 
et al. The Developing Human. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
486
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
shared elements: branchial arch developmental field defects in VCFS 
or disorders caused by abnormal neural crest cell migration. Critical 
embryologic events can give rise to disorders due to failure of a specific 
embryologic process: Neural tube defects arise because of abnormal 
neural tube fusion/closure.
BIRTH DEFECTS
It is estimated that approximately 15% of newborns have one minor 
anomaly, 0.8% have two minor anomalies, and 0.5% have three. The 
more minor anomalies that are present, the greater is the probability 
that an underlying syndrome or a major organ anomaly is also present. 
Statistically, this equates to a fivefold risk if two minor anomalies are 
present and a 20–30% probability that there is a major anomaly (con­
genital heart disease, renal, CNS, limb) if three minor anomalies are 
present. Approximately 50% of major anomalies involve the head and 
neck region. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention statistics 
for the United States assert that a baby is born with a birth defect every 
4.5 minutes; in 2010, birth defects accounted for about one in five 
infant deaths in the United States. Examples and potential etiologies 
are noted in Table 29.5.
Persons in the same family or ethnic group may superficially 
resemble one another; any attempt at identifying a condition as an 
abnormality should include inspection of close relatives. Unusual 
morphologic findings in a child who resembles their parents does not 
exclude a dysmorphic condition. The parents might have variation 
in expression of the disorder, or there could be additional features 
that are distinct that need to be separated from the common familial 
morphology.
CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION
Single-­System Defects
 • Most common of all birth defects
 • Isolated to a single organ system
 • Clinically similar to organ malformations seen in syndromes due to 
common pathways and same-­organ end-­point
 • Examples: isolated cleft lip/palate; congenital heart disease; distal 
limb anomalies
Association
 • Statistically ascertained nonrandom co-­occurrences of multiple 
anomalies in which a single underlying cause is not identifiable. 
Usually, a diagnosis of exclusion
 • Creates an awareness to evaluate for associated anomalies
 • <1% risk for recurrence
 • Example: VATER/VACTERL (vertebral, anal atresia, cardiac, tra­
cheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, limb malformations—typ­
ically radial ray) (Figs. 29.6 and 29.7)
Sequence
 • A cascade of effects from a single localized abnormality in early 
morphogenesis that results in multiple congenital anomalies
 • Example: Potter sequence secondary to renal agenesis and severe 
oligohydramnios (Figs. 29.8 and 29.9)
Syndrome
 • The presence of multiple structural/functional defects due to a sin­
gle cause
 • Example: Down syndrome caused by trisomy for chromosome 
21 (Fig. 29.10) or other trisomies (Fig. 29.11 and Tables 29.6, 29.7, 
and 29.8)
Complex
 • Denotes a malformation arising from the effects of an event affect­
ing a single developmental field in the embryo. Typically relates to 
aberrant vasculature or vascular events
 • Example: sacral agenesis, Poland anomaly
DYSMORPHIC EVALUATION
The first step toward a dysmorphic evaluation is an index of sus­
picion. In a neonate with birth defects, this is often a logical step, 
but in a child with failure to thrive or short stature, someone has 
to initiate a more detailed evaluation for a syndromic entity, or it 
will be delayed. It is not uncommon for a young female to be diag­
nosed with monosomy X (Turner syndrome) when she fails to enter 
puberty.
TABLE 29.4  Glossary of Selected Terms 
Used in Dysmorphology
Terms Pertaining to the Face and Head
Brachycephaly: A condition in which head shape is shortened from front to 
back along the sagittal plane; the skull is rounder than normal
Canthus: The lateral or medial angle of the eye formed by the junction of the 
upper and lower lids
Columella: The fleshy tissue of the nose that separates the nostrils
Glabella: Bony midline prominence of the brows
Nasal alae: The lateral flaring of the nostrils
Nasolabial fold: Groove that extends from the margin of the nasal alae to the 
lateral aspects of the lips
Ocular hypertelorism: Increased distance between the pupils of the 
2 eyes
Palpebral fissure: The shape of the eyes based on the outline of the 
eyelids
Philtrum: The vertical groove in the midline of the face between the nose and 
upper lip
Plagiocephaly: A condition in which head shape is asymmetric in the sagittal 
or coronal planes; can result from asymmetry in suture closure or from 
asymmetry of brain growth
Scaphocephaly: A condition in which the head is elongated from front to back 
in the sagittal plane; most normal skulls are scaphocephalic
Synophrys: Eyebrows that meet in the midline
Telecanthus: A wide space between the medial canthi
Terms Pertaining to the Extremities
Brachydactyly: A condition of having short digits
Camptodactyly: A condition in which a digit is bent or fixed in the direction of 
flexion (a “trigger finger”–type appearance)
Clinodactyly: A condition in which a digit is crooked and curves toward or 
away from adjacent digits
Hypoplastic nail: An unusually small nail on a digit
-­melia: A suffix meaning “limb” (e.g., amelia—missing limb; brachymelia—
short limb)
Polydactyly: The condition of having 6 or more digits on an extremity
Syndactyly: The condition of having 2 or more digits at least partially fused 
(can involve any degree of fusion, from webbing of skin to full bony fusion 
of adjacent digit)
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:149.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
487
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
Components of Dysmorphic Evaluation
Detailed History
 • A family health history (three-­generation pedigree analysis) (Figs. 
29.12 and 29.13) (about 5% of children have a biologic father who is 
not the reported partner)
 • Pregnancy history with detail to exposures (teratogens) and general 
health (gestational diabetes)
 • Birth history and neonatal status
 • Participation in state newborn screening
 • General growth and developmental history; regression is very 
important to document
 • Complete medical history, including details of the minutiae of 
symptom presentation and progression
Some sensitivity surrounding the history taking should be exercised 
as it is common for a parent to perceive responsibility for the outcomes. 
Most birth defects occur sporadically without a family history. Auto­
somal recessive disorders typically happen in one or more siblings 
without a family history; many autosomal dominant conditions occur 
as new pathogenic variants. Sex-­linked conditions may have no prior 
family occurrence or an occurrence identified in a remote relative such 
as the maternal grandmother’s brother.
Family health history. It is customary to start with the siblings of the 
patient (the proband), proceed to the parents and the parents’ siblings 
and their children, and then consider the four grandparents and their 
siblings. This approach is more helpful than the generic question 
“Does anyone in the family have anything like this?” Many parents 
may be unaware of neonatal deaths in older relatives (the proband’s 
grandparents or uncles and aunts). Most people are unfamiliar with 
the term consanguinity, but the examiner can ask whether there are 
ancestors in common or inquire about the place of origin and the 
size of the community from which the families derive. Maiden names 
of women should always be noted. Self-­identified, remote ancestry 
may help identify a fruitful area to investigate because certain 
conditions may be more common in certain ethnic population groups. 
Consanguinity refers to couples who have ancestors in common within 
two or three generations, whereas group identity is not consanguinity.
Pregnancy and birth history. Maternal health and concurrent 
illness with treatment is a critical part of the evaluation. Details of 
participation in prenatal screening programs and prenatal evaluations 
can help resolve uncertainties that arise during the evaluation. On 
occasion, a discrepancy is discovered between an ultrasound report 
and a neonatal clinical finding: for example, a “normal” cerebellum 
reported at 17 weeks of gestation and absence of the cerebellum at 
term. Before concluding that some process happened between 17 and 
40 weeks of gestation, it is important to review the actual studies done 
at 17 weeks. This type of investigation can help pinpoint the timing 
of in utero problems or can eliminate erroneous hypotheses if the 
Growth factor
NRAS
RTK
p120GAP
-GTP
CS
-GTP
SHOC2
Legius
syndrome
CFC
SHC
SHP2
UB
CBL
PP1C
SPRED1
NF-1
CM-AVM
NS
NSML
Neurofibromin
Numerous
nuclear
effectors
Numerous
cytosolic
effectors
CRAF
BRAF
MEK1
MEK2
ERK1
ERK2
RAS
SOS1
GRB2
-GTP
KRAS
-GTP
HRAS
Cell membrane
Fig. 29.3  The RAS/MAPK signal transduction pathway. The MAPK signaling pathway of protein kinases is 
critically involved in cellular proliferation, differentiation, motility, apoptosis, and senescence. The RASopa­
thies are medical genetic syndromes caused by pathogenic variants in genes that encode components or 
regulators of the RAS/MAPK pathway (indicated by dashed lines). These disorders include neurofibromatosis 
type 1 (NF1), Noonan syndrome (NS), Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML), capillary malforma­
tion–arteriovenous malformation syndrome (CM-­AVM), Costello syndrome (CS), cardiofaciocutaneous syn­
drome (CFC), and Legius syndrome. RAS/MAPK, RAS protein family/mitogen-­activated protein kinase. (From 
Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2013;14:355–369.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
488
study of the fetus at 17 weeks was incomplete or inconclusive. Viral 
and other infectious illnesses and rashes are germane to note, as are 
times of exposure during the pregnancy. Parvovirus B19, rubella 
virus, cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma species, herpes simplex virus, 
varicella virus, Zika virus, and Treponema pallidum (syphilis) are 
microorganisms that can be teratogenic or affect organ function. 
Fetal exposure to these organisms at a vulnerable time can be critical; 
conversely, exposures after formation of an organ are not expected 
to have a morphologic effect on the organ. Perinatal anoxia is often 
blamed for infants’ problems, but infants with a syndrome or genetic 
condition may be predisposed to perinatal problems, including fetal 
distress or neonatal adaptive difficulties.
Developmental history. A developmental history establishes the 
pattern for acquisition of developmental milestones. A screening tool 
such as the Denver Developmental Assessment Test can assist in the 
evaluation of younger children. It is important to establish whether 
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Short, upturned nose
• Hypospadias
• Postaxial polydactyly
Holoprosencephaly
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Failure of CNS
lateralization
• Hypotelorism
Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Prominent beaked nose
• Broad thumbs
• Hirsutism
Greig
Cephalopolysyndactyly 
Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Hypertelorism
• Pre- and postaxial
polydactyly
Pallister-Hall
Syndrome
 • Hypothalamic
hamartoma
• Short, upturned
nose
• Central and
postaxial
polydactyly
• Bifid epiglottis
Gorlin Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Wide-set eyes
• Basal cell 
carcinoma
• Rib anomalies
Cholesterol
GLI-1
GLI-2
GLI-3 • CBP
GLI1
PTC1
HNF3
N-SHH
N-SHH•Chol
Smoothened
Twist
Sonic Hedgehog
Cleavage
Holoprosencephaly
Smith-Lemli-Opitz
Gorlin Syndrome
Greig Syndrome
Pallister-Hall Syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi
P
at
c
h
e
d 
1
Fig. 29.4  Deleterious sequence variants in genes that function together in a developmental pathway typi­
cally have overlapping clinical manifestations. Several components of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway 
have been identified and their relationships elucidated (see text for further details). Pathogenic variants in 
several members of this pathway result in phenotypes with facial dysmorphism, as seen in holoprosen­
cephaly, Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome, Gorlin syndrome, Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-­Hall 
syndrome, and Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. CNS, central nervous system. (From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW 
III, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:989, Fig. 128.2.)
Teratogen
5%
Chromosome
imbalance
25%
Copy number
variants
10%
Single-gene
defects
20%
Multifactorial
40%
Fig. 29.5  Causes of congenital malformation. (From Nussbaum RL, 
et al. Thompson and Thompson Genetics in Medicine. 8th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
A
B
C
5%
3%
3%
7%
7%
10%
36%
27%
T-E FISTULA
VERTEBRAL
DEFECTS
IMPERFORATE
ANUS
RADIAL
DYSPLASIA
Fig. 29.6  VATER association as initially set forth. A, Young infant with vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, 
esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula, radial aplasia on the left, and thumb hypoplasia on the 
right. B, Relative frequencies of some of the other VATER association defects when the patient is ascertained 
by virtue of having one of the defects. C, Same patient at 2 years of age, with normal intelligence. T-­E, tra­
cheoesophageal. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:852.)
TABLE 29.5  Causes of Congenital Malformations
Monogenic (7.5% of Serious Anomalies)
X-­linked hydrocephalus
Achondroplasia
Ectodermal dysplasia
Apert disease
Treacher Collins syndrome
Chromosomal (6% of Serious Anomalies)
Trisomies 21, 18, 13
XO, XXY
Deletions 4p–, 5p–, 7q–, 13q–, 18p–, 18q–, 22q–
Prader–Willi syndrome (50% have partial deletion of chromosome 15)
Maternal Infection (2% of Serious Anomalies)
Intrauterine infections (e.g., herpes simplex, CMV, varicella-­zoster, rubella, 
and toxoplasmosis)
Zika virus
Maternal Illness (3.5% of Serious Anomalies)
Diabetes mellitus
Phenylketonuria
Hyperthermia
Uterine Environment (% Unknown)
Deformation
Uterine pressure, oligohydramnios: clubfoot, torticollis, congenital hip 
dislocation, pulmonary hypoplasia, 7th nerve palsy
Disruption
Amniotic bands, congenital amputations, gastroschisis, porencephaly, intestinal atresia
Twinning
Conjoined twins, intestinal atresia, porencephaly
Environmental Agents (% Unknown)
Polychlorinated biphenyls
Herbicides
Mercury
Alcohol
Medications (% Unknown)
Thalidomide
Diethylstilbestrol
Phenytoin
Warfarin
Cytotoxic drugs
Isotretinoin (vitamin A)
d-­Penicillamine
Valproic acid
Unknown Etiologies
Polygenetic
Anencephaly/spina bifida
Cleft lip/palate
Pyloric stenosis
Congenital heart disease
Imprinting of Genes
Prader–Willi syndrome
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome
Sporadic Syndrome Complexes (Anomalads)
CHARGE syndrome
VATER syndrome
Pierre Robin syndrome
Prune-­belly syndrome
Nutritional
Low folic acid–neural tube defects
CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, ear anomalies (deafness); CMV, cytomegalovirus; VATER, 
vertebral defects, anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, and radial and renal anomalies.
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:148.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
490
a child is making progress, remaining static, or showing signs of 
developmental regression (see Chapter 28) by losing landmarks of 
development. The last possibility is the most ominous for prognosis and 
warrants aggressive evaluation for diagnosis and possible treatment.
Prior medical concerns including all evaluations and investigations 
to date should be reviewed. It is often necessary to delay the initial con­
sult so that past medical records can be made available for thorough 
review.
Examination
The details of morphology are documented in much more detail than 
is ordinarily the case in a general physical examination. Diagnosis is 
often based on the language used in the description. Even if a diagnosis 
is not clear, the description is the starting point of the evaluation. It is 
helpful to have an anatomic outline for assessing morphology in an 
orderly and systematic manner.
There are few opportunities to follow a predetermined flow for the 
examination in most young children, but it is important to maintain a 
level of structure to the data collection process so as not to overlook a 
critical finding. It is also good practice to obtain photographs of the 
face with frontal and side profiles for later reflection and utilization 
of newer facial recognition tools. When documenting your findings, 
aim to use standardized terminology in alignment with Human Phe­
notype Ontology (HPO) as this will aid in the diagnostic analysis and 
if machine learning tools with natural language processing are ever 
applied to the medical record for diagnostic purposes.
Initial Inspection
General observation of the patient is important. The office visit is a 
small snapshot in the life of the person being evaluated. Subtle move­
ments, behaviors, and social interactions may be key to the underlying 
diagnosis. Children with Williams syndrome are exceptionally sociable 
with verbose language skills and frequently have a coarse character to 
their voice, whereas on the opposing end, children with autism may 
not permit you to perform a complete physical examination and the 
greatest opportunity to evaluate movements and physical traits is while 
you are initially interviewing the parents or caregivers.
Anthropometrics
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has published growth 
curves for children and adolescents that are based upon a heteroge­
neous U.S. population more representative of various ethnic and ances­
tral groups than were previous charts. There are separate curves for 
height, weight, head circumference, and stature for males and females 
aged 0–36 months, and there are corresponding curves for males and 
females aged 2–18 years, in addition to curves for body mass index, 
but without curves for head circumference. There are also references 
for anthropometric measurements of various body parts from the 
fetus to adult age. If a child’s measurements are discrepant from the 
norms—that is, over the 97th percentile or under the 3rd percentile—it is 
possible to transpose the actual measurement up or down to the 50th 
percentile on the same line to determine the height age or weight age 
equivalent. Height can be plotted versus weight on the stature curve 
to determine whether these parameters are proportional. Thus, a child 
can be identified as small or tall for age and appropriate or inappro­
priate in weight (either too heavy or too thin) for height. A child with 
short stature and proportionate weight has proportionate short stature. 
Head growth is an important factor in assessing brain growth as well as 
skull growth and suture closure. Abnormally small head size (micro­
cephaly) and abnormally large head size (macrocephaly) are consid­
ered in proportion to stature with consideration for chronologic age. A 
child 7 years of age but with a height age of 4 years and proportionate 
weight and head circumference does not truly have microcephaly but 
proportionate growth failure. Standardized tables exist in various ref­
erence resources for several ethnic groups that allow for assessment 
across racial barriers. Additionally, standardized charts exist for known 
syndromes so that normal growth can be appropriately evaluated in a 
child with a known diagnosis.
A helpful diagnostic assessment for children of discrepant size is the 
bone age, determined by radiograph of the left hand and wrist, accord­
ing to the standards of Gruleich and Pyle, but occasionally, for infants, 
by radiograph of the hemiskeleton.
The data collection should include the following highlights with 
more detail completed as needed.
Head and Neck
 • Hair: distribution, texture, pigmentation, low posterior hairline 
(Fig. 29.14)
 • Skull: shape, fontanel
 • Neck: mobility, adenopathy, thyroid, embryonic remnants (bran­
chial arch)
Face
 • Forms the largest and most important aspect of the dysmorphic 
evaluation
TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL
FISTULA
RADIAL LIMB
DEFECT
ANAL
ATRESIA
VERTEBRAL
DEFECT
GENITAL DEFECT
RENAL
DEFECT
CARDIAC
DEFECT
SINGLE
UMBILICAL
ARTERY
Fig. 29.7  Top, Expanded VACTERL association of defects. Bottom, 
Note the relatively severe thumb (radial) defect of the right hand 
and the much more subtle “radial” defect of the left hand (arrow). 
The arrow depicts a hypoplastic thenar eminence and crease. (From 
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable 
Patterns of Human Malformation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2013:853.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
A
C
B
Hindgut
Mesonephric
duct
Mesonephric
ridge
Ureteral
bud
Cloaca
Normal
development
Happens at
about 31 days
Defective
development
Renal agenesis
Ureteral bud
induces metanephric
tissue to form renal
parenchyma
Lack of urine
into amniotic cavity
Relative lack of
amniotic fluid during
fetal life
Pulmonary
hypoplasia
Amnion
nodosum
Fetal
compression
Altered
facies
Breech
presentation
Abnormal
positioning of
hands and feet
Death from
respiratory
insufficiency
Fig. 29.8  A–C, The consequences of renal agenesis. Note the multiple deformational defects in B, and the 
amnion nodosum (brown-­yellow granules from vernix that have been ribbed into defects of the amniotic 
surface) in C. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Mal­
formation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:821.)
Fetal Akinesia
Growth
deficiency
Pulmonary
hypoplasia
Myo-neural
dysfunction
Lack of
amniotic fluid
Intrauterine constraint
Short
umbilical
cord
Limb
positional
defects
Facial
anomalies
B
C
D
A
Fig. 29.9  A, This diagram demonstrates the etiologically heterogeneous phenotype that results from fetal akine­
sia. B, This infant was born with myotonic dystrophy to a mother with the same condition. He had multiple joint 
contractures with thin bones and respiratory insufficiency. C, This infant was immobilized in a transverse lie after 
amnion rupture at 26 weeks. D, This fetus had bilateral renal agenesis resulting in oligohydramnios. (From Graham 
JL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007:287. Fig. 47-­2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
492
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
General “Rules”
 • 1/3s = forehead-­nasion:nasion-­subnasale:subnasale-­chin = 1:1:1
 • Perpendicular from pupils should meet corners of mouth
 • Inner canthal distance should allow space for an additional eye (on 
MRI space between globes should allow an additional globe)
 • Top of ear should align with eyebrow/line through pupils should 
align with root of outer helix
 • Forehead: slope, breadth, height, prominence
 • Eyebrows: thickness/fullness, arch
 • Eye: distance (hyper-­ or hypotelorism), color, pupil shape, presence 
of epicanthus or telecanthus, alignment (up-­ or down-­slanting)
 • Ears: overall shape/architecture, position, rotation, pits, creases, 
hearing
 • Nose: root, bridge, tip, columella, nasolabial fold, alae nasi, phil­
trum
 • Mouth: lip thickness and shape, lip pits, mucosal lesions, dental 
alignment, dentition, palate, uvula
 • Chest: shape, pectus, nipples, breathing
 • Abdomen: organomegaly, masses, hernia
 • Genitalia: structure, size, Tanner stage, anus, and perineum
 • Musculoskeletal: spine alignment, joint mobility (see Chapter 47), 
proportions, finger length, palmar surfaces, nail health
 • Neurologic evaluation: complete including development, behav­
ior and modified mini-­mental examination, and observation for 
unique movements or behaviors
If a child has an unusual appearance and the differences do not seem 
to be familial variations as judged by observing the parents, it is neces­
sary to describe how the child appears different. When the variation is 
a discontinuous variable—that is, a birth defect (e.g., there is an extra 
digit on the ulnar side of each hand; there is a cleft of the lip on the 
left that extends into the left nostril, and there is a notch in the gum 
behind the cleft)—the task is easier. Such birth defects may be consid­
ered major abnormalities. The subtle malformations are often minor 
abnormalities, but both major and minor findings are relevant to diag­
nosis. Some conditions may be obvious on inspection alone, especially 
to an experienced observer. Typical manifestations of Down syndrome 
(Figs. 29.15 and 29.16; see also Tables 29.6 and 29.7 and Fig. 29.10), 
Fig. 29.10  Facial appearance of a child with Down syndrome. (From 
Wiedemann HR, Kunze J, Dibbern H. Atlas of Clinical Syndromes: A 
Visual Guide to Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.)
Fig. 29.11  Facial appearance of a child with trisomy 13. (From Wiede­
mann HR, Kunze J, Dibbern H. Atlas of Clinical Syndromes: A Visual 
Guide to Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.)
TABLE 29.6  Clinical Findings That May Be 
Present with Trisomy 21*
Stature smaller than that of peer age 
group
Developmental delays
Congenital heart disease (e.g., endo­
cardial cushion defect and ventricular 
septal defect)
Structural abnormalities of the bowel 
(e.g., tracheoesophageal atresia, 
duodenal atresia, annular pancreas, 
duodenal web, and Hirschsprung 
disease)
Central hypotonia
Brachycephaly
Delayed closure of fontanels
Small midface, hypoplastic frontal sinuses, 
myopia, and small (short) ears
Lax joints, including laxity of the 
atlantoaxial articulation (the 
latter predisposing the patient 
to C1–C2 dislocation)
Short, broad hands, feet, and 
digits; single palmar crease, 
clinodactyly
Exaggerated space between 1st 
and 2nd toes
Velvety, loosely adhering mottled 
skin (cutis marmorata) in 
infancy; coarse, dry skin in 
adolescence
Statistically increased risk for 
leukemia, Alzheimer disease, 
hypothyroidism
*An individual may exhibit any combination of these findings. There 
is no correlation between the number of physical findings and even­
tual level of mental performance. The increased risk for leukemia is 
significant, but probably not >1% for any individual. Alzheimer dis­
ease is relatively common in persons with trisomy 21 who die in 
middle adult life, but its frequency in all adults with Down syndrome 
is not known.
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:142.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
493
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
trisomy 13 or 18 (Figs. 29.17 and 29.18; see also Table 29.8 and Fig. 
29.10), severe manifestations of Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and those 
of Williams syndrome may represent a quick diagnosis; however, even 
these classical syndromes may manifest in atypical and subtle ways, and 
careful assessment is necessary to identify them. The expectation that, 
with enough experience, a physician, even a geneticist or a dysmorphol­
ogist, can unerringly identify every case of a common syndrome (even 
one so common and well known as trisomy 21) is not true. Human 
diversity is so great that even the most experienced clinicians are glad 
for confirmatory tests. Most cases of trisomy 21 can be identified by 
inspection, but there is not the same degree of certainty about every 
dysmorphic patient.
ASSEMBLING THE DATA
After the history and examination are complete, the abnormal 
findings are listed. In general, the order is in a sequence ranked by 
TABLE 29.8  Findings That May Be Present 
in Trisomy 13 and Trisomy 18
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18
Head and 
face
Scalp defects (e.g., cutis aplasia) Small and premature appearance
Microphthalmia, corneal 
abnormalities
Tight palpebral fissures
Cleft lip and palate in 
60–80% of cases
Narrow nose and hypoplastic 
nasal alae
Microcephaly
Narrow bifrontal diameter
Microphthalmia
Prominent occiput
Sloping forehead
Micrognathia
Holoprosencephaly 
­(arhinencephaly)
Cleft lip or palate
Capillary hemangiomas
Microcephaly
Deafness
Chest
Congenital heart disease 
(e.g., VSD, PDA, and ASD) 
in 80% of cases
Congenital heart disease (e.g., 
VSD, PDA, and ASD)
Thin posterior ribs (missing ribs) Short sternum, small nipples
Extremities
Overlapping of fingers and 
toes (clinodactyly)
Limited hip abduction
Polydactyly
Hypoplastic nails, 
­hyperconvex nails
Clinodactyly and overlapping 
fingers; index over 3rd, 5th 
over 4th; closed fist
Rocker-­bottom feet
Hypoplastic nails
General
Severe developmental delays 
and prenatal and postnatal 
growth retardation
Severe developmental delays 
and prenatal and postnatal 
growth retardation
Renal abnormalities
Premature birth, polyhydramnios
Nuclear projections in 
neutrophils
Inguinal or abdominal hernias
Only 5% live >6 mo
Only 5% live >1 yr
ASD, atrial septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; VSD, ventric­
ular septal defect.
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:142.
Affected individual
Carrier (heterozygote)
Fig. 29.12  Pedigree showing affected individuals and carriers. (From 
Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:147, Fig. 47-­1.)
TABLE 29.7  Ultrasonographic and 
Pathologic Findings of Trisomic Conditions
Abnormality
Trisomy 21
Trisomy 18
Trisomy 13
IUGR
+
++
++
CNS abnormalities
−
+
++
Holoprosencephaly
−
−
++
Mild ventricular dilatation +
+
+
Agenesis of the corpus 
callosum
−
+
+
Dandy–Walker variant
−
++
+
Spina bifida, NTD
−
++
+
Face
−
+
++
Cyclopia
−
−
++
Cleft lip or palate
−
+
++
Microphthalmia
−
++
+
Duodenal atresia
++
−
−
Esophageal atresia
+
++
−
Cardiac defects
+
++
++
Echogenic intracardiac 
foci
+
−
++
Diaphragmatic hernia
−
++
+
Cystic hygroma
+
+
+
Hydrops
+
+
+
Omphalocele
−
+
+
Echogenic bowel
++
+
+
Short femur or humerus
+
++
−
Radial aplasia or limb 
reduction
−
++
+
Clenched hands or wrists
−
++
+
Polydactyly
−
−
++
Club feet or rocker-­
bottom feet
−
++
++
Renal abnormalities
+
+
++
Choroid plexus cysts
+?
++
−
Single umbilical artery
−
++
++
CNS, central nervous system; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; 
NTD, neural tube defect.
From Nyberg DA, Souter VL. Sonographic markers of fetal aneuploidy. 
Clin Perinatol. 2002;27:762.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
494
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
perceived importance. In determining the order, the clinician may 
consider the magnitude of the deviation, but uniqueness is import­
ant in differentiating conditions. Subtleties can be significant; for 
example, inverted nipples (common in carbohydrate-­deficient 
glycoprotein syndrome) or redundant umbilical skin (in com­
pany with abnormal anterior chamber of the eye and abnormally 
shaped teeth in Rieger syndrome) can be very helpful in identifying 
a condition.
The description of history and morphology becomes the working 
diagnosis. Even if the clinician cannot find a match in the standard 
references concerning the syndrome identification, a descriptive diag­
nosis is invaluable for providing the constellation of findings that delin­
eate the problems.
MINIMAL DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The key phenotypic elements of a syndrome, which unquestionably 
identify it and differentiate it from all other similar conditions, have 
been termed the minimal diagnostic criteria. In the absence of a defin­
itive laboratory test, establishing the diagnostic criteria is a logical and 
ideal goal for achieving uniformity of diagnosis.
Unfortunately, minimal diagnostic criteria are difficult to decide 
upon and are enumerated for only a few conditions. Reasonably 
successful efforts for identifying diagnostic criteria for two rela­
tively common conditions, neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) (Table 
29.9) and Marfan syndrome (Table 29.10), have been achieved and 
updated through consensus conferences. The molecular abnormal­
ities for each condition have been identified, but the absence of a 
molecular result does not exclude the diagnosis, and in the case of 
Marfan syndrome, the molecular finding itself is not sufficient for a 
diagnosis.
In NF1, a family history that includes an affected parent is a major 
help (and major criterion) for diagnosis. When there is no positive 
family history, an index case requires additional criteria. The criteria 
are quite specific and include easily documented findings. However, 
criteria do not include learning disabilities, intellectual disability, sco­
liosis, short stature, asymmetric limb growth, endocrine and neuroen­
docrine tumors, hypertension, or epilepsy, any of which may be present 
in NF1. These conditions are germane but not unique to NF1.
The concept of minimal diagnostic criteria is laudable but difficult 
to achieve. When available, the minimal diagnostic criterion is the 
confirmatory laboratory test; however, the confirmatory laboratory 
test does not necessarily define the parameters of the phenotype of the 
syndrome as is noted in the example of Marfan syndrome and FBN1 
gene variants.
TOOLS TO ASSIST THE DIAGNOSTIC ODYSSEY
Reference books on syndromology, human malformations, and defor­
mations are excellent resources for assistance with diagnosis; however, 
most illustrations in texts focus on individuals with the most exag­
gerated findings to illustrate the condition. Birth defects are discrete 
(discontinuous) variables, but human features occur in a continuum. 
Diagnosis becomes a process of identifying the variables by a system­
atic evaluation of the entire individual.
Technology has eliminated some of the art forms once in common 
practice (e.g., dermatoglyphics or the analysis of finger and palm ridge 
patterns).
Syndrome recognition is usually performed with genetic and 
morphometric technologies that may blur the margins between vari­
ous syndromes and enable syndrome recognition through the appli­
cation of various computational tools. These methods include facial 
Male
Marriage or union
Divorced
Consanguinity
Proband
No offspring
Multiple unions
Termination
of pregnancy
Arrow indicates
consultand
seeking
counseling
Pedigree with
generations
and individuals
numbered
1
2
2
2
3
2
1
I
II
3
1
Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Twins of unknown
zygosity
Stillbirth
Adopted into family
Adopted out of family
Pregnancy with
information on
dates if available
LMP
12/20/14
24 wk
SB
SB
P
P
?
Female
Sex unspecified
Number of children
of sex indicated
Affected
Segments filled for
different components
of the phenotype
Nonpenetrant carrier,
may manifest disease
Deceased individual
Obligate carrier, will
not manifest disease
Spontaneous
abortion
Fig. 29.13  Symbols commonly used in pedigree charts. Although there is no uniform system of pedigree 
notation, the symbols used here are according to recent recommendations made by professionals in the field 
of genetic counseling. (From Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson and Thompson Genet­
ics in Medicine. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:109.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
495
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
recognition software for syndromic identification (Fig. 29.19). These 
tools are not diagnostic but offer rank-­listed possibilities for diag­
nostic consideration. Such methods extract features from training 
images and perform classification of images, often identifying fea­
tures such as image texture that would not have been identified by 
human diagnosticians. One of the more widely implemented tools is 
the free resource Face2Gene®, which, in addition to the facial compu­
tational analysis, enables adjunct HPO terminology to be entered to 
further refine the phenotype. The machine learning aspect of these 
tools ensures that, over time, their accuracy will improve. The knowl­
edge base is continually expanded through “crowdsourcing” the 
expertise of recognized experts who continue to train the system by 
entering molecularly confirmed diagnoses.
The advent of broad molecular diagnostic tests has eliminated 
the original quest for a clinical diagnosis, which would then serve to 
focus targeted single-­gene testing. Copy number variations (CNVs 
or microdeletion/duplication disorders) still represent 10–15% of 
all syndromic disorders presenting for diagnosis, which has estab­
lished chromosome microarrays as the first-­line standard of care in 
the evaluation of a child with multiple congenital anomalies, devel­
opmental delays, or autism spectrum behaviors (Table 29.11). This 
is supported by the American College of Medical Genetics as well as 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Common chromo­
somal deletion and duplication disorders can be identified in this way 
(Table 29.12). Current technologies offer the capability of sequencing 
over 2,000 genes known to cause both syndromic and nonsyndromic 
A
B
C
Fig. 29.14  Turner syndrome. A–C, Note prominent ears, loose folds of skin in posterior neck with low hairline, 
and broad chest with widely spaced nipples. (Courtesy Dr. Lynne M. Bird, Children’s Hospital, San Diego; 
From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. 7th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:81.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
496
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
intellectual disability or autism and in addition can use complex algo­
rithms to assess CNVs, which is typically less expensive than running 
a microarray. There is a strong rationale for a exome-­ or genome-­
first approach because these technologies can provide comprehensive 
sequencing with CNV analysis at minimal additional burden to health 
care expenditure.
Utilization of specific genetic databases such as POSSUM (Pic­
tures of Standard Syndromes and Undiagnosed Malformations) or 
LMD (London Medical Databases) relies on cross-­referencing the 
presence of specific dysmorphologic features to create differential 
diagnoses. Another diagnostic support tool that includes genetic 
disorders but expands the differential diagnosis to include all pedi­
atric onset conditions is SimulConsult (https://simulconsult.com/). 
These resources, however, require an annual subscription and are 
curated by affiliated academic programs. Free resources that use the 
standardized ontologic nosology include OMIM (Online Mendelian 
Fig. 29.15  Characteristic dermal patterns of the palm of a child with 
Down syndrome: a single flexion crease (simian crease), axial triradius 
(arrowhead) in distal position, a pattern area on the palm between the 
3rd and 4th digits, and ulnar loops on all 10 digits. (From Nussbaum RL, 
McInnes RR, Willard HF. Thompson and Thompson Genetics in Medi­
cine. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:160.)
Fig. 29.16  “Prehensile” foot in a 1-­month-­old child. (From Wiedemann 
HR, Kunze J, Dibbern H. Atlas of Clinical Syndromes: A Visual Guide to 
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.)
Fig. 29.17  Trisomy 18: Overlapping finger and hypoplastic nails. (From 
Wiedemann HR, Kunze J, Dibbern H. Atlas of Clinical Syndromes: A 
Visual Guide to Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.)
Fig. 29.18  Trisomy 18: Rocker-­bottom feet (protruding calcanei). (From 
Wiedemann HR, Kunze J, Dibbern H. Atlas of Clinical Syndromes: A 
Visual Guide to Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1989.)
TABLE 29.9  Diagnostic Criteria for 
Neurofibromatosis Type 1*
	1.	Family history (an affected parent)
	2.	6 or more café-­au-­lait spots
>0.5 cm in prepubertal children
>1.5 cm in postpubertal children
	3.	1 or more plexiform neurofibromas
	4.	2 or more neurofibromas
	5.	Freckling of the armpits or in skinfolds
	6.	2 or more Lisch modules of the iris
	7.	Optic glioma
	8.	Osseous dysplasia of the sphenoid bone and/or long bones
*There must be positive findings in 2 or more categories.
From National Institutes of Health Consensus Developmental 
Conference. Neurofibromatosis conference statement. Arch Neurol. 
1988;45:575.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
497
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
Inheritance in Man; http://www.omim.org/) and Phenomizer 
(http://compbio.charite.de/phenomizer/), which similarly allow the 
end user to generate lists of potential diagnoses.
Genetic Testing
The catalog of available genetic tests has greatly expanded, and as large-­
scale sequencing becomes more accessible and affordable, genomic 
analysis is becoming the standard of care. The primary limitation of 
this testing is our ability to interpret all the variation and to connect 
relevance of this variation to the clinical phenotype being evaluated. 
It thus remains important to collect and identify crucial/significant 
phenotypic data elements that assist in the interpretation of the tests 
ordered. Broad panels encompassing common phenotypes are avail­
able for complex heterogeneic disorders such as epilepsy or cardiomy­
opathy. To assist in the identification of laboratories offering specific 
testing, a few reference websites have been established offering global 
laboratory listings; two of these resources include https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/gtr/ and https://app.concertgenetics.com/. Given the vari­
ability of the testing methodology and the genes included in various 
panel tests, it is important for the ordering practitioner to understand 
not only which genes are included but also what technology is being 
utilized so as to truly appreciate the negative predictive value in rela­
tion to the disorder within the differential diagnosis. For example, 
some tests do not offer copy number evaluation, and if the disorder 
you have near the top of your differential is most commonly caused by 
a deletion of a gene, then the test being ordered may provide a false-­
negative result (i.e., miss the diagnosis).
Testing itself should be judiciously selected to confirm a diagno­
sis or gather more information to enable a diagnosis to be formulated 
(see Chapter 1: Evidence-­Based Technologic Testing). Before any lab­
oratory or imaging testing is done, the examiner should address the 
question “Does the description correlate with a described condition or 
syndrome?” Often, the working diagnosis is the succinct and relevant 
description of the child, which amounts to a list of findings arranged 
in order of importance or significance from the perspective of the 
examiner.
A further advance in molecular understanding is the identification 
of metabolic disorders that are associated with intellectual disability but 
have proven treatments. The publication The Treatable Intellectual Dis­
ability (https://www.treatable-­id.org) presents a digital tool to enhance 
diagnosis and care for rare diseases and impacted the initial testing 
recommendations for children with intellectual disability, and recom­
mendations for initial evaluations as listed in Tables 29.13 and 29.14 
have become more broadly implemented. Thus, metabolic screening 
for disorders that would not have been detected through national new­
born screening programs is routinely used in the evaluation of children 
with intellectual disability. The development of metabolomic analysis 
has additionally improved the ability for diagnosing rare metabolic dis­
orders in individuals presenting with multisystem complex phenotypes 
and has become routine in the evaluation of undiagnosed and rare dis­
orders. Metabolomic analysis refers to the cross-­correlation of multiple 
analytes in several samples (serum, urine, and/or cerebrospinal fluid) 
aided by machine learning tools that have metabolic signatures for 
numerous diseases.
Diagnostic imaging is invaluable in assessing CNS malfor­
mations, cardiac structure and function, skeletal deformity, and 
abdominal organs. The rapid advances in imaging technology and 
resolution are additionally enabling functional studies as well as 
real-­time metabolic analysis with spectroscopy when using MRI to 
study the brain.
Bone age testing is indicated with short stature, growth delay, or 
large stature. Complete skeletal surveys are one of the only ways to help 
delineate skeletal dysplasias but require expert interpretation.
TABLE 29.10  Revised Ghent Criteria for the 
Diagnosis of Marfan Syndrome
The revised criteria place more emphasis on aortic root dilatation/dissection 
and ectopia lentis
	I:	 In the absence of family history: MFS DX if:
	 (1)	 Aortic root dilated/dissected (Z ≥2) AND EL*
	 (2)	 Aortic root dilated/dissected (Z ≥2) AND FBN1
	 (3)	 Aortic root dilated/dissected (Z ≥2) AND Syst (≥7 points)*
	 (4)	 Ectopia lentis with normal aortic root AND FBN1 pathogenic variant 
associated with aortic root dilated/dissected
	II:	 In the presence of family history: MFS DX if:
	 (5)	 EL AND FH of MFS
	 (6)	 Systemic feature score (≥7 points) AND FH of MFS*
	 (7)	 Ao (Z ≥2 above 20 yr old, ≥3 below 20 yr) + FH of MFS*
*Caveat: without discriminating features of Shprintzen–Goldberg syndrome, 
LDS, or vEDS AND after TGFBR1/2, collagen biochemistry, COL3A1 testing 
if indicated (Other conditions/genes will emerge with time.)
Scoring of systemic features: Max total: 20 points; score ≥7 points 
indicates systemic involvement
 • Wrist AND thumb sign [3] (wrist OR thumb sign [1])
 • Pectus carinatum deformity [2] (pectus excavatum or chest asymmetry [1])
 • Hindfoot deformity [2] (plain pes planus [1])
 • Pneumothorax [2]
 • Dural ectasia [2] (sensitive, but not specific; not considered equal to 
lens dislocation or aortic root enlargement)
 • Protrusio acetabuli [2] AP pelvis: medial protrusion of the acetabulum 
at least 3 mm beyond the ilioischial line
 • ↓ US/LS** AND ↑ arm span/height (>1.05) AND no severe 
scoliosis [1]
 • Scoliosis (≥2 degrees) or thoracolumbar kyphosis [1]
 • Reduced elbow extension [1] 170 degrees or less upon full extension
 • Facial features (3/5) [1] (dolichocephaly, enophthalmos, down-­slanting 
palpebral fissures, malar hypoplasia, retrognathia)
 • Skin striae [1] (abnormal position or excessive)
 • Myopia >3 diopters [1]
 • Mitral valve prolapse (all types) [1]
US/LS** (normal upper to lower segment ratios)
White adults, 0.85; Black adults, <0.78
Children 0–5 yo <1; 6–7 yo <0.95; 8–9 yo <0.9
Major Differential Diagnoses
Ectopia lentis syndrome: EL with or without Syst AND with an FBN1 not 
known with Ao or no FBN1
MASS phenotype: Ao (Z <2) AND Syst (≥5 with at least 1 skeletal feature) 
without EL
Mitral valve prolapse syndrome: MVP AND Ao (Z <2) AND Syst (<5) 
without EL
Differential expanded, conditions with: 
aortic aneurysms: LDS, bicuspid aortic valve, familial thoracic aortic aneu­
rysm, vEDS, arterial tortuosity
ectopia lentis: ectopia lentis syndrome, Weill–Marchesani syndrome, 
homocystinuria 
Stickler syndrome systemic features: Shprintzen–Goldberg syndrome, CCA, 
LDS, MASS phenotype and MVPS
Ao, aortic root dilatation/dissection; AP, anteroposterior; CCA, congen­
ital contractural arachnodactyly; DX, diagnosis; EDS, Ehlers-­Danlos 
syndrome; EL, ectopia lentis; FH, family history; LDS, Loeys-­Dietz syn­
drome; LS, lower segment; MASS, Mitral valve, myopia, Aorta, Skin, 
and Skeletal features; MFS, Marfan syndrome; MVPS, mitral valve 
prolapse syndrome; Syst, systemic feature score; US, upper segment; 
vEDS, vascular type of Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome; yo, years old.
From Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent 
nosology for the Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
A
B
Fig. 29.19  Image analysis process of the automated facial recognition technology. A, A face is detected in the 
frontal image and anatomic points are automatically identified. The face is divided into multiple regions, whose 
appearance is analyzed. B, Last, a mask depicting the characteristic appearance of each syndrome is created. 
(From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15–23 [Fig. 5, p. 21].)
TABLE 29.11  Common Microdeletion and Duplication Syndromes and Frequency of Occurrence
Condition; Genomic 
Location
Incidence
Major Phenotypic Features
16p11.2 duplication
1/1,900
Normal to DD, ASD, ADHD, microcephaly, psychiatric conditions
16p11.2 deletion
1/2,300
ID/DD, ASD, ADHD, macrocephaly, psychiatric conditions
16p13.11 deletion
1/2,300
ID/DD, seizures, schizophrenia
1q21.1 duplication
1/3,300
Normal to motor skill and articulation difficulty, ID/DD, ASD, ADHD, scoliosis, abnormal gait, macrocephaly, 
short stature, psychiatric conditions (schizophrenia, anxiety, depression), CHD (especially tetralogy of Fallot)
22q11.2 duplication
1/4,000
Normal to ID/DD, growth retardation, hypotonia
1p36 deletion syndrome
1/5,000
ID/DD, hypotonia, seizures, structural brain abnormalities, CHD, vision and hearing issues, skeletal 
anomalies, characteristic facies
Charcot–Marie–Tooth type 1A; 17p12 
­duplication
1/5,000–1/10,000
Slowly progressive neuropathy causing distal muscle weakness and atrophy, sensory loss, and slow 
nerve conduction velocity first noticeable in the 1st or 2nd decade
X-­linked ichthyosis; Xp22.31 deletion 1/6,000
ID/DD, ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, short stature, ocular albinism
7q11.23 duplication
1/7,500
DD, normal to ID, speech problems, hypotonia, problems with movement and walking, behavioral abnor­
malities, seizures, aortic enlargement
17q12 deletion
1/14,500
Kidney/urinary abnormalities, diabetes, ID/DD, ASD, psychiatric conditions
Sotos syndrome; 5q35 deletion
1/15,000
ID/DD, overgrowth, characteristic facies
Cri-­du-­chat; 5p15 deletion
1/15,000–1/50,000
High-­pitched cry, microcephaly, hypotonia, characteristic facies, ID/DD, CHD
Koolen de Vries; 17q21 deletion
1/16,000
ID/DD, sociable personality, hypotonia, seizures, distinct facial features, CHD, kidney anomalies, foot 
deformities
Potocki–Lupski syndrome; 17p11.2 
duplication
1/20,000
ID/DD, ASD, hypotonia, CHD
ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; CHD, congenital heart defect; DD, developmental delay; ID, intellec­
tual disability.
Modified from Norton ME, Kuller JA, Dugoff L, eds. Perinatal Genetics. Elsevier; 2019:129, Table 12.2.
TABLE 29.12  Examples of Some Chromosomal Deletion Syndromes for Which There Is a 
Commercially Available DNA Probe for Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization Analysis
Condition
Brief Description
Probe
Williams syndrome
Proportionate short stature, mild–moderate to severe intellectual disability, cocktail patter for conversation, stellate 
pattern of iris pigmentation, supravalvular aortic stenosis, recessed nasal bridge, and wide mouth with full lips
7q11
WAGR syndrome
Wilms tumor, aniridia, growth delay, intellectual disability, and genitourinary anomalies
11p13
Prader–Willi syndrome
Angelman syndrome
Distinct syndromes with common or overlapping areas of deletion; phenotype depends on gender of the parent of origin 
of the deletion
Prader–Willi syndrome: hypotonia in infancy, short stature, obesity, mild–moderate and occasionally severe intellectual disa­
bility, small hands and feet (caused by paternal deletion of 15q11-­13 or maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 15)
Angelman syndrome: severe intellectual disability, absence of speech, ataxia, tremulous movements, large mouth, 
frequent drooling (caused by maternal deletion of chromosome 15q11-­13 or paternal uniparental disomy)
15q11
Smith–Magenis syndrome
Brachycephaly, prognathism, self-­destructive behavior, wrist biting, pulling out nails, head banging, indifference to pain, 
severe intellectual disability, hyperactivity, social behavior problems
17p11.2
Miller–Dieker syndrome
Microcephaly, narrow temples, hypotonia/hypertonia, abnormal posturing, seizures, severe to profound intellectual 
disability, poor growth, lissencephaly and other brain abnormalities on CT or MRI
17p13
Velocardiofacial (VCF) 
syndrome (overlaps with 
DiGeorge syndrome)
VCF: cleft palate, congenital heart disease, learning and/or behavior problems, long face, prominent nose, limb hypotonia, 
slender hands with tapering fingers
DiGeorge syndrome: T-­cell deficiency, immunoglobulin deficiency
22q11
WAGR, Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
499
CHAPTER 29  Dysmorphology
Specialized laboratory testing is reserved to aid specific diagnostic 
investigation (e.g., muscle biopsy, fibroblast culture for enzyme anal­
ysis, electron microscopy of arterial walls or blood buffy coat). These 
specialized tests are performed by a small number of laboratories to aid 
the diagnosis of rare disorders and should ideally be left to the expert 
physician.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 29.13  Genetics and Biochemical 
Developmental Delay Evaluation
Tier One
Acylcarnitine profile
Amino acids (plasma)
Ammonia
Urine organic acids
Ceruloplasmin
Copper (blood)—if abnormal repeat with 24-­hr urine
DNA microarray
Homocysteine (blood)
Lactic acid and pyruvic acid (blood) to determine lactate:pyruvate 
ratio in mitochondrial disorders
Tier Two
Mucopolysaccharides screen
Congenital disorders of carbohydrate glycosylation
Chromosome Fragile X
Prader–Willi and Angelman (methylation testing)
Creatine/guanidinoacetate (blood)
Creatine/guanidinoacetate (urine)
Purine pyrimidine panel (urine)
Very long chain fatty acids (blood)
TABLE 29.14  Genetic Testing in Congenital 
Heart Disease
Patient Features
What to Order
CHD with features suggestive of trisomy 
21 or 45X
Karyotype
CHD with features of trisomy 13 or 18
STAT chromosome FISH 
21/18/13
Conotruncal congenital heart lesion
 • Interrupted aortic arch
 • Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal 
defect
 • Tetralogy of Fallot
 • Truncus arteriosus
 • Malaligned ventricular septal defect and/
or features typical of 22q11.2 deletion 
syndrome
DNA microarray
Heterotaxy
DNA microarray
Next-­generation sequencing 
heterotaxy panel
CHD with or without dysmorphic features/
multiple anomalies
DNA microarray
CHD, congenital heart disease; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
499.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bone Age and Physical Measurements
Bonthron D, Fitzpatrick D, Porteous M, et al. Clinical Genetics: A Case-­Based 
Approach. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998.
Bronstein RA, Cornstock CH. Central nervous system anomalies. Clin Perina­
tol. 2000;27:791–812.
Bukowski R, Saade GR. Hydrops fetalis. Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:1007–1032.
Dar P, Gross SJ. Craniofacial and neck anomalies. Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:
813–838.
Devine PC, Malone FD. Noncardiac thoracic anomalies. Clin Perinatol. 
2000;27:865–900.
Dugoff L, Thieme G, Hobbins JC. Skeletal anomalies. Clin Perinatol. 
2000;27:979–1006.
Emanuel BS, Saitta SC. From microscopes to microarrays: dissecting recurrent 
chromosomal rearrangements: the RASopathies annual review of genomics 
and human genetics. Nat Rev Genetics. 2007;8:869–883.
Frazer KA, Murray SS, Schork NJ, et al. Human genetic variation and its con­
tribution to complex traits. Nat Rev Genetics. 2009;10:241–251.
Gleason PF, Eddleman KA, Stone JL. Gastrointestinal disorders of the fetus. 
Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:901–920.
Goodman RM, Gorlin RJ. The Malformed Infant and Child—An Illustrated 
Guide. New York: Oxford University Press; 1983.
Gorlin RJ, Cohen Jr MM, Hennekam RCM. Syndromes of the Head and Neck. 
4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2001.
Greulich WW, Pyle SI. Radiographic Atlas of Skeletal Development of the Hand 
and Wrist. 2nd ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press; 1959.
Hall JG, Froster-­Iskenius UG, Allanson JE. Handbook of Normal Physical Mea­
surements. New York: Oxford University Press; 1989.
Jacobs AM, Toudjarska I, Racine A, et al. A recurring FBN1 gene mutation in 
neonatal Marfan syndrome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2002;156:1081–1084.
Jones KL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformations. 5th ed. Phil­
adelphia: WB Saunders; 1997.
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Hu­
man Malformation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.
Keats TEE. Atlas of Roentgenographic Measurement. St. Louis: Mosby-­
Yearbook; 1990.
Kulchak Rahm A, et al. User testing of a diagnostic decision support system 
with machine-assisted chart review to facilitate clinical genomic diagnosis. 
BMJ Health Care Inform. 2021;28.
Malone FD, D’Alton ME. Anomalies peculiar to multiple gestations. Clin 
Perinatol. 2000;27:1033–1046.
McKusick VA. Mendelian Inheritance in Man. 12th ed. Baltimore: Johns Hop­
kins University Press; 1998. Available online as: OMIM: Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man. http://www3.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/OMIM/.
Nyberg DA, Souter VL. Sonographic markers of fetal aneuploidy. Clin Perina­
tol. 2000;27:761–789.
Robinson JN, Abuhanad AZ. Abdominal wall and umbilical cord anomalies. 
Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:947–978.
Roizen NJ, Patterson D. Down’s syndrome. Lancet. 2003;361:1281–1288.
Saphier CJ, Gaddipati S, Liat E, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and management 
of abnormalities in the urologic systems. Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:
921–946.
Simpson JL, Elias S. Genetics in Obstetrics and Gynecology. 3rd ed. Philadel­
phia: WB Saunders; 2003.
Simpson LL. Structural cardiac anomalies. Clin Perinatol. 2000;27:839–864.
Sontag LW, Snell D, Anderson M. Skeletal maturation. Am J Dis Child. 
1939;58:949.
Stevenson RE, Hall JG, Goodman RM. Human Malformations and Related 
Anomalies. Vols. 1–2. New York: Oxford University Press; 1993.
Syndrome References
Van Karnebeel CDM, Houben RFA, Lafek M, et al. The treatable intellectual 
disability AAP. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012;7:47. A digital tool to enhance 
diagnosis and care for rare diseases. www.treatable-­id.org.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
