242
Diarrhea is the passage of unusually loose or watery stools, typically 
at least three times in a 24-­hour period, and should be considered in a 
child who is passing stools more frequently than usual with a consis­
tency looser than what is considered normal for that individual. Diar­
rhea is classified broadly by the duration of symptoms. Acute diarrhea 
is usually a self-­limited illness that lasts for 2 weeks or less. Chronic 
diarrhea persists for more than 2 weeks. The etiologies of acute and 
chronic diarrhea differ by age (Table 14.1).
Diarrhea is further classified by pathophysiology, which typi­
cally involves one or more of the following mechanisms: (1) osmotic 
diarrhea, characterized by an increased intraluminal osmotic load 
leading to passive diffusion of fluid into the gastrointestinal lumen; 
(2) secretory diarrhea, characterized by increased active secretion 
of fluid into the gastrointestinal lumen beyond the capacity to be 
reabsorbed; and (3) altered gastrointestinal tract motility. Differen­
tiating osmotic from secretory diarrhea allows for a more directed 
diagnostic evaluation (Table 14.2). Osmotic diarrhea may be related 
to the malabsorption of carbohydrate, fat, or protein or to the pres­
ence of nonabsorbable substances in the gastrointestinal lumen. The 
characteristics of the stool may provide information that allows for 
the identification of the malabsorbed substance, particularly for iso­
lated carbohydrate and fat malabsorption (Table 14.3). Secretory 
diarrhea is characterized by an excess of crypt cell fluid and elec­
trolyte secretion that exceeds the absorptive capabilities of the villi 
and is classified by the presence or absence of normal villi. Inflam­
matory diarrhea of both infectious and noninfectious etiologies 
usually involves both osmotic and secretory components. Finally, 
surgical bowel resection may decrease the surface area available for 
the resorption of both fluid and solutes, leading to both secretory and 
osmotic diarrhea. The causes of diarrhea based on pathophysiology 
are presented in Table 14.4.
ACUTE DIARRHEA
History
Acute diarrhea in children is most often infectious (Table 14.5), 
although it may be secondary to noninfectious inflammatory pro­
cesses, toxins, or medications. The etiology of acute diarrhea is sug­
gested by both the history and characteristics of the stool (Fig. 14.1 
and Table 14.6). Fever or blood in the stool suggests an infectious 
cause. Watery diarrhea is typical of viral gastroenteritis, as well as 
some bacterial and parasitic infections. Dysentery, characterized by 
severe diarrhea and the presence of blood and mucus in the stool, 
suggests bacterial colitis. Vomiting and diarrhea developing within 
hours of food ingestion suggests exposure to preformed toxins in 
the food, rather than the acquisition of an enteric pathogen from 
the food, which is characterized by a predominantly diarrheal illness 
developing within days of exposure (Fig. 14.2). A recent history of 
travel suggests traveler’s diarrhea, more than 80% of which is caused 
by bacterial species that are endemic to the area of travel, to which 
the patient has not been previously exposed. Recent travel may also 
suggest parasitic or helminthic infection. Exposure to health care 
settings suggests nosocomial diarrhea. Patients with a history of 
immunodeficiency or malnourishment may be more likely to have 
an infection with atypical or opportunistic organisms or to have a 
more protracted and severe course. Hematuria or oliguria may sug­
gest hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) as a complication of infec­
tion with Escherichia coli 0157:H7 or Shigella. Other extraintestinal 
manifestations may also provide a clue to the diagnosis (Table 14.7).
Physical Examination
Physical examination should focus on assessing the level of hydration 
and the need for fluid resuscitation (Table 14.8). The general examina­
tion may reveal nonenteric infections that could present with diarrhea, 
such as otitis media, pneumonia, or sepsis. Abdominal tenderness or 
masses suggest appendicitis, intussusception, or, less commonly, toxic 
megacolon. Generalized toxicity or shock may occur with HUS or with 
sepsis, such as from invasive Salmonella or staphylococcal toxic shock 
syndrome.
Viral Diarrhea
Rotavirus Infection
Rotavirus is the most frequent cause of severe diarrhea in unvaccinated 
infants and young children. The introduction of an effective vaccine 
has decreased the incidence, with most infections occurring in unvac­
cinated children under 3 years of age. In countries with a higher base­
line socioeconomic status, it is typically seen in winter months, with 
prevalence decreasing substantially in summer months. Transmission 
is by the fecal-­oral route and the incubation period ranges from 1 to 3 
days. Patients typically present with the acute onset of fever and vom­
iting followed 1–2 days later by watery diarrhea. Symptoms generally 
persist for 3–8 days. In moderate to severe cases, dehydration, electro­
lyte abnormalities, and acidosis may occur. In immunocompromised 
children, persistent infection and chronic diarrhea can develop, with 
persistently positive diagnostic assays. Chronic infection is to be dif­
ferentiated from postinfectious malabsorption seen in some immuno­
competent children, in whom the small intestinal mucosa may require 
3–8 weeks to recover its absorptive ability. Diagnosis is confirmed by 
nucleic acid amplification assays, enzyme immunoassay (EIA), immu­
nochromatography, or latex agglutination assay for group A rotavirus 
antigen detection in the stool.
Norovirus Infection
Norovirus is a single-­stranded RNA virus of the Calciviridae family 
and is the leading cause of epidemic outbreaks of acute gastroenteritis, 
as well as the most common cause of foodborne illness and foodborne 
Diarrhea
Bhaskar Gurram
14
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
243
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
TABLE 14.1  Differential Diagnosis of Acute and Chronic Diarrhea by Age
Infants
Children
Adolescents
ACUTE
Common
Infectious gastroenteritis
Food poisoning
Antibiotic-­associated diarrhea
Food poisoning
Systemic infection
Infectious gastroenteritis
Food poisoning
Antibiotic-­associated diarrhea
Hyperthyroidism
Infectious gastroenteritis
Systemic infection
Medication induced (e.g., antibiotics, laxatives)
Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES)
Food poisoning
Overfeeding
Rare
Hirschsprung-­associated enterocolitis
Neonatal opioid withdrawal
CHRONIC
Disorders of Absorption and Transport of 
Nutrients and Electrolytes
Primary lactase deficiency
Secondary (e.g., postinfectious) lactase deficiency
Congenital sucrose-­isomaltase deficiency
Trehalase deficiency
Congenital chloride diarrhea
Congenital sodium diarrhea
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Glucose-­galactose malabsorption
Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Chylomicron retention disease
Abetalipoproteinemia
Enterokinase deficiency
Maltase-­glucoamylase deficiency
Primary bile acid diarrhea
Familial diarrhea syndrome
Diarrhea-­associated DGAT1 variants
Defects in Enterocyte Structure
Congenital tufting enteropathy
Microvillus inclusion disease
Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (syndromic diarrhea)
Neuro-­Enteroendocrine Diarrhea
Enteric anendocrinosis
Mitchell-­Riley syndrome
Proprotein convertase 1/3 deficiency
X-­linked lissencephaly
Secretory tumors (e.g., neuroblastoma)
Defects in Intestinal Immune-­Related 
Homeostasis
Cow’s milk or soy milk protein colitis
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis and colitis
Early-­onset enteropathy with colitis
IPEX syndrome
IPEX-­like disorders
XIAP deficiency
Autoimmune enteropathy
Other primary immune deficiency disorders (e.g., SCID)
Pancreatic Insufficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Johansson-­Blizzard syndrome
Pearson syndrome
Disorders of Absorption and Trans­
port of Nutrients and Electrolytes
Lactose intolerance
Secondary (e.g., postinfectious) lactase defi­
ciency
Congenital sucrose-­isomaltase deficiency
Primary bile acid diarrhea
Familial diarrhea syndrome
Disorders of Intestinal Motility
Toddler’s diarrhea
Irritable bowel syndrome
Infectious Etiologies
Giardiasis
Cryptosporidium
Defects in Enterocyte Structure
Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (syndromic 
diarrhea)
Neuro-­Enteroendocrine Diarrhea
Proprotein convertase 1/3 deficiency
X-­linked lissencephaly
Secretory tumors (e.g., neuroblastoma, VIPoma)
Defects in Intestinal Immune-­Related 
Homeostasis
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis and colitis
Early-­onset enteropathy with colitis
XIAP deficiency
Autoimmune enteropathy
Pancreatic Insufficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Chronic pancreatitis
Disorders of Absorption and Transport of 
Nutrients and Electrolytes
Lactose intolerance
Laxative abuse
Disorders of Intestinal Motility
Irritable bowel syndrome
Pseudoobstruction and bacterial overgrowth
Infectious Etiologies
Giardiasis
Cryptosporidium
Neuro-­Enteroendocrine Diarrhea
Primary adrenal insufficiency
Defects in Intestinal Immune-­Related 
Homeostasis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis and colitis
Pancreatic Insufficiency
Chronic pancreatitis
DGAT1, diacylglycerol O-­acyltransferase 1; IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked; SCID, severe combined immu­
nodeficiency; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide; XIAP, X-­linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
244
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
disease outbreaks in the United States. Young children have the high­
est incidence of infection. Transmission is via the fecal-­oral route or 
through contaminated food or water. Norovirus gastroenteritis typ­
ically presents with the abrupt onset of vomiting accompanied by 
watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, and vomiting. Systemic 
manifestations, including myalgia, fatigue, and headache, may accom­
pany gastrointestinal symptoms. Diagnosis is confirmed by nucleic 
acid amplification assays that detect viral RNA from the stool. Noro­
virus can cause persistent infection in immunocompromised patients 
and is difficult to clear without reconstitution of the immune system.
Bacterial Diarrhea
Most bacterial diarrheal illnesses are foodborne and affect infants and 
young children more frequently than adults. Bacterial infections of the 
intestine cause diarrhea via direct invasion of the intestinal mucosa, 
followed by intraepithelial cell multiplication or invasion of the lamina 
propria. Cellular invasion may be followed by the production of cyto­
toxin, which disrupts cell function, and/or the production of entero­
toxin, which alters cellular electrolyte and water balance. Bacterial 
adherence to the mucosal surface may result in flattening of the micro­
villi and disruption of normal cell functioning. Symptomatic differen­
tiation from viral causes of diarrhea may be difficult, and sequelae or 
extraintestinal manifestations of infections are varied (see Table 14.7).
Salmonella Infection
Nontyphoidal Salmonella organisms are estimated to cause 1 million 
annual gastrointestinal infections in the United States. The attack rate is 
highest in infancy; the incidence of symptomatic infections is lower in 
patients older than 6 years. Salmonella infection may cause an asymp­
tomatic intestinal carrier state that is rare in children, enterocolitis 
with diarrhea, or bacteremia without gastrointestinal manifestations 
but with subsequent local infections, such as meningitis or osteomy­
elitis. Salmonella infection is usually spread through contaminated 
water supplies or food (e.g., meat, chicken, eggs, raw milk, and fresh 
produce). Most infections in the United States are sporadic rather than 
epidemic. Although an infected food handler may contaminate food 
sources, farm animals or pets are more often the vector. Cats, turtles, 
lizards, snakes, and iguanas may also harbor Salmonella organisms. 
Outbreaks may occur among children in institutional settings; out­
breaks in daycare centers are rare.
After a 12-­ to 72-­hour incubation period, gastroenteritis devel­
ops and is characterized by the sudden onset of diarrhea, abdominal 
cramps and tenderness, and fever. The diarrhea is watery, with stools 
containing polymorphonuclear leukocytes and, on occasion, blood. 
The peripheral blood white blood cell count is usually normal. Symp­
toms slowly resolve within 3–5 days, although excretion of the organ­
ism may persist for several weeks. The organism is readily isolated from 
culture of the stool or a rectal swab or may be identified via multiplex 
PCR assays that detect multiple bacterial, viral, and parasitic enteric 
pathogens.
Shigella Infection
Most Shigella infections in the United States occur in young children 
aged 1–4 years, with a peak seasonal incidence in late summer and early 
autumn. It may also be the most common bacterial cause of diarrhea 
outbreaks in daycare settings. The organism is transmitted via the fecal-­
oral route, most often by the hands. During a 12-­ to 72-­hour incubation 
period, patients may develop a nonspecific prodrome characterized 
by fever, chills, nausea, and vomiting. A predominantly rectosigmoid 
colitis develops and results in abdominal cramps and watery diarrhea. 
In more severe infections (bacillary dysentery), blood and mucus 
are passed in small, very frequent stools (see Table 14.6). High fever 
in young infants may induce febrile seizures, and some patients may 
develop HUS. Bacterial culture of the stool or a rectal swab, or the use 
of multiplex PCR assays, allows for differentiating this organism from 
other pathogens. If positive, antibiotic treatment is usually indicated.
Campylobacter Infection
Many animal species, including poultry, farm animals, and household 
pets, serve as reservoirs for Campylobacter jejuni. Transmission occurs 
through ingestion of contaminated food, especially undercooked food, 
and through person-­to-­person spread via the fecal-­oral route. The dis­
ease is common in infants and adolescents, and both daycare and college 
outbreaks have been reported. Asymptomatic carriage is uncommon. 
Campylobacter infection symptoms may range from mild diarrhea to 
frank dysentery. The organism causes diffuse, invasive enteritis that 
involves the ileum and colon. Fever, cramping, abdominal pain, and 
bloody diarrhea are characteristic and may mimic symptoms of acute 
appendicitis or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Fever and diarrhea 
usually resolve after 5–7 days; prolonged illness or relapse occasion­
ally occurs. Campylobacter infection is also known to cause meningitis, 
abscesses, pancreatitis, and pneumonia. Guillain-­Barré syndrome has 
been reported after Campylobacter infection. Identification is via stool 
or rectal swab bacterial culture or via multiplex PCR assay. If positive, 
antibiotic treatment is indicated.
Yersinia Infection
Infection with either Yersinia enterocolitica or Yersinia pseudotubercu­
losis may cause various clinical syndromes, including gastroenteritis, 
TABLE 14.2  Differentiating Osmotic from 
Secretory Diarrhea
Osmotic
Secretory
Stool volume
Small (<200 mL/24 hr)
Large (>200 mL/24 hr)
Response to fasting
Diarrhea improves
Diarrhea continues
Stool sodium
<70
>70
Stool osmotic gap*
>50
<50
Stool pH
<5
>6
*Stool osmotic gap = 290 − 2 (stool Na+ + stool K+).
TABLE 14.3  Distinguishing Isolated Carbohydrate from Isolated Fat Malabsorption
Isolated Carbohydrate Malabsorption
Isolated Fat Malabsorption
Stool character
Loose and watery, non–foul-­smelling
Bulky large stool, foul-­smelling, oil droplets visible
Perianal rash/skin erosion
Present
Present
Signs of fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency
Variable
Present
Stool pH
Acidic (usually <6)
Alkaline
Stool reducing/nonreducing substances
Present
Absent
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
245
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
mesenteric adenitis, pseudoappendicitis, and postinfectious reac­
tive arthritis. The organism is present in animals and may be spread 
to humans by consumption of undercooked meat (especially pork), 
unpasteurized milk, and other contaminated foods. Person-­to-­person 
spread also occurs. Young children are particularly susceptible to 
disease, and the frequency of infections increases during the summer 
months.
The organisms may be identified via multiplex PCR assay or may be 
cultured from rectal swab or stool specimens, but selective media are 
required, and the organism may not be identified via culture for sev­
eral weeks. The microbiology laboratory should be notified if Yersinia 
infection is suspected. Neonates, immunocompromised patients, and 
patients with bacteremia or extraintestinal infection should receive 
antibacterial therapy; treatment decreases the duration of fecal excre­
tion and can additionally be considered in immunocompetent patients 
with moderate to severe symptoms.
Escherichia coli Infection
Although E. coli make up the predominant normal flora in the colon, 
some strains are pathogenic. Diarrhea caused by E. coli can be watery, 
inflammatory, or bloody, depending on the strain involved. These diar­
rheagenic E. coli strains are classified into five major groups on the 
basis of serogrouping or pathogenic mechanisms: (1) enteropathogenic 
E. coli (EPEC), an important cause of diarrhea in infants; (2) entero­
toxigenic E. coli (ETEC), a cause of diarrhea in infants and a cause of 
traveler’s diarrhea; (3) enteroinvasive E. coli, a cause of watery ETEC-­
like illness or, less commonly, a dysentery-­like illness; (4) enterohe­
morrhagic E. coli, a cause of hemorrhagic colitis and HUS; and (5) 
enteroaggregative E. coli, a cause of persistent diarrhea.
Enteric infections with E. coli are acquired via the fecal-­oral route. 
Enterohemorrhagic strains are the only diarrhea-­producing E. coli strains 
common in the United States and have been associated with foodborne 
epidemic outbreaks transmitted in some cases by undercooked meat.
EPEC is a well-­established cause of infantile diarrhea, especially in 
countries with a lower baseline socioeconomic status. Asymptomatic 
carriage is common. At least two separate mechanisms are responsible 
for diarrhea: adherence to intestinal epithelial cells leading to villous 
injury and mucosal inflammation, and production of a toxin similar 
to that of Shigella organisms. Chronic infection resulting in failure to 
thrive may also occur.
ETEC is the major cause of traveler’s diarrhea; occasional nosocomial 
outbreaks have also occurred in hospitalized infants. At least three dif­
ferent types of E. coli enterotoxins (heat-­labile, heat-­stable toxin A, and 
heat-­stable toxin B) have been identified. Definitive diagnosis requires 
enterotoxin identification, and this method is not widely available.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli produces a Shiga-­like cytotoxin and 
causes diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, and, in about 20% of infected per­
sons, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). Both epidemic and sporadic 
cases have been recognized. Infection is more common in the summer 
and fall. A particular serotype, E. coli 0157:H7, has been linked to the 
development of HUS in young children. The most common manifesta­
tions of enterohemorrhagic E. coli infection begin with severe abdominal 
cramps and watery diarrhea, followed by grossly bloody stools and eme­
sis. Fever is uncommon. Fecal leukocytes are absent or few. Other man­
ifestations include asymptomatic infection and watery diarrhea without 
progression to hemorrhagic colitis. E. coli 0157:H7 is cleared from the 
stool in 5–12 days. If HUS develops, symptoms become noticeable in 
the week after the onset of diarrhea and consist of oliguric renal failure, 
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and diarrhea. 
There is no role for antimicrobial therapy in enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
disease. Antibiotics neither shorten the duration of disease nor prevent 
progression to HUS; they may predispose to HUS.
Clostridioides difficile Infection
Clostridioides difficile (previously termed Clostridium difficile) causes 
acute and chronic diarrhea in children when the normal colonic flora is 
disrupted. Pseudomembranous colitis is the most severe form of this 
TABLE 14.4  Differential Diagnosis of 
Diarrhea by Pathophysiology
Osmotic Diarrhea
	1.	Carbohydrate malabsorption
 • Lactose intolerance
 • Osmotic laxatives (lactulose, polyethylene glycol 3350)
 • Antacids (magnesium hydroxide)
 • Ingestion of excessive amounts of nonabsorbable sugar or sugar alco­
hols (sorbitol in chewing gum, diet candy, sucralose)
 • Dietary ingestion of excessive fructose (high-­fructose corn syrup, 
ingestion of high-­fructose–containing fruits in excessive amounts)
 • Disaccharidase deficiency (sucrose-­isomaltase deficiency, glucose-­
galactose malabsorption, maltase-­glucoamylase deficiency, congenital 
lactase deficiency, trehalase deficiency)
 • Gastrocolic fistula, jejunoileal bypass, short-­bowel syndrome
	2.	Fat malabsorption
 • Pancreatic insufficiency
 • Defective handling of bile acids (e.g., primary bile acid malabsorption, 
cholestasis)
 • Defective mucosal lipid handling (e.g., intestinal lymphangiectasia, 
abetalipoproteinemia, chylomicron retention disease)
	3.	Protein malabsorption
 • Primary enterokinase deficiency
 • Hartnup disease
Secretory Diarrhea
	1.	Normal villous architecture
 • Chloride-­losing diarrhea (Cl− − HCO−
3  exchanger defect)
 • Sodium-­losing diarrhea (Na+ − H+ exchanger defect)
 • Familial diarrhea syndrome (gain-­of-­function variant of guanylate 
cyclase 2C)
 • Neurogenin-­3 pathogenic variants
	2.	Villous atrophy
 • Microvillus inclusion disease
 • Tufting enteropathy
 • Acrodermatitis enteropathica
 • Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (phenotypic or syndromic diarrhea)
 • Congenital disorders of glycosylation defects
	3.	Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1
	4.	Neuroendocrine tumors
Inflammatory (Combination of Secretory and Osmotic)
	1.	Infectious
	2.	Celiac disease
	3.	Inflammatory bowel disease
	4.	Autoimmune enteropathy and infantile-­onset inflammatory bowel disease
 • Interleukin-­10 and interleukin-­10 receptor defects
 • Hyperimmunoglobulin D from mevalonate kinase deficiency presenting 
as severe neonatal colitis
 • IPEX/IPEX-­like syndrome
	5.	Postinfectious enteropathies
	6.	Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
	7.	Idiopathic
Decreased Surface Area for Absorption
	1.	Short-­bowel syndrome
IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
246
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
infection, occurring as a result of a severe inflammatory response to the 
C. difficile toxins. Transmission occurs through person-­to-­person con­
tact and through environmental contamination via the spores formed 
by C. difficile, which retain viability for up to 1 week on dry surfaces.
The prevalence of carrier status for C. difficile in healthy, asymp­
tomatic outpatients is as high as 50% in healthy infants but is usually 
less than 5% in patients over 5 years of age. C. difficile and its toxin have 
been identified in the feces of healthy infants in concentrations similar 
to those found in adults with pseudomembranous colitis. The apparent 
resistance of infants to C. difficile and its toxin is related to the devel­
opmental absence of the toxin-­binding site in the immature intestine. 
Asymptomatic carriage rates in hospitalized patients may be as high 
as 20%. Infection is highly associated with recent antibiotic exposure, 
particularly to broad-­spectrum antibiotics, which disrupt the endog­
enous colonic flora that inhibits the growth of C. difficile. Other risk 
factors for C. difficile diarrhea include IBD, cystic fibrosis, use of proton 
pump inhibitors, indwelling enteral feeding tubes, and immunocom­
promised status.
TABLE 14.5  Common Gastrointestinal Pathogens and Their Key Epidemiologic Features
Organism
Key Epidemiologic Features
Viruses
Adenovirus
Serotypes 40 and 41 among the leading causes of infantile gastroenteritis globally
Astrovirus
Outbreaks in closed populations
Norovirus
Most common cause of medically attended gastroenteritis in United States: winter vomiting illness; environmentally 
hardy
Rotavirus
Most common global cause of gastroenteritis in young children, particularly in settings without rotavirus vaccination
Sapovirus
Mainly affects infants and toddlers
Bacteria
Aeromonas spp.
Widely distributed in aquatic environments; may cause diarrhea or extraintestinal infection
Bacillus cereus
Vomiting illness; rare fatal cases with hepatic necrosis; testing for toxin available
Campylobacter jejuni
Associated with poultry; common cause of traveler’s diarrhea in Asia; associated with postinfectious arthritis and 
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Clostridioides difficile
Leading cause of mortality from gastrointestinal infection in United States: community acquired and antibiotic associ­
ated
Clostridium botulinum
Vomiting illness due to preformed toxin ingestion; infant botulism due to germination of spores presents with progres­
sive weakness
Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli
Persistent diarrhea in young children, associated with malnutrition
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (STEC)
Associated with hemolytic uremic syndrome in children
Enteroinvasive E. coli
Associated with dysentery
Enteropathogenic E. coli
Acute watery diarrhea
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Most common cause of traveler’s diarrhea
Listeria
Associated with raw dairy products; pregnancy complications with systemic illness
Nontyphoidal Salmonella spp.
Intestinal carriage can be prolonged
Plesiomonas shigelloides
May cause watery diarrhea, dysentery, or extraintestinal infection
Shigella spp.
Most common global cause of dysentery
Staphylococcus aureus
Vomiting due to preformed staphylococcal enterotoxin ingestion
Vibrio cholerae
Outbreaks of watery diarrhea associated with lack of sanitation and humanitarian crises
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Associated with shellfish consumption
Yersinia enterocolitica
Zoonosis; able to grow in refrigerated food; associated with postinfectious polyarthritis
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Appendicitis-­like syndrome
Protozoa
Cryptosporidium hominis/parvum
Major cause of childhood diarrhea in children in low-­income countries; daycare centers
Cyclospora cayetanensis
Opportunistic infection; associated with foodborne outbreaks
Cystoisospora belli
Tropical and subtropical areas; opportunistic infection
Entamoeba histolytica
May cause liver abscess
Giardia lamblia
Associated with drinking from contaminated streams; daycare centers
Microsporidium
Ubiquitous in the environment; opportunistic infection
Parasites
Anisakis simplex
Vomiting illness after consuming raw fish
STEC, Shiga toxin–producing enterohemorrhagic E. coli (original, alternative definition of enterohemorrhagic E. coli).
Modified from Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Phil­
adelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1332, Table 96.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
247
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
TABLE 14.6  Clinical Syndromes Associated with Community-­Acquired Gastrointestinal 
Infection
Clinical Syndrome
Signs and Symptoms
Pathogenic Mechanism
Example Pathogens
Acute watery diarrhea*
Loose stools, often with mucus but not blood
Occasional vomiting and anorexia
Low-­grade fever
Malaise
Local infection in the gut
Norovirus genogroups I, II, and IV; enteric ade­
novirus types 40 and 41; rotavirus; enterotoxi­
genic Escherichia coli; enteropathogenic 
E. coli; Cryptosporidium; Clostridium perfrin­
gens; Bacillus cereus
Dysentery (acute bloody 
diarrhea)
Loose stools with gross blood and mucus
Fever
Abdominal cramps and, in some cases, 
tenesmus
May be clinically toxic
Local invasion of the gut
Shigella, enteroinvasive E. coli, Campylobacter 
jejuni, Entamoeba histolytica, nontyphoidal Sal­
monella, Yersinia enterocolitica, Aeromonas, 
Plesiomonas, Clostridioides difficile
Profuse purging
Copious watery stools resembling “rice water”
Low-­grade fever
Overt signs of dehydration
Toxin mediated
Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139, enterotoxigenic 
E. coli
Persistent diarrhea
Similar to acute diarrhea, but symptoms persist 
for at least 14 days
Local infection in the gut and/or 
immune compromise of host
Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium hominis/
parvum, Cystoisospora belli, Cyclospora caye­
tanensis, enteropathogenic E. coli, enteroag­
gregative E. coli
Acute vomiting
Sudden onset of nausea and vomiting
Little or no diarrhea
Local infection in the gut or 
intoxication
Norovirus, food poisoning due to Staphylococcus 
aureus, Bacillus cereus
Enteric fever
Fever
Lymphadenopathy
Local invasion of the gut with 
systemic spread
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, S. enterica 
serovar Paratyphi A, B, or C
*Etiologic agents that can cause dysentery can also cause acute watery diarrhea.
From Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:1335, Table 96.3.
Symptoms: emesis,
   low-grade/absent
   fever; mild, crampy,
   periumbilical pain;
   watery diarrhea
Causes: Non-
   inflammatory diarrhea
• Enteric viruses
• Enterotoxin-producing
  bacteria
• Giardia and other
  protozoa
• Strongyloides
Upper Intestinal Tract
Symptoms: fever,
  moderate to severe
  abdominal pain,
  tenesmus
Causes: Inflammatory
  diarrhea
• Shigella spp.
• Enteroinvasive E. coli
• Campylobacter jejuni/coli
• Yersinia enterocolitica
• Enterohemorrhagic E. coli
• Clostridioides difficile
• Entamoeba histolytica
Lower Intestinal Tract
Symptoms: nausea,
  emesis
Causes:
• Enteric viruses
• Chemical
   contaminants
• Toxins
Stomach
Fig. 14.1  Localizing gastrointestinal tract 
signs and symptoms and possible causes 
of illness. (From Long SS, Prober CG, 
Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice 
of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:54, Fig. 55.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
248
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
C. difficile infection should be considered in patients in whom 
diarrhea develops during or within several weeks of antibiotic therapy. 
Illness associated with this organism varies from a mild, self-­limited, 
nonbloody diarrhea to severe hemorrhagic colitis, protein-­losing 
enteropathy, toxic megacolon, colonic or cecal perforation, peritoni­
tis, sepsis, shock, and death. In rare cases, manifestations of C. diffi­
cile infection include fever or abdominal pain without diarrhea.
The colitis is caused by potent toxins produced by the organism: 
toxin A, a lethal enterotoxin that causes hemorrhage and fluid secretion 
in the intestines, and toxin B, a cytotoxin detectable by its cytopathic 
effects in tissue culture. Both toxins play a role in disease pathogenesis, 
although toxin B may be more important.
Recommendations for diagnosis of C. difficile infection are to con­
sider a two-­step method to exclude false-­positive testing, particularly in 
the setting of asymptomatic carriage in infants and younger children: 
nucleic acid amplification testing to identify microbial toxin genes and an 
enzyme immunoassay for toxins in stool. Testing is typically performed 
only on patients with diarrhea who are not concurrently taking laxatives 
or promotility agents that could otherwise explain the diarrhea; testing 
may be considered for patients without loose stools if C. difficile–induced 
ileus or toxic megacolon is suspected. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy 
reveals pseudomembranes in up to 50% of cases, typically in association 
with more severe disease. Treatment is dependent on the severity of the 
disease and whether the infection is primary or recurrent. Antibacterials 
include metronidazole, oral vancomycin, and, in adults, fidaxomicin.
Aeromonas Infection
Aeromonas species are gram-­negative bacilli that are found in a vari­
ety of freshwater sources and that are capable of causing a wide array 
• Staphylococcus aureus (dairy, produce,
   meats, eggs, and salads contaminated
   with staphylococcal enterotoxins)
• Bacillus cereus (cooked rice or other
   prepared foods left out at room
   temperature and contaminated with
   enterotoxin)
• Noroviruses
• Anisakiasis (parasitic nematode found in
   raw seafood)
• Clostridium perfringens
   (meat, poultry, and
   gravy)
• ETEC and enteric
   viruses (contaminated
   food and water)
• Cryptosporidium parvum
   (bovine fecal contamination
   of water, unpasteurized
   milk, or fresh produce)
• Cyclospora cayetanesis
   (berries, fresh basil)
• Intestinal tapeworms
   (undercooked beef,
   pork, and fish)
• Nontyphoidal salmonellosis
   (meat, poultry, fresh produce,
   peanut butter, eggs)
• Campylobacter (poultry)
• Enterohemorrhagic toxigenic
   Escherichia coli (e.g., 0157:H7
   EHEC or STEC) (ground beef,
   unpasteurized juice, raw fruits
   and vegetables)
• Shigella (salads, poultry, dairy
   products, raw vegetables)
• Vibrio parahemolyticus (raw
   shellfish)
• Yersinia (undercooked pork,
   unpasteurized milk or
   fecally contaminated water)
Suspecting a
foodborne illness
Vomiting is the
predominant
 symptom (usually
within 6 hr)
Diarrhea is the
predominant symptom
(1–7 days)
Watery
diarrhea
Diarrhea with
blood and mucus
and fever
Fig. 14.2  Differentiating causes of foodborne illness. EHEC, enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli; ETEC, 
enterotoxigenic E. coli; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli.
TABLE 14.7  Extraintestinal Manifestations 
of Enteric Pathogens
Manifestation
Related Enteric Pathogens
Erythema nodosum*
Yersinia spp., Campylobacter spp., Salmo­
nella spp.
Glomerulonephritis*
Shigella spp., Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp.
Guillain-­Barré syndrome*
Campylobacter spp.
Hemolytic anemia*
Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp.
Hemolytic uremic syndrome*
STEC
Immunoglobulin A nephropathy*
Campylobacter spp.
Reactive arthritis*
Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Yersinia spp., 
Campylobacter spp., Cryptosporidium spp.
Postinfectious irritable bowel 
syndrome
Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., 
Shigella spp., STEC, Giardia intestinalis
Meningitis
Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella spp. 
(infants ≤3 mo at high risk)
Intestinal perforation
Salmonella spp. (including Typhi), Shigella 
spp., Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp.
Encephalopathy, seizure
Shigella spp.
Toxic megacolon
Shigella spp., Clostridioides difficile
Aortitis, osteomyelitis
Salmonella spp.
STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
*Immune-­mediated extraintestinal manifestations.
Modified from Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and 
Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:54, Table 55.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
249
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
of disease, including a mild, self-­limited diarrheal illness in children. 
Occasionally, Aeromonas may cause dysentery or a protracted diarrheal 
illness. The most common manifestation is a watery, nonbloody, non­
mucoid diarrhea seen during the late spring, summer, and early fall. 
More severe infections may resemble ulcerative colitis, with chronic 
bloody diarrhea and abdominal pain.
Plesiomonas Infection
Plesiomonas shigelloides is a Vibrio-­like organism found in soil and 
warmer (>8°C) fresh or brackish water that is sometimes implicated in 
childhood diarrhea. It has been linked to consumption of raw shellfish 
or contaminated water, exposure to reptiles and tropical fish, and travel 
to endemic areas. The organism is most frequently found in subtropical 
or tropical climates though has a wide geographic distribution. After an 
incubation period of 1–2 days, patients typically develop watery diar­
rhea and vomiting, although some may develop dysentery. Diagnosis 
is via stool culture. Symptoms may last up to 2 weeks, although the 
disease is typically self-­limited in immunocompetent individuals.
Parasitic Diarrhea
Giardiasis
Giardia intestinalis is a flagellated protozoan that can cause diarrhea, 
malabsorption, abdominal pain, and weight loss. It spreads through con­
taminated food and water, as well as through person-­to-­person contact 
via the fecal-­oral route. The latter mode of transmission is responsible for 
outbreaks of diarrhea in daycare centers and residential facilities. Infec­
tion is often asymptomatic. Symptomatic illness usually develops 1–3 
weeks after exposure and may mimic acute gastroenteritis with low-­grade 
or no fever, nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea. In some patients, a 
chronic illness develops, characterized by intermittent, foul-­smelling 
diarrhea, abdominal bloating, nausea, abdominal pain, and weight loss. 
Up to 40% of patients may develop secondary lactase deficiency follow­
ing infection. Diagnosis is via EIA or direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) 
tests, which offer superior sensitivity and specificity compared to micros­
copy. If microscopy is performed, three separate samples of fresh stool 
should be examined for cysts or trophozoites, because excretion of the 
organism is only intermittent. Treatment is typically indicated in the 
presence of symptoms, to prevent institutional outbreaks, or to prevent 
spread to immunocompromised individuals.
Entamoeba histolytica Infection
Entamoeba histolytica is acquired in warm climates via the ingestion 
of cysts in fecally contaminated food or water. Infected individuals 
are often asymptomatic. Amebic dysentery may occur, but hepatic 
abscess and other focal infections are uncommon. Because cysts 
are shed in the stool on an intermittent basis, examination of sev­
eral fecal specimens may be required for identification. Stool anti­
gen detection assays allow for differentiation between E. histolytica 
and the more prevalent though less pathogenic E. dispar, which may 
also be detected on microscopy. Treatment is indicated to prevent 
the development of extraintestinal manifestations or spread to other 
individuals.
Cryptosporidium Infection
This intracellular protozoan causes watery diarrhea in both immu­
nocompetent and immunocompromised hosts and is an important 
cause of severe diarrhea in individuals infected with HIV. Cryp­
tosporidium has also been recognized as an occasional cause of 
self-­limited diarrhea in travelers, as well as in children in daycare 
centers and persons in residential institutions. The mechanisms 
by which these organisms cause diarrhea are unknown. Nucleic 
acid amplification assays and EIA tests are available for diagnosis. 
Identification via microscopy requires specialized staining tech­
niques that should be requested if Cryptosporidium infestation is 
suspected.
Other Causes of Acute Diarrhea
Parenteral Secondary Diarrhea
Acute diarrhea that accompanies infections outside of the gastroin­
testinal tract is termed parenteral diarrhea. Upper respiratory tract 
and urinary tract infections may be associated with increased bowel 
movement frequency or stool water. The mechanism is unclear but may 
involve alterations in bowel motility, changes in diet, or the effects of 
antibiotic treatment.
Medications
Various nonlaxative prescription and over-­the-­counter medications 
may cause acute diarrhea (Table 14.9). The most implicated agents are 
antibiotics, acting through mechanisms other than C. difficile.
TABLE 14.8  Assessment of Degree of Dehydration
General Appearance
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Infants/young children
Thirsty; alert; restless
Thirsty; restless or listless
Drowsy or lethargic; limp, cold, sweaty, cyanotic
Older children
Thirsty; alert; restless
Thirsty; alert (usually)
Usually conscious (but at reduced level), apprehensive; 
cold, sweaty, cyanotic extremities; wrinkled skin on 
fingers/toes; muscle cramps
Signs and Symptoms
Tachycardia
Absent
Present
Present
Palpable pulses
Present
Present (weak)
Decreased
Blood pressure
Normal
Orthostatic hypotension
Hypotension
Cutaneous perfusion
Normal
Normal
Reduced/mottled
Skin turgor
Normal
Slight reduction
Reduced
Fontanel
Normal
Slightly depressed
Sunken
Mucous membranes
Moist
Dry
Very dry
Tears
Present
Present/absent
Absent
Respirations
Normal
Deep, may be rapid
Deep and rapid
Urine output
Normal
Oliguria
Anuria/severe oliguria
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
250
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Food Poisoning (Table 14.10; see Fig. 14.2)
Staphylococcal food poisoning results from ingestion of preformed 
enterotoxin, produced in contaminated food that has incubated at or 
above room temperature for a suitable period. Staphylococcal food 
poisoning is suggested by the sudden onset of vomiting that is followed 
by explosive diarrhea, usually within 4–6 hours after ingestion of the 
contaminated food. The illness is self-­limited and usually resolves 
within 12–24 hours. The diagnosis is based on the typical historical 
presentation. Treatment is supportive; antibiotics are not indicated.
Bacillus cereus, a gram-­positive sporulating organism found in soil, 
is usually associated with contamination of refried rice or vegetables. 
Two food poisoning syndromes can occur. A short incubation period 
disease (1–6 hours) results from ingestion of preformed toxin and is 
characterized by nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, similar to staphylo­
coccal food poisoning. A long incubation period disease (8–16 hours) is 
caused by in vivo production of an enterotoxin and is characterized by 
abdominal pain, tenesmus, and profuse watery diarrhea. Vomiting is 
usually absent. Both syndromes resolve spontaneously within 24 hours 
and are managed with supportive care.
Clostridium perfringens food poisoning has been associated with 
ingestion of contaminated beef and poultry. The disease results from 
the production and release of an enterotoxin into the lower bowel 8–24 
TABLE 14.9  Medications and Substances 
Associated with Diarrhea in Children
Agent
Mechanism
Stimulant laxatives (e.g., senna, 
bisacodyl)
Increased intestinal secretion (phenol­
phthalein, bisacodyl)
Antacids
Osmotic effect (Mg2+)
Prokinetic agents
Increased peristalsis (metoclopramide, 
bethanechol, cisapride)
Measles-­mumps-­rubella vaccine
Unknown
Thyroid hormone
Increased peristalsis
Chemotherapeutics
Intestinal mucosal injury
Heavy metals
Toxic effect
Organophosphates
Cholinergic effects
Diuretics
Unknown
Digitalis
Unknown
Colchicine
Unknown
Indomethacin
Prostaglandin synthesis inhibition
Theophylline
Increased peristalsis
TABLE 14.10  Foodborne Gastrointestinal Illnesses
Cause
Incubation 
Period
Clinical Clues
Common Vehicle
Diagnosis
Heavy metals (copper, 
zinc, cadmium, tin)
Minutes to 2 hr
Metallic taste, diarrhea, promi­
nent vomiting, no fever
Carbonated or acidic beverages in 
metal containers
Chemical study of implicated beverage
Mushroom poisoning*
Minutes to 2 hr
Altered mental status with visual 
disturbance (encephalopathy)
Noncommercially obtained mushrooms
Identify mushroom and/or toxic chemical 
(e.g., muscarine, psilocybin)
Fish/shellfish-­related toxins*
Scombrotoxin 
poisoning
Minutes to 2 hr
Histamine reaction: flushing, 
headache, dizziness, burning of 
throat and mouth
Scombridae fish (includes tuna, mack­
erel, and bonito species), mahi-­mahi
Identify fish and/or chemical toxin (cig­
uatoxin, tetrodotoxin, histamine, etc.)
Paralytic shellfish 
poisoning
Minutes to 2 hr
Paresthesia, dizziness, sometimes 
paralysis
Mussels, clams, oysters, scallops 
contaminated with toxins, typically 
from dinoflagellate algae species
Tetrodotoxin 
­poisoning
Minutes to 2 hr
Paresthesia
Various pufferfish and angelfish 
species. The toxin is produced by 
symbiotic or infecting bacteria in the 
fish species
Ciguatoxin poisoning
2–24 hr
Itching, arthralgia, metallic taste, 
paresthesia, cramps, visual 
disturbances, “loose” painful 
teeth
Barracuda, red snapper, grouper, 
amberjack
Norovirus
24–48 hr
Epidemic watery diarrhea
Contaminated ice machines, shellfish, 
ready-­to-­eat foods
Nucleic acid amplification assays
Staphylococcal entero­
toxins
2–8 hr
Prominent vomiting, no fever, 
duration <24 hr
Ham, poultry, pastries (cream-­filled), 
mixed salads, egg salad
Identification of preformed toxin or 
isolation of 105 colony-­forming units of 
organism from food
Bacillus cereus
Emetic form: short 
incubation
2–8 hr
Prominent vomiting, no fever, 
duration <48 hr
Fried rice, macaroni and cheese, vege­
tables, other ready-­to-­eat foods left 
at room temperature. Symptoms and 
rapidity of onset are due to presence 
of preformed toxin
Identification of preformed toxin or 
isolation of 105 colony-­forming units of 
organism from food
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
251
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
hours after ingestion of the vegetative form of the organism. Onset is 
sudden, with abdominal pain and watery diarrhea. Fever and vomiting 
are absent. Treatment is supportive.
CHRONIC DIARRHEA
The etiology of chronic diarrhea is dependent on the age of the patient 
(see Table 14.1) and is additionally influenced by socioeconomic fac­
tors and the clinical setting. In countries with a lower baseline socio­
economic status, chronic diarrhea may be caused by acute infections, 
as malnutrition can prolong the course of infectious enterocolitis. The 
most common etiologies of chronic diarrhea in countries with a higher 
baseline socioeconomic status are functional intestinal disorders, 
nutrient malabsorption (e.g., cystic fibrosis), celiac disease, and IBD, 
but persistent infections of the intestinal tract may also occur. Neona­
tal or early-­infancy-­onset chronic diarrhea is often due to monogenic 
disorders (Tables 14.11 and 14.12).
History
The history should establish the age of onset, as well as the frequency 
and nature of the stools, including the presence of blood, nighttime 
stooling, urgency, weight loss, and any associated systemic symptoms. 
History should also ascertain any recent travel, other sick contacts, 
or swimming in freshwater sources. A history of recurrent infec­
tions, use of intravenous drugs, or other signs, symptoms, or risk 
factors for immunodeficiency should be documented. Family history 
should be probed for the presence of gastrointestinal disorders or 
immunodeficiency.
Physical Examination
Hydration status should be assessed. Growth parameters should be 
obtained and charted on age-­matched growth charts. The physical 
examination should assess for signs of malnutrition, vitamin and 
micronutrient deficiency, and dermatologic manifestations of systemic 
diseases. Jaundice may suggest hemolysis or hepatic dysfunction. Signs 
of fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency include bone deformities in vitamin 
D deficiency, dry scaly skin and Bitot spots (superficial buildup of 
keratin in the conjunctivae) in vitamin A deficiency, hyporeflexia or 
gait abnormalities in vitamin E deficiency, and bruises or bleeding in 
vitamin K deficiency. Joint examination may reveal arthritis associated 
with IBD. Abdominal examination may reveal evidence suggestive of 
neuroendocrine tumors, and perianal examination may reveal evi­
dence of IBD (fistula, skin tags).
Diagnostic Evaluation
The clinician should try to focus the diagnostic evaluation on only 
those conditions suggested by the history and physical examination. 
Invasive diagnostic procedures should be limited to those patients 
whose presentation contains red flags for serious disease (Table 14.13). 
Laboratory investigation should begin with microbiologic studies 
for bacteria and parasites in the stool. Acute infection with bacteria, 
such as Yersinia, E. coli, and Salmonella, may develop into a chronic 
TABLE 14.10  Foodborne Gastrointestinal Illnesses—cont’d
Cause
Incubation 
Period
Clinical Clues
Common Vehicle
Diagnosis
Diarrheal form: longer 
incubation
8–14 hr
Abdominal cramps, severe diar­
rhea, no fever, duration <48 hr
Fried rice, macaroni and cheese, vege­
tables, other ready-­to-­eat foods left 
at room temperature. Symptoms are 
due to in vivo toxin production
Identification of preformed toxin or 
isolation of 105 colony-­forming units of 
organism from food or stool
Clostridium perfringens
8–14 hr
Abdominal cramps, severe diar­
rhea, no fever, duration <48 hr
Meat, poultry, gravy
Identification of preformed toxin or 
isolation of 105 colony-­forming units of 
organism from food or stool
Enterotoxigenic Esche­
richia coli (ETEC)
12 hr to several 
days
Abdominal cramps, watery 
diarrhea may be prolonged up 
to 7 days
Incomplete data (rarely reported)
Identification of enterotoxin or isolation 
of organism from stool
Invasive E. coli
12 hr to days
Prolonged febrile diarrhea and/or 
dysentery
Incomplete data (rarely reported)
Isolation of organism from stool
Vibrio cholerae
12 hr to days
Abdominal cramps, watery diar­
rhea (rice-­water stools). May be 
prolonged up to 1 wk
Contaminated food and water (very 
rare in United states)
Isolation of organism from food or stool
Vibrio parahaemolyticus 12 hr to days
Prolonged febrile diarrhea and/or 
dysentery
Seafood
Stool culture (or food culture)
Shigella species
12 hr to days
Prolonged febrile diarrhea and/or 
dysentery
Fish, mixed salads
Stool culture (or food culture)
Campylobacter species
12 hr to days
Prolonged febrile diarrhea and/or 
dysentery
Unpasteurized milk, poultry or meat
Stool culture (or food culture)
Clostridium botulinum
12 hr to days
Diarrhea, constipation
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Home-­canned foods, fish, honey
Botulinum toxin in food, stool, and 
serum
Yersinia enterocolitica
Uncertain
Prolonged diarrhea and/or 
dysentery
Milk, pig intestine
Stool culture
*Potentially dangerous; observation in hospital often required.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:888.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
252
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 14.11  Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Chronic Diarrhea
Category
Disorder
Gene(s) Involved
Inheritance
Features
Defects in epithe­
lial nutrient and 
­electrolyte transport
Congenital chloride 
diarrhea
SLC26A3
AR
 • High chloride in stools
 • Founder effect from Saudi Arabia (Taif region) and Finland
 • Premature with IUGR
 • Absence of meconium
 • Polyhydramnios and dilated loops of bowel on prenatal imaging, 
abdominal distension after birth
 • 24% had renal involvement (chronic kidney disease)
 • Dental carries
 • Some overlap with Bartter and Gitelman syndrome
Congenital sodium 
diarrhea
SLC9A3
GUCY2C
AR
AD
 • Increased risk of development of IBD
 • Polyhydramnios and dilated loops of bowel on prenatal imaging
 • High sodium in stools
 • Diarrhea may improve with time
Glucose-­galactose 
malabsorption
SLC5A1
AR
 • Treatment requires avoidance of all sugars other than fructose
Primary bile acid diarrhea
SLC10A2
SLC51B
AR
AR
 • Associated with cholestasis, increased gamma-­glutamyl trans­
ferase level, and fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency
Acrodermatitis entero­
pathica
SLC39A4
AR
 • Perioral and extremity lesions, alopecia, and diarrhea
 • Recurrent infection from immune dysfunction
Defects in epithe­
lial enzymes and 
­metabolism
Congenital lactase 
deficiency
LCT
AR
 • Rare form of inherited diarrhea
Congenital sucrase-­
isomaltase deficiency
SI
AR
 • Bloating, diarrhea, and rarely associated with failure to thrive
 • High prevalence in Greenland and Inuit (5%), with 0.2% preva­
lence in Europeans
 • Variable phenotype
Trehalase deficiency
TREH
AR
 • Up to 8% of Greenland population
 • Similar to lactase deficiency
Enterokinase deficiency
TMPRSS15
AR
 • Deficiency of activator of pancreatic enzymes
DGAT1 deficiency
DGAT1
AR
 • Fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency
 • Avoidance of enteral lipids seems to help
Sieving protein-­losing 
enteropathy
PLVAP
AR
 • Protein loss of specific sizes
 • Syndromic with hydrops, dysmorphic facies, cardiac and renal 
abnormalities
Abetalipoproteinemia
MTTP
AR
 • Enterocytes show lipid-­filled vacuoles
 • Steatorrhea and failure to thrive
 • Later noted to have fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency and bleeding 
issues
Hypobetalipoproteinemia
APOB
AR
Chylomicron retention 
disease
SAR1B
AR
Dyskeratosis congenita
DKC1
RTEL1
X
AR
 • Nail pitting, leukoplakia, and immune defects
Kabuki syndrome
KMT2D
AD
 • Multiple congenital anomalies with varying phenotype
Defects in epithelial 
trafficking and 
polarity
Microvillus inclusion 
disease
MYO5B
AR
 • Microvilli seen on electron microscopy are periodic acid–Schiff 
positive
 • May be associated with Fanconi syndrome
STX3
AR
 • Rare form. May be associated with neurologic findings
Tufting enteropathy
EPCAM
AR
 • Teardrop-­shaped tufts of enterocytes throughout the intestine
Syndromic sodium-­losing 
diarrhea
SPINT2
AR
 • Phenotype similar to tufting enteropathy, but with sodium-­losing 
diarrhea
Trichohepatoenteric 
syndrome
TTC37
AR
 • Woolly hair, SCID-­like phenotype and hepatic defects
SKIV2L
AR
Familial hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis 
type 5
STXBP2
AR
 • Recurrence after HSCT, villous blunting
Multiple intestinal 
atresia
TTC7A
AR
 • Variable phenotype with multiple intestinal atresia, SCID-­like 
phenotype, and enterocolitis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
253
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
TABLE 14.11  Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Chronic Diarrhea—cont’d
Category
Disorder
Gene(s) Involved
Inheritance
Features
Enteroendocrine cell 
dysfunction
Enteric anendocrinosis
NEUROG3
AR
 • Severe malabsorptive diarrhea, neonatal-­onset diabetes melli­
tus, and normal intestinal biopsies
Proprotein convertase 1/3 
deficiency
PCSK1
AR
 • Age-­dependent phenotype. Infants have TPN-­dependent 
diarrhea and failure to thrive. Later appear to lose intestinal 
phenotype and develop multiple endocrine abnormalities
X-­linked lissencephaly 
with abnormal genitalia
ARX
X
 • Seizures, abnormal genitalia, survival between 6 days and 6 yr
Mitchell-­Riley syndrome
RFX6
AR
 • Lack of enteroendocrine cells
Intractable congenital 
diarrhea in infants
ICR
AR
 • Secretory diarrhea caused by a noncoding variant with wide-­
ranging effects on multiple intestinal genes
Immune disregula­
tion–associated 
enteropathy
Immune disregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy X-­linked
FOXP3
X
 • Polyendocrinopathy
Common variable 
immune deficiency 
(CVID) type 1
ICOS
AR
 • Variable presentation. May have dietary-­induced diarrhea
CVID type 8
LRBA
AR
ADAM17 deficiency
ADAM17
AR
 • Fatal in most patients
EGFR deficiency
EGFR
AR
 • Described in three patients
CTLA-­4
CTLA-­4
AD
 • Similar to LRBA. May respond to abatacept
CD55 deficiency
CD55
AR
 • Protein-­losing enteropathy and thrombosis
X-­linked inhibitor of 
apoptosis
XIAP
X
 • Responsive to HSCT
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IBD, 
inflammatory bowel disease; IUGR intrauterine growth restriction; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; TPN, total parenteral nutrition; X, 
X-­linked.
From Elkadri AA. Congenital diarrheal syndrome. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:87–104 (Table 2, pp 94–96).
TABLE 14.12  Pancreatic Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Chronic Diarrhea
Cystic fibrosis
AR
Pathologic genetic variants involving 
CFTR. More than 1,300 patho­
logic genetic variants have been 
described. Most common is patho­
logic genetic variant ΔF508
Meconium ileus in neonate
Megacolon
Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic insufficiency starting from 
1 mo of age
Failure to thrive
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
Low stool elastase
High sweat chloride (>60 mEq/L)
Newborn screening
Molecular genetic testing
Shwachman-­Diamond 
syndrome
AR
SBDS gene in over 90%
Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic insufficiency
Bone marrow failure
Skeletal changes
Pancreatic lipomatosis on diagnostic imaging (ultrasound or 
computed tomography)
Clinical features
Molecular genetic testing
Johanson-­Blizzard 
syndrome
AR
UBRI gene
Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic insufficiency
Dysmorphic features: aplastic alae nasi, extension of the 
hairline to the forehead with upswept frontal hair, low-­set 
ears, large anterior fontanel, micrognathia, thin lips, micro­
cephaly, aplasia cutis (patchy distribution of hair with areas 
of alopecia), dental anomalies, poor growth, and anorectal 
anomalies (mainly imperforate anus)
Clinical features
Molecular genetic testing
Pearson syndrome
Sporadic: caused by de novo single, 
large deletions of mtDNA, which 
can range from 1,000 to 10,000 
nucleotides
Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic insufficiency
Sideroblastic anemia, variable neutropenia, thrombocytope­
nia, and vacuolization of bone marrow precursors
Lactic acidosis and liver failure
Clinical features
Molecular genetic testing
AR, autosomal recessive; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; cGMP, cyclic immunoglobulin; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
254
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
illness and can be detected by routine stool cultures and multiplex PCR 
assays. C. difficile testing should be performed, especially in the pres­
ence of risk factors. Antigen detection and PCR-­based assays for Giar­
dia and Cryptosporidium are more sensitive and specific than routine 
microscopy-­based examinations and are indicated if these infections 
are suspected.
Except in the setting of neonatal-­onset diarrhea and factitious 
diarrhea, stool electrolytes and osmolality are of limited use. The 
differentiation of osmotic and secretory diarrhea is typically made 
by a trial of fasting and determining if there is improvement in the 
stool output: osmotic diarrhea improves or resolves upon fasting, 
whereas secretory diarrhea does not. Stool reducing substances are 
positive in the setting of osmotic diarrhea secondary to carbohy­
drate malabsorption. In patients with osmotic diarrhea and negative 
reducing substances, it is essential to determine whether steatorrhea 
is present. If qualitative assays for fecal fat are negative, a more pre­
cise indication of steatorrhea may be obtained by quantifying fecal 
fat and calculating the coefficient of fat absorption, which requires 
a 72-­hour collection of stool. Low fecal elastase suggests pancre­
atic insufficiency. Elevated levels of stool α1-­antitrypsin (A1AT) 
are suggestive of protein-­losing enteropathy (PLE). Elevated fecal 
calprotectin or fecal lactoferrin are indicative of intestinal inflam­
mation. The presence of fecal leukocytes or occult blood may indi­
cate mucosal inflammation as well, though neither is sufficiently 
sensitive nor specific.
Blood tests should include a CBC to evaluate for anemia and 
thrombocytosis, which may suggest blood loss and inflammation, 
respectively. In the presence of anemia, red blood cell indices may 
reveal a microcytosis potentially indicative of iron deficiency or a 
macrocytosis suggestive of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency. A nor­
mocytic anemia may be seen in chronic inflammatory diseases. 
White blood cell count and differential and quantification of immu­
noglobulins A, G, and M screen for immune deficiency disorders. 
Elevated ESR and CRP indicate inflammation but are nonspecific. 
Low albumin could be indicative of an inflammatory process or PLE. 
Elevated antitissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A (IgA) anti­
body is sensitive and specific for celiac disease, but a low total serum 
IgA level may result in a false-­negative test. Levels of the fat-­soluble 
vitamins A, 25-­OH vitamin D, vitamin E, and vitamin K (reflected 
by prothrombin time) may be measured if fat malabsorption is 
suspected.
The algorithmic approach to evaluating chronic diarrhea is depicted 
in Figure 14.3A and B and is enumerated in Table 14.14.
Disorders of Carbohydrate Malabsorption
The brush border epithelium of the small bowel contains enzymes 
necessary for carbohydrate digestion. These enzymes hydrolyze disac­
charides and oligosaccharides into monosaccharides that are then 
absorbed by transporters on the luminal surface of enterocytes. Carbo­
hydrate malabsorption is secondary to either deficiency of a particular 
enzyme (e.g., congenital sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency) or an abnor­
mality in a transport protein involved with the absorption of monosac­
charides (e.g., glucose-­galactose malabsorption). The onset of various 
carbohydrate malabsorption syndromes can vary based on the timing 
of the introduction of particular carbohydrates (Table 14.15).
Patients with carbohydrate malabsorption disorders present with 
severe watery diarrhea, which results from osmotic action exerted by 
the malabsorbed carbohydrate in the intestinal lumen. Colonic bac­
teria ferment the malabsorbed sugars, which generates a mixture of 
gases (e.g., hydrogen, methane, and carbon dioxide) and short-­chain 
fatty acids. These gases form the basis of carbohydrate-­specific breath 
hydrogen testing, which is often used in diagnosis. The stools become 
acidified to a pH of less than 7, which can lead to diaper dermatitis.
Disaccharidase Deficiency
Congenital sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency (CSID). CSID is an 
inherited deficiency of the ability to hydrolyze sucrose, maltose, and 
starch. Exposure to these substances leads to osmotic diarrhea, pain, 
bloating, abdominal distension, and, at times, chronic malnutrition and 
failure to thrive. The sucrase-­isomaltase gene is located on chromosome 
3 (3q25.2-­q26.2) and more than 25 pathogenic variants in the gene 
have been identified. These variants result in a variety of defects in the 
structure and function of the enzyme, including isolated deficiencies 
in sucrase activity or isomaltase activity. This genetic heterogeneity 
results in phenotypic variability ranging from completely absent to 
low-­residual sucrase activity, and from completely absent to normal 
isomaltase activity. Because sucrase-­isomaltase is responsible for up 
to 80% of the maltase activity in the brush border, maltase activity is 
significantly reduced in almost all cases.
The exact prevalence of CSID is unclear, although rates are as 
high as 10% in the Greenland Inuit population, 7% in Canadians of 
indigenous ancestry, and about 3% in Alaskans of indigenous ances­
try. Estimates of the prevalence of CSID in other North American and 
European populations generally range from 1 in 500 to 1 in 2,000.
The classic presentation of CSID is severe watery diarrhea, failure 
to thrive, irritability, and diaper dermatitis in a 9-­ to 18-­month-­old 
infant who has been exposed to sucrose and starch in the form of 
fruit juices, fruit purees, and starch-­laden foods such as crackers and 
cookies (see Table 14.4). Intrinsic factors that contribute to the sever­
ity of presentation during infancy include the shorter length of the 
colon and a decreased capacity for colonic reabsorption of fluid and 
electrolytes, more rapid small intestinal transit, a high-­carbohydrate 
diet, and lower levels of amylase prior to 2 years of age. Some patients 
with milder sucrase deficiency may improve with age as their colonic 
bacteria develop an increased capacity to ferment residual sucrose 
and the intestinal tract develops an increased capacity for reabsorp­
tion. Patients may be misdiagnosed as having food allergies or irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS) or may remain undiagnosed. Symptoms may 
abate with the restriction of carbohydrate in the diet or with the use of 
enteral sucrase enzyme supplements.
Diagnosis typically involves endoscopy for histologic examination 
of small bowel morphology and measurement of disaccharidase levels 
on biopsy specimens. Diagnosis requires the following:
	1.	 Normal small bowel morphology
	2.	 Absent or markedly reduced sucrase activity
	3.	 Isomaltase activity varying from absent to full activity
TABLE 14.13  Red Flags in the Evaluation 
of Diarrhea
Presence of blood in stools
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Persistent right upper or right lower quadrant abdominal pain
Involuntary weight loss or growth failure
Delayed puberty
Presence of associated symptoms, such as unexplained fever, suggesting 
inflammatory arthritides or other systemic diseases
Nocturnal fecal urgency or diarrhea
Perirectal/perianal disease
Persistent dysphagia
Edema, hypoalbuminemia
Cutaneous lesions
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
255
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
Stool studies for:
Ova and parasites
pH
Reducing substances
Stool culture and/or
   nucleic acid
   amplification assays
Food protein–induced 
enterocolitis syndrome 
(see Chapter 15)
Bacterial 
gastroenteritis
Clostridioides 
difficile
Consider:
Stool for blood, fecal leukocytes,
   ova and parasites, fecal fat
Stool culture
Stool for Giardia antigen
Clostridioides difficile toxin
CBC
ALT
GGT
Sweat chloride
Stool and serum electrolytes
Serum zinc level
Immunoglobulins 
Postinfectious
enteritis
Excessive juice 
(sorbitol) intake
Hirschsprung
disease
Postinfectious enteritis
Protozoa (Giardia,
Cryptosporidium) 
Excessive juice
(sorbitol) intake
Carbohydrate malabsorption
(congenital disaccharidase 
deficiciency)
Bacterial gastroenteritis
Cystic fibrosis
Protozoa (e.g., Giardia)
Shwachman-Diamond
   syndrome
Hepatic disorders
   (cholestasis)
Immune deficiency
Autoimmune enteropathy
   (IPEX/IPEX-like disorders)
Congenital chloride-losing
   diarrhea
Bacterial gastroenteritis
Acrodematitis enteropathica
Food protein–induced
   enteropathy
Postinfectious
   enteritis
Excessive juice
   (sorbitol) intake
Protein-calorie
   malnutrition
Factitious disorder by
   proxy
Microvillus inclusion
   disease
A
CHRONIC DIARRHEA IN INFANTS <6 MONTHS OF AGE
Blood-tinged diarrhea
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
YES
NO
Weight loss or poor weight gain
Stool culture
± Clostridioides difficile toxin
NO
YES
Fig. 14.3  A, The algorithmic approach to chronic diarrhea in infants younger than 6 months of age. ALT, ala­
nine aminotransferase; GGT, gamma-­glutamyl transferase; IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy, X-­linked.
	4.	 Reduced maltase activity
	5.	 Normal lactase activity, or in the setting of reduced lactase, a 
sucrase: lactase ratio of <1.0
Other less invasive methods of diagnosis include sucrose breath 
hydrogen quantification and differential urinary disaccharide assess­
ment; however, both modalities are associated with high false-­positive 
and false-­negative rates. Furthermore, differential urinary disaccharide 
testing requires a 10-­hour urine collection specimen, which is often 
impractical in infants and younger children.
Maltase-­glucoamylase deficiency. Maltase-­glucoamylase is a 
brush border hydrolase that serves as an alternate pathway for starch 
digestion that complements sucrase-­isomaltase activity. Congenital 
maltase-­glucoamylase deficiency is rare, with only several cases 
described in the literature. Genetically, maltase-­glucoamylase 
shares approximately 59% of its sequence with sucrase-­isomaltase, 
and the enzyme has two catalytic sites that are identical to those of 
sucrase-­isomaltase. Symptoms are similar to those seen in CSID. 
Diagnosis requires the demonstration of reduced glucoamylase activity 
in the setting of normal small bowel histology and normal pancreatic 
amylase activity.
Congenital glucose-­galactose malabsorption (CGGM). Congenital 
glucose-­galactose malabsorption results from defective sodium-­
coupled transport of glucose and galactose into enterocytes. It is a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder that results from pathogenic variants in 
the sodium-­glucose cotransporter gene SGLT1 located on chromosome 
22q12.3. CGGM presents as a neonatal-­onset profuse, watery diarrhea 
that ceases immediately following the elimination of glucose and 
galactose sources from the diet. Symptoms recur if the patient is fed 
formula containing either of these carbohydrates, including polymers 
such as sucrose and lactose. The disorder may lead to dehydration and 
electrolyte abnormalities, both of which can become life threatening, 
and patients may be hypoglycemic. Stool reducing substances are 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
256
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
positive secondary to the presence of glucose in the stools. Intestinal 
morphology is normal. The diagnosis can be further established by 
an abnormal glucose breath hydrogen test and SGLT1 sequencing, 
although neither is required to confirm the diagnosis.
Congenital lactase deficiency. A rare autosomal recessive disorder 
leading to very low or complete absence of brush border lactase-­
phlorizin hydrolase activity, congenital lactase deficiency usually 
presents with diarrhea starting soon after the introduction of breast 
milk or any lactose-­containing formula. Most infants manifest within 
the first 10 days of life. Unless the disorder is recognized and treated 
quickly, the condition is life-­threatening secondary to dehydration and 
electrolyte abnormalities. Small bowel biopsies reveal normal histology 
but low or completely absent lactase concentrations. A presumptive 
diagnosis can be made if osmotic diarrhea in a neonate resolves by 
introducing lactose-­free formula.
Primary lactase deficiency (lactose intolerance). Approximately 65% 
of the world’s population has primary lactase deficiency, although 
prevalence varies by ethnicity. While primary lactase deficiency is 
nearly universal in Asian and Native American populations and is as 
high as 80% in Latino, Black, and Ashkenazi Jewish populations, as few 
as 2% of individuals of northern European ancestry are affected. Age of 
onset varies by ethnicity as well. Approximately 20% of Latino, Asian, 
Consider: 
Stool for blood, pH, reducing substances, ova and parasites
Giardia antigen
Cryptosporidium antigen
Stool culture
Clostridium difficile toxin
Bacterial gastroenteritis
Protozoa (Giardia)
Clostridioides difficile
Postinfectious enteritis
Disaccharidase deficiencies
Inflammatory bowel disease
Consider:
Stool studies for fecal leukocytes, fat, alpha-1-antitrypsin,
   and elastase
CBC with differential
ALT
GGT
ESR
CRP
HIV testing
Sweat chloride
Antitissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A
Serum immunoglobulins
Serum zinc level (if rash present)
Excessive juice (sorbitol) intake
Chronic nonspecific diarrhea (toddler’s
   diarrhea)
Postinfectious enteritis
Lactose intolerance
Irritable bowel syndrome
Constipation with overflow incontinence
Laxative abuse
Factitious disorder or factitious disorder by proxy
Postinfectious enteritis
Congenital disaccharidase deficiencies
HIV
Cystic fibrosis
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
Celiac disease
Immune deficiency
Autoimmune enteropathy (IPEX/IPEX-like disorders)
Food protein–induced enteropathy
Hepatic disorders (cholestastasis)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Acrodematitis enteropathica
Protein-calorie malnutrition
Intestinal telangectasias
B
CHRONIC DIARRHEA IN INFANTS >6 MONTHS OF AGE ( >2 WEEKS’ DURATION)
Abnormal
results
Weight loss or
poor weight gain
YES
NO
YES
NO
Fig. 14.3,  cont’d  B, The algorithmic approach to chronic diarrhea in children older than 6 months of age. ALT, 
alanine aminotransferase; GGT, gamma-­glutamyl transferase; IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinop­
athy, enteropathy, X-­linked. (Modified from Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, Kliegman RM, eds. Pediatric 
Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:87–89.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
257
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
and Black children younger than 5 years of age are affected, while White 
children typically do not develop symptoms of lactose intolerance until 
after 5 years of age. Children with clinical signs of lactose intolerance at 
an earlier age than would be typical for their ethnicity may warrant an 
evaluation for an alternate cause.
Symptoms typically develop insidiously over the course of many years, 
with most affected individuals experiencing onset of symptoms in late 
adolescence or adulthood. Within 30 minutes to 2 hours of ingesting lac­
tose, patients develop abdominal cramping and distension, foul-­smelling 
flatulence, nausea, and diarrhea. While the severity of symptoms is directly 
correlated with the quantity of ingested lactose, each individual exhibits a 
unique dose threshold beyond which symptoms develop.
Diagnosis is suggested historically. When lactose intolerance is sus­
pected, a trial of a lactose-­free diet can aid in confirming the diagno­
sis. Patients must be sure to eliminate all sources of lactose, including 
some that may be hidden (Table 14.16). Generally, a 2-­week trial of a 
strict lactose-­free diet producing resolution of symptoms, followed by 
a subsequent reintroduction of dairy foods resulting in recurrence of 
symptoms, is diagnostic. In subtler cases, hydrogen breath testing is the 
least invasive and most helpful test to diagnose lactose malabsorption.
Secondary lactase deficiency. Secondary lactase deficiency develops 
when an inflammatory process, such as a viral gastrointestinal infection, 
damages the brush border epithelium and leads to the loss of the lactase-­
containing epithelial cells from the tips of the villi. The immature epithelial 
cells that replace these are often lactase deficient, leading to lactose 
malabsorption. Secondary lactase deficiency in most children with acute 
gastroenteritis is rarely clinically significant. Most affected children can 
safely continue breast milk or standard lactose-­containing formula without 
any significant effects, although infants under 3 months of age may develop 
TABLE 14.14  Diagnostic Studies in the 
Evaluation of Chronic Diarrhea
Initial Studies
Stool examination for blood, leukocytes, reducing substances, and Clostridi­
oides difficile toxin; stool examination for ova and parasites and cultures or 
nucleic acid amplification testing for infectious pathogens
Complete blood count
Serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, 
albumin, total protein
Urinalysis and culture
Stool electrolytes
Fecal calprotectin or lactoferrin if inflammatory bowel disease suspected
Second-­Phase Studies
Sweat chloride test
Breath analysis
d-­Xylose test
Serum carotene, folate, vitamin B12, and iron levels
Fecal α1-­antitrypsin level
Fecal fat studies or coefficient of fat absorption studies
Fatty test meal, Lundh test meal
Third-­Phase Studies
Fat-­soluble vitamin levels: A, 25-­hydroxy D, and E
Contrast radiographic studies: upper gastrointestinal series or barium 
enema
Small intestinal biopsy for histology and mucosal enzyme determination
Bentiromide excretion test
Specialized Studies
Schilling test
Serum/urine bile acid determination
Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography
Provocative pancreatic secretion testing
Exome sequencing for monogenic disorders
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disease. 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1999:283.
TABLE 14.15  Typical Age of Presentation 
of Carbohydrate Malabsorption Syndromes
Carbohydrate Malabsorption 
Syndrome
Age of Symptom Onset
Congenital glucose-­galactose malab­
sorption
Neonatal period
Congenital lactase deficiency
Sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency
Weaning age
Glucoamylase deficiency
Primary lactase deficiency
Uncommon before 2 or 3 yr of age
Around 5 yr of age in Asian, Latino, 
and Black populations
Over 5 yr of age, more typically in 
adolescence in Caucasians of 
European descent
TABLE 14.16  Hidden Sources of Lactose
 • Bread and other baked goods
 • Waffles, pancakes, biscuits, cookies, and the mixes to make them
 • Processed breakfast foods such as doughnuts, frozen waffles and pan­
cakes, toaster pastries, and sweet rolls
 • Processed breakfast cereals
 • Instant potatoes, soups, and breakfast drinks
 • Potato chips, corn chips, and other processed snacks
 • Processed meats such as bacon, sausage, hot dogs, and lunch meats
 • Margarine
 • Salad dressings
 • Liquid and powdered milk-­based meal replacements
 • Protein powders and bars
 • Candies
 • Nondairy liquid and powdered coffee creamers
 • Nondairy whipped toppings
 • Certain medications
If a food label includes any of the following words, the product contains 
lactose:
 • Milk
 • Lactose
 • Whey
 • Curds
 • Milk by-­products
 • Dry milk solids
 • Nonfat dry milk powder
From National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. Lactose 
intolerance. 2015. http://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/lacto­
seintolerance.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
258
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
clinically significant symptoms. Giardiasis, cryptosporidiosis, and other 
parasites that infect the proximal small intestine often lead to lactose 
malabsorption from direct injury to the epithelial cells by the parasite. 
Secondary lactase deficiency with clinical signs of lactose intolerance can 
be seen in celiac disease, Crohn disease, and immune-­related and other 
enteropathies and should be considered if children with these diagnoses 
have symptoms of lactose intolerance. Diagnostic evaluation should 
be directed toward these entities when secondary lactase deficiency is 
suspected and an infectious etiology is not found.
Severe malnutrition can also produce secondary lactose intolerance 
via small bowel atrophy. Most infants and children with malabsorp­
tion attributable to malnutrition are able to continue to tolerate dietary 
carbohydrates, including lactose. However, the World Health Organi­
zation recommends avoidance of lactose in children with persistent 
postinfectious diarrhea lasting more than 14 days, if they fail a dietary 
trial of milk or yogurt. Treatment of secondary lactase deficiency and 
lactose malabsorption attributable to an underlying condition gener­
ally does not require elimination of lactose from the diet but, rather, 
treatment of the underlying condition.
Trehalase deficiency. Trehalose is an α(1,1)-­linked glucose dimer that 
is produced by certain bacteria, fungi, plants, and invertebrates as an energy 
source and as a method of surviving freezing temperatures or lack of water. 
Potential dietary sources include mushrooms and processed foods that 
have trehalose added to improve frozen shelf life. Symptoms are similar 
to lactose intolerance. Deficiency is rare in most populations though is 
estimated to affect up to 8% of the indigenous population in Greenland.
Tables 14.11 and 14.12 list additional important causes of chronic 
neonatal or infantile diarrhea.
Functional Diarrhea (Chronic Nonspecific Diarrhea)
Functional diarrhea, previously termed chronic nonspecific diar­
rhea or toddler’s diarrhea, typically affects children between 1 and 3 
years of age and is characterized by the passage of several watery and 
unformed stools each day. Stools are typically relatively well formed in 
the morning but become looser as the day progresses. The stools often 
have undigested vegetable matter but lack blood, mucus, or excessive 
fat. Children with functional diarrhea, if offered an unrestricted and 
age-­appropriate diet, gain weight normally. However, in an attempt to 
treat the diarrhea, many children are placed on restrictive diets that 
may lack dairy, fats, and occasionally starches; such restrictions lead 
to failure to thrive. Rome IV diagnostic criteria specify that all of the 
following must be present:
	1.	 Daily painless, recurrent passage of four or more large, unformed 
stools
	2.	 Symptoms lasting more than 4 weeks
	3.	 Onset of symptoms between 6 and 60 months of age
	4.	 No failure to thrive if caloric intake is adequate
Chronic nonspecific diarrhea is thought to be a variant of IBS, and 
a family history of IBS is common. The pathophysiology may involve 
abnormal intestinal motility with decreased mouth-­to-­anus transit 
time. Excessive fruit juice intake may also contribute to the diarrhea by 
overwhelming the carbohydrate absorptive ability of the gut. Chronic 
nonspecific diarrhea is a benign and self-­limited condition that usually 
resolves without intervention by 3–4 years of age. Parents should be 
reassured and encouraged to place the child on a regular, unrestricted 
diet to provide adequate calories. The diarrhea often improves with 
removal of prior dietary restrictions and by limiting fruit juice intake. 
Some patients may improve with increasing the fat content of the diet 
(e.g., switching from low-­fat milk to whole milk), which can slow gas­
trointestinal transit time.
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
The normal small intestine is colonized with relatively few bacteria, 
typically <104 organisms/mL, with lower concentrations in the duo­
denum and jejunum, and higher concentrations in the ileum. Various 
conditions such as short bowel syndrome, malnutrition, pseudoob­
struction, bowel strictures, and achlorhydria from medications such 
as proton pump inhibitors may result in overgrowth of aerobic and 
anaerobic bacteria in the small bowel. Symptoms of abdominal pain, 
bloating, abdominal distension, and diarrhea arise as bile acids are 
deconjugated and fatty acids are hydroxylated by bacteria, leading to an 
osmotic diarrhea. The diagnosis can be made by breath hydrogen test­
ing showing early and late rise in breath hydrogen after ingestion of lac­
tulose. Quantitative jejunal aspirate cultures showing >105 organisms/
mL are suggestive of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, although 
established cutoff ranges and specificity are imperfect.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
IBS is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain and altered bowel 
habits and typically presents in adolescence. Symptoms include abnor­
mal stool frequency (either four or more stools per day or two or fewer 
stools per week), abnormal stool form (either loose and watery or 
lumpy and hard), abnormal passage of stool (e.g., straining, urgency, 
feeling of incomplete evacuation), the passage of mucus, and bloating 
or distension. Diagnosis requires that patients have a normal physical 
examination and growth curve and meet both of the following criteria 
at least once per week for at least 2 months before diagnosis:
	1.	 Abdominal pain at least 4 days per month associated with one or 
more of the following:
	
a.	 Pain related to defecation
	
b.	 Change in the frequency of stool
	
c.	 Change in the form or appearance of stool
	2.	 After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully 
explained by another medical condition
The etiology and pathogenesis of IBS are not well understood. Vis­
ceral hypersensitivity has been well documented in children with IBS. 
Genetic predisposition, early stressful events, and ineffective coping 
mechanisms are compounding factors. Additional mechanisms may 
include infection, inflammation, intestinal trauma, allergy, and disor­
dered gut motility.
Celiac Disease
Celiac disease is an immune-­mediated systemic disorder elicited by 
exposure to gluten and related proteins in genetically susceptible indi­
viduals. Clinical presentations vary, although the hallmarks of celiac dis­
ease include enteropathy and the presence of disease-­specific antibodies. 
Prevalence is as high as 1% in Western nations, with most affected indi­
viduals presenting in childhood. A genetic predisposition is suggested 
by familial aggregation and the high concordance in monozygotic twins, 
which approaches 100%. A strong association with human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-­DQ2.5, and to a lesser degree HLA-­DQ8, has been iden­
tified. A family or personal history of autoimmune disease and certain 
genetic conditions confers a higher risk (Table 14.17).
The pathogenesis of celiac disease involves exposure to gliadin, 
a protein component of wheat gluten, or structurally related storage 
proteins (prolamines) found in rye and barley. Altered processing by 
intraluminal enzymes, changes in intestinal permeability, and activa­
tion of the innate immune response precede the development of an 
adaptive immune response that results in systemic autoimmunity and 
an inflammatory enteropathy characterized by villous atrophy, elon­
gated crypts, and intraepithelial lymphocytosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
259
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
Celiac disease symptoms are protean and reflect its systemic 
nature. The age of onset is variable, and a high degree of suspicion 
is needed. Manifestations include recurrent abdominal pain, nausea 
and vomiting, iron deficiency with or without anemia, short stature, 
aphthous stomatitis, chronic fatigue, arthritis, raised aminotrans­
ferase levels, and reduced bone mineral density (osteopenia). Rare 
manifestations include ataxia; dermatitis herpetiformis, which 
is a blistering rash with pathognomonic cutaneous IgA deposits; 
and celiac crisis, which is a rare life-­threatening syndrome mostly 
observed in children that is characterized by severe diarrhea, hypo­
proteinemia, and metabolic and electrolyte imbalances. The classic 
presentation of a toddler with chronic diarrhea, abdominal disten­
sion, and failure to thrive is uncommon. Most patients are identified 
via serologic screening in the context of a strong family history or 
other risk factors.
Serologic tests are the cornerstone of screening for celiac disease in 
patients with risk factors or a suggestive history (Table 14.18). Estab­
lishing the diagnosis is dependent on the levels of disease-­specific anti­
bodies detected. Total serum IgA should be obtained to exclude IgA 
deficiency. If total serum IgA is normal and antitissue transglutami­
nase IgA antibodies are negative, celiac disease is unlikely. Patients with 
positive antitissue transglutaminase IgA antibodies that are <10 times 
the upper limit of normal should undergo upper endoscopy with mul­
tiple biopsies. If biopsies demonstrate total or partial villous atrophy, 
elongated crypts, and increased intraepithelial lymphocytes (>25 lym­
phocytes/100 enterocytes), the diagnosis is confirmed. Patients with 
positive antitissue transglutaminase IgA antibodies that are ≥10 times 
the upper limit of normal should have antiendomysial IgA antibodies 
and HLA testing performed. If the patient is positive for antiendomy­
sial IgA antibodies and is positive for HLA-­DQ2 or HLA-­DQ8 testing, 
the diagnosis is confirmed; if either or both are negative, the patient 
should undergo biopsy.
Patients with celiac disease experience relief in their symptoms 
when placed on a strict gluten-­free diet. Complications associated with 
untreated celiac disease include osteoporosis, impaired splenic func­
tion, neurologic disorders, infertility or recurrent spontaneous abor­
tion, ulcerative jejunoileitis, and cancer. Enteropathy-­associated T-­cell 
lymphoma and adenocarcinoma of the jejunum are rare complications 
of celiac disease. Refractory celiac disease is diagnosed when there 
are persistent or recurrent malabsorptive symptoms and signs of vil­
lous atrophy on biopsy despite strict adherence to a gluten-­free diet 
for more than 12 months. Refractory celiac disease can be classified as 
type 1 (characterized by the presence of normal intraepithelial lym­
phocytes) or type 2 (characterized by abnormal intraepithelial lympho­
cytes; clonal intraepithelial lymphocytes lacking surface markers CD3, 
CD8, and T-­cell receptors; or both). Type 2 refractory celiac disease is 
associated with a higher risk of ulcerative jejunoileitis and lymphoma.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
IBD is divided broadly into ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease, 
idiopathic systemic chronic inflammatory diseases whose primary 
symptoms are related to relapsing gastrointestinal tract inflamma­
tion. Common signs and symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
blood in the stools, and nutritional compromise. Ulcerative colitis 
consists of mucosal inflammation restricted to the colon, while Crohn 
disease consists of transmural inflammation that affects all layers of 
the intestinal wall and may involve any portion of the gastrointestinal 
tract from the mouth to the anus. Ulcerative colitis involves the colon 
in a continuous fashion, typically starting in the rectum and extending 
proximally to variable degrees. Crohn disease is characterized by skip 
lesions, in which there are areas of normal-­appearing mucosa inter­
spersed with inflammatory lesions.
The prevalence of ulcerative colitis is as high as 246 per 100,000 per­
sons, and the prevalence of Crohn disease is as high as 199 per 100,000 
persons. Approximately 25% of all IBD is diagnosed in children and 
adolescents.
Clinical Presentation
Up to 80% of children with Crohn disease will present with diarrhea. 
Stool may contain microscopic blood although may not be grossly 
bloody, especially in the absence of significant left-­sided colonic disease. 
Diarrhea is more common in colonic disease and may be absent alto­
gether in cases of isolated small bowel inflammation. In ulcerative coli­
tis, diarrhea is a more consistent presenting feature, often insidious in 
its development but eventually progressing to hematochezia. Nocturnal 
diarrhea with urgency may be a sign of left-­sided colonic inflammation 
in both entities. Gastrointestinal and extraintestinal manifestations oth­
erwise vary between Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis (Table 14.19). 
Extraintestinal manifestations are present in up to 23% of children at 
diagnosis, with a higher frequency in those over 6 years of age.
TABLE 14.17  Conditions Whose Presence 
Confers a Higher Risk of Celiac Disease
Condition
Incidence of Celiac 
Disease (%)
First-­degree relative with celiac disease
2–20
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
3–12
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
1.5–2.5
Trisomy 21
0.3–5.5
Turner syndrome
6.5
Williams syndrome
9.5
IgA nephropathy
4
IgA deficiency
3
Autoimmune thyroid disease
3
Autoimmune liver disease
13.5
IgA, immunoglobulin A.
TABLE 14.18  Serologic Tests for Celiac Disease
Test
Sensitivity (Percent)
Specificity (Percent)
Comments
Antitissue transglutaminase IgA
>95 (73–100)
>95 (77–100)
Recommended screening test
Antitissue transglutaminase IgG
Widely variable (12.6–99.3)
Widely variable (86.3–100)
Useful in patients with IgA deficiency
Antiendomysial antibody IgA
>90.0 (82.6-­100)
98.2 (94.7–100)
Useful in patients with an uncertain 
diagnosis. Expensive.
Antideamidated gliadin peptide IgG
>90.0 (80.1–98.6)
>90.0 (86.0–96.9)
Useful in patients with IgA deficiency 
and young children
IgA, immunoglobulin A; IgG, immunoglobulin G.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
260
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Physical examination should establish nutritional status and 
include an assessment of growth parameters, including the review of 
previous growth charts. Pubertal status should also be recorded. Oral 
cavity examination should look for aphthous ulcers that are present in 
approximately 10% of IBD patients (more commonly in Crohn disease). 
An eye examination should look for episcleritis, painful inflammation 
of the outer layer of the sclera, and patients with known IBD should 
be followed by an ophthalmologist to assess for uveitis and keratopa­
thy. A detailed abdominal examination should document abdominal 
distension, mass, tenderness, and hyper-­ or hypoactive bowel sounds. 
Particular attention should be paid to assessing the perianal region for 
any abscesses or fistulas. Skin examination should look for erythema 
nodosum, painful raised red lesions about 1–3 cm in diameter typi­
cally found on the shins; pyoderma gangrenosum, a severe ulcerating 
rash; and psoriatic lesions. Two clinical features suggest a diagnosis of 
Crohn disease over ulcerative colitis: the presence of perianal disease 
and the presence of stricturing and fistulizing disease of the bowel. No 
other systemic or extraintestinal manifestations reliably suggest one 
diagnosis over the other (Table 14.20).
Diagnosis
IBD is a clinical diagnosis that integrates history and physical findings 
with objective data from imaging studies, laboratory evaluation, and 
endoscopic findings including histopathology. Diagnosis should nei­
ther be confirmed nor excluded on any one variable or result: up to 
54% of patients with mild ulcerative colitis and 21% of patients with 
mild Crohn disease have normal hemoglobin, albumin, CRP, and ESR 
levels at the time of initial diagnosis. Important mimics of IBD include 
IBS, Behçet disease, infectious enterocolitis (particularly enterovirus 
and Yersinia), and tuberculosis (Tables 14.21 and 14.22). As such, every 
TABLE 14.19  Clinical Manifestations of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Manifestation
Comments
Gastrointestinal
Diarrhea with or without blood
Isolated small bowel Crohn disease 
may not manifest with diarrhea or 
grossly bloody stools
Abdominal pain
Hematochezia
More common in ulcerative colitis
Anorexia, weight loss, and fatigue
More common in Crohn disease
Growth failure and pubertal delay
More common in Crohn disease
Abdominal mass
Only in Crohn disease
Fever and night sweats
More common in Crohn disease
Vomiting and nausea
Seen in both but severe would suggest 
intestinal obstructive process from 
Crohn disease
Extraintestinal
Iritis and uveitis
More common in Crohn disease
Aphthous ulceration
More common in Crohn disease
Erythema nodosum
More common in Crohn disease
Pyoderma gangrenosum
More common in ulcerative colitis
Musculoskeletal
 • Axial arthropathy and ankylosing 
spondylitis
 • Polyarticular arthritis
 • Pauciarticular arthritis
 • Osteoporosis
Liver
 • Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 • Autoimmune hepatitis and 
overlap syndrome
 • Cholelithiasis
Autoimmune pancreatitis
Cardiovascular
 • Myocarditis
 • Pericarditis
Pulmonary Crohn disease
Commonly involves large airways, 
but parenchymal disease, such as 
organizing pneumonia, interstitial 
disease, and necrobiotic nodules, 
has been described
Renal
 • Nephritis
 • Amyloidosis
 • Urolithiasis (especially oxalate 
stones)
More common in Crohn disease 
compared to ulcerative colitis
Hematologic
 • Iron-­deficiency anemia, anemia 
of chronic disease, vitamin B12 
deficiency or folate deficiency
 • Immune thrombocytopenia
 • Deep vein thrombosis
TABLE 14.20  Comparison of Crohn 
Disease and Ulcerative Colitis
Feature
Crohn Disease
Ulcerative Colitis
Malaise, fever, weight loss
Common
Common
Rectal bleeding
Sometimes
Usual
Abdominal mass
Common
Rare
Abdominal pain
Common
Common
Perianal disease
Common
Rare
Ileal involvement
Common
None (backwash ileitis)
Strictures
Common
Unusual
Fistula
Common
Very rare
Skip lesions
Common
Not present
Transmural involvement
Usual
Not present
Crypt abscesses
Variable
Usual
Intestinal granulomas
Common
Rarely present
Risk of cancer*
Increased
Greatly increased
Erythema nodosum
Common
Less common
Mouth ulceration
Common
Rare
Osteopenia at onset
Yes
No
Autoimmune hepatitis
Rare
Yes
Sclerosing cholangitis
Rare
Yes
*Colonic cancer, cholangiocarcinoma, lymphoma in Crohn disease.
From Bishop WP, Ebach DR. Intestinal tract. In: Marcdante KJ, Klieg­
man RK, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2015:437–444.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
261
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
TABLE 14.21  Differential Diagnoses of Presenting Symptoms of Crohn Disease
Primary Presenting Symptom
Differential Diagnosis
Right lower quadrant abdominal pain, with or 
without mass
Appendicitis, infection (e.g., Campylobacter, Yersinia species, tuberculosis, or atypical mycobacteria), lymphoma, 
intussusception, mesenteric adenitis, Meckel diverticulitis, ovarian cyst or ovarian torsion, ectopic pregnancy
Chronic periumbilical or epigastric abdominal pain
Irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, lactose intolerance, peptic ulcer disease, functional dyspepsia
Rectal bleeding, no diarrhea
Fissure, polyp, Meckel diverticulum, solitary rectal ulcer syndrome
Bloody diarrhea
Infection, allergic colitis, hemolytic uremic syndrome, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, ischemic bowel, radiation 
colitis
Watery diarrhea
Irritable bowel syndrome, lactose intolerance, giardiasis, Cryptosporidium infection, sorbitol, laxatives
Perirectal disease
Fissure, hemorrhoid (rare), streptococcal infection, condyloma (rare)
Growth delay
Endocrinopathy
Anorexia, weight loss
Celiac disease, other systemic illnesses, anorexia nervosa
Arthritis
Collagen vascular disease, infection
Liver abnormalities
Chronic hepatitis
Oral ulcers
Celiac disease
TABLE 14.22  Infectious Agents Mimicking Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Agent
Manifestations
Diagnosis
Comments
Bacteria
Campylobacter jejuni
Acute diarrhea, fever, fecal blood and leukocytes
Culture or nucleic acid amplification assay Common in adolescents, may relapse
Yersinia enterocolitica
Acute diarrhea that can become chronic, right 
lower quadrant pain, mesenteric adenitis–pseu­
doappendicitis, fecal blood and leukocytes
Culture or nucleic acid amplification 
assay
Common in adolescents as fever of 
unknown origin, weight loss, abdominal 
pain
Extraintestinal manifestations may mimic Crohn 
disease
Clostridioides difficile
Onset during or following a course of antibiotics, 
watery → bloody diarrhea, pseudomembrane on 
sigmoidoscopy
Cytotoxin assay or nucleic acid amplifi­
cation assay
May be nosocomial
Toxic megacolon possible
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Colitis, fecal blood, abdominal pain
Culture and typing or nucleic acid 
amplification assay
Hemolytic uremic syndrome possible
Salmonella
Watery → bloody diarrhea, foodborne, fecal leuko­
cytes, fever, pain, cramps
Culture or nucleic acid amplification 
assay
Usually acute
Shigella
Watery → bloody diarrhea, fecal leukocytes, fever, 
pain, cramps
Culture or nucleic acid amplification 
assay
Dysentery symptoms
Edwardsiella tarda
Bloody diarrhea, cramps
Culture
Ulceration on endoscopy
Aeromonas hydrophila
Cramps, diarrhea, fecal blood
Culture
May be chronic
May be acquired from contaminated drink­
ing water or swimming in contaminated 
pools or freshwater sources
Plesiomonas shigelloides
Diarrhea, cramps
Culture
Shellfish source
Tuberculosis
Rarely bovine, now Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Culture, purified protein derivative, biopsy, 
interferon gamma release assay
Can mimic Crohn disease
Ileocecal area, fistula formation
Parasites
Entamoeba histolytica
Acute bloody diarrhea and liver abscess, colic
Trophozoite in stool, colonic mucosal 
flask ulceration, serologic tests
Travel to endemic area
Giardia lamblia
Foul-­smelling, watery diarrhea, cramps, flatulence, 
weight loss; no colonic involvement
“Owl”-­like trophozoite and cysts in 
stool; rarely duodenal intubation
May be chronic
Opportunistic Organisms in the Setting of Immune Deficiency
Cryptosporidium
Chronic diarrhea, weight loss
Stool microscopy
Mucosal findings not like inflammatory 
bowel disease
Isospora belli
Chronic diarrhea, weight loss
Stool microscopy
Tropical location
Cytomegalovirus
Colonic ulceration, pain, bloody diarrhea
Culture, biopsy
More common when on immunosuppres­
sive medications
From Grossman AB, Baldassano RN. Chronic ulcerative colitis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pedi­
atrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:1823.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
262
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
patient with a history and examination suggestive of IBD should have 
stool studies for infectious organisms and special request should be 
made for Yersinia culture if multiplex PCR assays that include Yersinia 
testing are not available. Patients presenting with suggestive symptoms 
prior to 6 years of age may require an evaluation for an underlying 
immune disregulation disorder as an additional mimic of IBD (Table 
14.23). Stool biomarkers such as calprotectin and lactoferrin should be 
utilized to exclude noninflammatory causes before considering endo­
scopic procedures. The suggested diagnostic evaluation of suspected 
IBD is presented in Table 14.24.
TABLE 14.23  Known Defects Associated with Very Early-­Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
and Associated Extraintestinal Manifestations and Laboratory Findings
Defects
Gene Defect
Extraintestinal Immune, Hematologic, or 
Somatic Manifestations
Laboratory Findings and Functional 
Evaluation
IPEX and IPEX-­Like Disorders
IPEX
FOXP3
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, cytopenia, hepatitis and kidney 
disease, eczema, food allergy, eosinophilia
Decrease in regulatory T-cell number and function
Decreased FOXP3 expression
CD25 deficiency
CD25
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, cytopenia, eczema, gingivitis, 
alopecia universalis, bullous pemphigoid, CMV, EBV disease
Absent CD25 expression
STAT5b deficiency
STAT5B
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, eczema, short stature, intersti­
tial pneumonitis, alopecia universalis, bullous pemphigoid, 
varicella and herpes zoster infections
Variable immune abnormality
Normal to low T, B, and NK cells
STAT1 GOF variant
STAT1
Mucocutaneous candidiasis, short stature, eczema, autoim­
mune endocrinopathy, sinopulmonary infection, hyperten­
sion, aneurysm
Most have normal regulatory T-cell number 
and FOXP3 expression, abnormal STAT1 
phosphorylation studies
STAT3 GOF variant
STAT3
Multisystem autoimmunity, variable short stature, lympho­
proliferation
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class-­switched memory B cells
LRBA deficiency
LRBA
Multisystem autoimmunity, cytopenia, arthritis, recurrent sin­
opulmonary infection, granuloma, hypogammaglobulinemia
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class-­switched memory B cells
CTLA4 haploinsufficiency
CTLA4
Diarrhea, enteropathy, hypogammaglobulinemia, granulo­
matous lymphocytic interstitial lung disease, multisystem 
autoimmunity
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class-­switched memory B cells
ADA-­2 deficiency
ADA2
Multiorgan disease, vasculopathy, stroke, IBD-­like GI illness, 
autoimmune, autoinflammatory, livedo racemosa
Cytopenias, hypogammaglobulinemia
Defects in IL-­10 Signaling
Defects in IL-­10 and IL-­10R
IL-­10RA
IL-­10RB
IL-­10
Perianal fistula, folliculitis, arthritis, abscess, lymphoma
STAT3 phosphorylation by IL-­6 and IL-­10 
studies*
Defects in Neutrophil Function
CGD
CYBB
CYBA
NCF1
NCF2
NCF4
Perianal fistula, recurrent cold abscess from catalase-­positive 
organisms,† gastric outlet obstruction
Decreased neutrophil oxidative burst study
Elevated IgG
Glycogen storage disease 1b
SLC37A4
Recurrent bacterial infections, hypoglycemic seizures, 
hepatomegaly
Neutropenia, hypoglycemia, hyperuricemia, 
hyperlipidemia
Leukocyte adhesion defect
ITGB2
Neutrophilia, recurrent bacterial infections, delayed separa­
tion of umbilical cord, poor wound healing
Leukocytosis
Absent CD18 expression
Congenital neutropenia
G6PC3
Cutaneous vascular malformation and cardiac defect
Severe neutropenia
Hyperinflammatory Disorders
XIAP
BIRC4
Perianal fistula, recurrent HLH, EBV, and CMV infections, 
hypogammaglobinemia
Markedly elevated IL-­18
Decreased or absent XIAP protein expression 
by flow
NLRC4 GOF variant
NLRC4
Recurrent macrophage activation, rash
Markedly elevated IL-­18
Mevalonate kinase deficiency
MVK
Recurrent fever, rash, abdominal pain, and emesis
Elevated inflammatory markers
Elevated IgD
Elevated urine mevalonate
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
263
CHAPTER 14  Diarrhea
TABLE 14.23  Known Defects Associated with Very Early-­Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
and Its Associated Extraintestinal Manifestations and Laboratory Findings—cont’d
Defects
Gene Defect
Extraintestinal Immune, Hematologic, or 
Somatic Manifestations
Laboratory Findings and Functional 
Evaluation
Familial Mediterranean fever
MEFV
Recurrent fever, abdominal pain, arthralgia, peritonitis
Elevated inflammatory markers
Familial HLH type 5
STXBP2
HLH, hypogammaglobinemia, sensorineural hearing loss
Marked elevated ferritin and sIL-­2R
Decreased CD107a degranulation
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
HPS1
HPS4
HPS6
Partial albinism, bleeding tendency, recurrent infection, and 
immunodeficiency
Decreased CD107a degranulation
Defects in Epithelial Barrier Function
TTC7A deficiency
TTC7A
Varying degree of intestinal atresia, T-­cell immune defect, 
and recurrent infections
Mild to severe T-­cell immune deficiency
Hypogammaglobinemia
X-­linked ectodermal immunodefi­
ciency (NEMO deficiency)
IKBKG
Varying degree of ectodermal dysplasia, conical teeth, space 
and brittle hair; recurrent bacterial, viral, and mycobacterial 
infections
Hypogammaglobinemia
Decreased class-­switched memory B cells
ADAM17 deficiency
ADAM17
Neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease, generalized 
pustular rash
Normal T-­cell and B-­cell numbers
Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa COL7A1
Blistering disorder primarily affects the hands, feet, knees, 
and elbows
Unremarkable immune findings
Kindler syndrome
FERMT1
Acral skin blistering, photosensitivity, progressive poikilo­
derma, and diffuse cutaneous atrophy
Eosinophilia
Isolated or Combined T-­Cell and B-­Cell Immune Defects
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
BTK
Recurrent sinopulmonary infection
Absent B cells in peripheral blood
Absent plasma cells in tissue
Decreased class-­switched memory B cells
Common variable immune defect 
(CVID)
Heterogeneous group of defects with sinopulmonary infec­
tions, autoimmunity, lymphoproliferation, and variable T-­cell 
immune defect
Hypogammaglobinemia
Variable T-­cell lymphopenia
X-­linked hyper IgM (CD40L)
CD40L
Sclerosing cholangitis, cryptosporidium diarrhea, and pneu­
mocystis infection
Elevated or normal IgM, neutropenia
Absent class-­switched memory B cells
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
WAS
Eczema, recurrent infection, autoimmunity, vasculitis
Microthrombocytopenia
Variable lymphopenia, low IgM
Decreased WAS protein
Leaky SCID or Omenn
RAG1, RAG2
IL-­7Ra
IL-­2RG
Generalized erythroderma, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphade­
nopathy
Eosinophilia
T-­cell lymphopenia
Decreased naïve T cells
CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; GI, gastrointestinal; GOF, gain of function; HLH, hemophago­
cytic lymphohistiocytosis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IgD, immunoglobulin D; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; IL, interleukin; 
IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked; NEMO, nuclear factor-kappa B essential modulator; XIAP, X-­linked inhibitor 
of apoptosis.
*STAT3 signaling following IL-­6 and IL-­10 will only identify IL-­10R A and B defects; it will not identify IL-­10 deficiency.
†Staphylococcus aureus, Serratia marcescens, Burkholderia cepacia, Aspergillus, and Candida.
Modified from Chandrakasan S, Venkateswaran S, Kugathasan S. Nonclassic inflammatory bowel disease in young infants. Pediatr Clin N Am. 
2017;64:139–160 (Table 2, pp. 148–150).
TABLE 14.24  Suggested Evaluation in Suspected Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Test
Common Abnormalities/Comments
Complete blood count with differential
Anemia, especially iron deficiency
Comprehensive metabolic panel
Hypoalbuminemia, elevated liver enzymes, low alkaline phosphatase (likely 
secondary to associated zinc deficiency)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated in CD > UC
C-­reactive protein
Elevated in CD > UC
Stool cultures with Yersinia; ova and parasites
Always rule out infectious causes as the likely reason for symptoms
Clostridioides difficile toxin assay or polymerase chain reaction assay
Could be an isolated reason for symptoms or could be a superimposed illness
Fecal occult blood
Positive in vast majority of patients. No need for this test if patient has grossly 
bloody stools
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
264
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Acute diarrhea is a common childhood illness. For most children, the 
etiologic agent is of no therapeutic significance. Exceptions are giardiasis, 
pseudomembranous colitis, dysentery suggestive of Shigella infection, 
amebiasis, or Campylobacter infection, all of which necessitate specific 
treatment. Oftentimes of greater importance are the secondary compli­
cations associated with fluid and electrolyte losses and the reduced oral 
fluid intake, which may result in shock and its systemic complications.
Red flags for acute diarrhea are the manifestations of dehydration 
(see Table 14.8). Young age (younger than 6 months) is associated with 
a greater risk of dehydration, as are 10 or more stools a day and fre­
quent emesis and fever (see Table 14.13).
Chronic diarrhea may be benign or may signify a more serious 
illness associated with malabsorption, inflammation, or congenital 
defects. Red flags include onset of diarrhea in the neonatal period, 
weight loss, growth stunting, anorexia, fever, fatty stools, blood in 
stools, extraintestinal manifestations associated with intestinal disease, 
history of travel to countries with poor sanitation and water supply, 
and specific nutritional deficiencies associated with malabsorption.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Test
Common Abnormalities/Comments
Fecal calprotectin (or lactoferrin)
To distinguish inflammatory bowel disease from irritable bowel syndrome prior to 
considering invasive procedures such as endoscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and ileocolonoscopy
After ruling out other causes of patient’s symptoms
Imaging studies
 • MRI and MRE
 • CT abdomen
 • Abdominal ultrasound
Consider for evaluation of patients presenting with fistulizing or stricturing dis­
ease. Also used for evaluation of small bowel after endoscopic procedures
Wireless capsule endoscope
Consider for evaluation of small bowel in very young children in whom MRE is 
difficult or in situations where conventional endoscope and imaging tools have 
been nondiagnostic
CD, Crohn disease; MRE, magnetic resonance enterography; UC, ulcerative colitis.
TABLE 14.24  Suggested Evaluation in Suspected Inflammatory Bowel Disease—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
264.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Corinaldesi R, Stanghellini V, Barbara G, et al. Clinical approach to diarrhea. 
Intern Emerg Med. 2012;7:255–262.
Das JK, Salam RA, Bhutta ZA. Global burden of childhood diarrhea and inter­
ventions. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2014;27:451–458.
Granado-­Villar D, Cunill-­De Sautu B, Granados A. Acute gastroenteritis. 
Pediatr Rev. 2012;33:487–494; quiz 495.
Whyte LA, Jenkins HR. Pathophysiology of diarrhoea. Paediatr Int Child 
Health. 2012;22:443–447.
Acute Gastroenteritis
Bányai K, Estes MK, Martella V, et al. Viral gastroenteritis. Lancet. 
2018;392(10142):175–186.
Belliot G, Lopman BA, Ambert-­Balay K, et al. The burden of norovirus gas­
troenteritis: an important foodborne and healthcare-­related infection. Clin 
Microbiol Infect. 2014;20:724–730.
Camilleri M, Murray JA. Diarrhea and constipation. In: Kasper D, Fauci A, 
Hauser S, et al., eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New 
York: McGraw-­Hill; 2015.
Committee on Infectious Diseases, American Academy of Pediatrics. Preven­
tion of rotavirus disease: updated guidelines for use of rotavirus vaccine. 
Pediatrics. 2009;123:1412–1420.
Committee on Infectious Diseases. Clostridium difficile infection in infants and 
children. Pediatrics. 2013;131:196–200.
Cortes JE, Curns AT, Tate JE, et al. Rotavirus vaccine and health care utiliza­
tion for diarrhea in U.S. children. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1108–1117.
Cortese MM, Parashar UD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC). Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and children: 
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep). 2009;58:1–25.
Crim SM, Griffin PM, Tauxe R, et al. Preliminary incidence and trends of in­
fection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food—Foodborne 
Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 10 U.S. sites, 2006-­2014. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64:495–499.
Croxen MA, Law RJ, Scholz R, et al. Recent advances in understanding enteric 
pathogenic Escherichia coli. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2013;26:822–880.
DuPont HL. Clinical practice. Bacterial diarrhea. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1560–1569.
DuPont HL. The search for effective treatment of Clostridium difficile infection. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;364:473–475.
Guo B, Harstall C, Louie T, et al. Systematic review: faecal transplantation for 
the treatment of Clostridium difficile-­associated disease. Aliment Pharmacol 
Ther. 2012;35:865–875.
Krones E, Hogenauer C. Diarrhea in the immunocompromised patient. Gas­
troenterol Clin North Am. 2012;41:677–701.
Louie TJ, Miller MA, Mullane KM, et al. Fidaxomicin versus vancomycin for 
Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:422–431.
Man SM. The clinical importance of emerging Campylobacter species. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:669–685.
McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for 
Clostridium difficile infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66(7):e1–e48.
Nash TE. Unraveling how Giardia infections cause disease. J Clin Invest. 
2013;123:2346–2347.
Steffen R, Hill DR, DuPont HL. Traveler’s diarrhea. J Am Med Assoc. 2015;313:71.
Chronic Diarrhea
Abraham C, Cho JH. Inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;361:2066–2078.
Baumgart DC, Sandborn WJ. Crohn’s disease. Lancet. 2012;380:1590–1605.
Benninga MA, Faure C, Hyman PE, et al. Childhood functional gastro­
intestinal disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;S0016
-­5085(16)00182-7.
Binder HJ. Causes of chronic diarrhea. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:236–239.
Branski D. Disorders of malabsorption. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. 
Geme III JW, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2016:1831–1850.
Bröer S. Lysinuric protein intolerance: one gene, many problems. Am J Physiol 
Cell Physiol. 2007;293:C540–C541.
Canani RB, Castaldo G, Bacchetta R, et al. Congenital diarrhoeal disorders: 
advances in this evolving web of inherited enteropathies. Nat Rev Gastroen­
terol Hepatol. 2015;12:293–302.
Chumpitazi BP, Robayo-­Torres CC, Opekun AR, et al. Congenital sucrase-­
isomaltase deficiency. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;55:S36.
Danese S, Fiocchi C. Ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1713–1725.
Elkadri A, Thoeni C, Deharvengt SJ, et al. Mutations in plasmalemma vesicle 
associated protein result in sieving protein-­losing enteropathy character­
ized by hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. 
Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;1(4):381–394. e7.
Fasano A, Catassi C. Celiac disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2419–2426.
Fiskerstrand T, Arshad N, Haukanes BI, et al. Familial diarrhea syndrome caused 
by an activating GUCY2C mutation. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1586–1595.
Ghaferi AA, Chojnacki KA, Long WD, et al. Pancreatic VIPomas: subject re­
view and one institutional experience. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;12:382–393.
Gråfors JM, Casswall TH. Exclusive enteral nutrition in the treatment of chil­
dren with Crohn’s disease in Sweden: a questionnaire survey. Acta Paediatr. 
2011;100:1018–1022.
Henderson P, Anderson NH, Wilson DC. The diagnostic accuracy of fecal 
calprotectin during the investigation of suspected pediatric inflammatory 
bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2014;109:637–645.
Heyman MB, for the Committee on Nutrition. Lactose intolerance in infants, 
children, and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2006;118:1279–1286.
Husby S, Koletzko S, Korponay-­Szabó IR, et al. European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition guidelines for the diagnosis 
of coeliac disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;54:136–160.
Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Functional disorders: children and 
adolescents. Gastroenterology. 2016;S0016-­5085(16)00181-5.
Hyman PE, Milla PJ, Benninga MA, et al. Childhood functional gastrointesti­
nal disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2006;130:1519–1526.
Kurolap A, Eshach-­Adiv O, Gonzaga-­Jauregui C, et al. Establishing the role 
of PLVAP in protein-­losing enteropathy: a homozygous missense variant 
leads to an attenuated phenotype. J Med Genet. 2018;55(11):779–784.
Levine A, Griffiths A, Markowitz J, et al. Pediatric modification of the Mon­
treal classification for inflammatory bowel disease: the Paris classification. 
Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2010;17:1314–1321.
Levine A, Koletzko S, Turner D, et al. ESPGHAN revised porto criteria for the 
diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease in children and adolescents. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58:795–806.
Mouzaki M, Vresk L, Gonska T. Clinical challenges and images in GI. Gastro­
enterology. 2014;146:912–1138.
Saadah OI, Alghamdi SA, Sindi HH, et al. Congenital glucose-­galactose mal­
absorption: a descriptive study of clinical characteristics and outcome from 
Western Saudi Arabia. Arab J Gastroenterol. 2014;15:21–23.
Schmulson MJ, Drossman DA. What is new in Rome IV. J Neurogastroenterol 
Motil. 2017;23(2):151–163.
Tack GJ, Verbeek WHM, Schreurs MWJ, et al. The spectrum of celiac disease: 
epidemiology, clinical aspects and treatment. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepa­
tol. 2010;7:204–213.
Terrin G, Tomaiuolo R, Passariello A, et al. Congenital diarrheal disorders: an 
updated diagnostic approach. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13:4168–4185.
Treem WR. Clinical aspects and treatment of congenital sucrase-­isomaltase 
deficiency. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;55(suppl 2):S7–S13.
Van Assche G, Dignass A, Reinisch W, et al. The second European evidence-­
based consensus on the diagnosis and management of Crohn’s disease: 
special situations. J Crohns Colitis. 2010;4:63–101.
Wang DZ. Neurotoxins from marine dinoflagellates: a brief review. Mar Drugs. 
2008;6(2):349–371.
Wang J, Cortina G, Wu SV, et al. Mutant neurogenin-­3 in congenital malab­
sorptive diarrhea. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:270–280.
Zella GC, Israel EJ. Chronic diarrhea in children. Pediatr Rev. 2012;33:207–
218.
Zhang Y, Li Y. Inflammatory bowel disease: pathogenesis. World J Gastroenter­
ol. 2014;20:91–99.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
