1139
SECTION 12  Dermatology
RASHES (TABLE 60.1)
Papules and Pustules—Diffuse or Scattered
Erythema toxicum is a benign condition that occurs in 30–70% of 
White full-­term infants. Erythema toxicum occurs less frequently in 
premature infants. The eruption is characterized by blotchy, erythem­
atous macules or patches with central papules, pustules, or vesicles 
that give the infant a “flea-­bitten” appearance (Fig. 60.1). The lesions 
develop most commonly between the second and fourth days after 
birth; however, they may appear during the first 2–3 weeks. They are 
self-­limiting and usually resolve within several days. Typical sites of 
involvement include the face, trunk, and proximal extremities. There 
may be very few to hundreds of lesions.
A Giemsa or Wright stain of the intralesional contents reveals 
sheets of eosinophils with a relative absence of neutrophils. Peripheral 
eosinophilia may be present in up to 20% of affected infants. Erythema 
toxicum is occasionally confused with transient neonatal pustular mel­
anosis, congenital cutaneous candidiasis, impetigo neonatorum, milia, 
herpes simplex, or miliaria rubra (prickly heat).
Transient neonatal pustular melanosis, seen in up to 4% of neo­
nates, occurs more often in Black infants. Typically present at birth, 
the initial lesions are 2-­ to 5-­mm pustules distributed over the face, 
neck, and upper chest and, less often, on the sacrum, trunk, thighs, 
palms, and soles (Fig. 60.2). In contrast to the lesions of erythema tox­
icum, there is no erythema surrounding each pustule, and a Wright 
stain of pustular contents reveals many neutrophils. In both disorders, 
the pustules are sterile and should be distinguished from those seen in 
potentially serious infections caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV), 
Staphylococcus aureus, or Candida species.
The superficial pustules of transient neonatal pustular melanosis 
rupture spontaneously within the first few days after birth, leaving 
hyperpigmented macules that have collarettes of fine scale. It is com­
mon to see only the hyperpigmented macules at birth. These brown 
spots slowly fade over several weeks to months.
Miliaria results from sweat retention and is exacerbated by heat and 
humidity. Affected newborns are frequently in incubators or receiving 
phototherapy. Keratinous plugging of the eccrine ducts and subsequent 
release of eccrine sweat into the surrounding skin produces two dis­
tinct clinical manifestations with different sites of eccrine duct obstruc­
tion. In miliaria crystallina, obstruction occurs just below the stratum 
corneum, resulting in superficial, noninflammatory 1-­ to 2-­mm ves­
icles. In miliaria rubra, or “prickly heat,” obstruction occurs in the 
mid-­epidermis. This is associated with an inflammatory response 
exhibited by vesicles, papules, or papulovesicles surrounded by a rim 
of erythema. The lesions occur in clusters on the trunk, face, scalp, and 
intertriginous regions. Neither type of miliaria warrants therapy, but 
improvement occurs with cooling of the skin and avoidance of exces­
sive warmth and moisture.
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis is another disorder of infancy 
characterized by recurrent crops of vesicles and pustules, beginning in 
the first year of life. Lesions are often present on the forehead and scalp. 
The condition tends to occur in a cyclic pattern and is very pruritic. 
Scraped material from the pustules subjected to Wright stain demon­
strates a large number of eosinophils but no evidence of infectious 
organisms. A CBC may show peripheral eosinophilia. In rare cases, 
skin biopsy may be necessary. Histopathologic study demonstrates a 
perifollicular and dermal infiltrate of eosinophils, as well as lympho­
cytes and histiocytes. Because the clinical condition is very similar to 
infantile acropustulosis, some authors contend that eosinophilic pustu­
lar folliculitis may be part of the same clinical spectrum. This condition 
is not associated with systemic disease, and the first-­line treatment is 
symptomatic with topical corticosteroids and antihistamines. Oral and 
topical indomethacin has been effective in recalcitrant cases. Eosino­
philic pustular folliculitis usually resolves spontaneously by 2–3 years 
of age.
Acropustulosis of infancy is a condition that may present at birth 
or during the first few weeks or months afterward. The disorder is char­
acterized by recurrent eruptions of pruritic pustules or vesicles involv­
ing the hands and feet (Fig. 60.3). On occasion, involvement includes 
other sites such as the trunk or abdomen. The lesions frequently begin 
in crops, which typically last approximately 1 week, and resolve with 
desquamation, followed by postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.
Acropustulosis is often confused with infantile scabies. Family his­
tory and examination of scrapings of the involved area may help differ­
entiate between these two diagnoses. However, there is some thought 
that it may occur after a previous scabies infection. Scrapings of lesions 
in acropustulosis often demonstrate neutrophils. Bacterial infection 
should also be ruled out by wound cultures. Treatment is symptomatic 
and consists of control of pruritus with low-­ to mid-­potency topical 
corticosteroids and antihistamines. Parents should be advised that 
lesions tend to occur episodically until approximately 2–3 years of age.
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis (neonatal acne) develops in approxi­
mately 20% of newborns. Typically, it is not present at birth but appears 
during the first few weeks after birth. Characterized by papules and 
pustules located on the face or trunk, this condition usually resolves 
within the first several months of life (Fig. 60.4). Neonatal acne is a 
Congenital Cutaneous Lesions 
and Infantile Rashes
Stephen R. Humphrey
60
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1140
SECTION 12  Dermatology
misnomer as neonatal cephalic pustulosis is likely caused by Malasse­
zia yeast species. Therapeutic intervention is rarely required, but keto­
conazole 2% cream may be of some use.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare disorder, affecting 
about 5 per 1 million children, which is characterized by a proliferation 
of clonal dendritic cells, called Langerhans cells. There are four main 
types, two of which are most frequently seen in neonates and infants, 
though there is substantial overlap among the types.
Congenital self-­healing reticulohistiocytosis (Hashimoto-­Pritzker 
disease) typically presents at birth or within the first few days of life 
and is limited to the skin. There is a diffuse eruption of red to purple-­
brown papules and nodules that will crust and remit after several 
weeks. While it is considered a benign, self-­limited condition, it can 
rarely progress to other, more aggressive forms of LCH.
Letterer-­Siwe disease is the more acute, diffuse form of LCH that 
has multisystem involvement. It commonly presents before 1 year of 
age with the majority of patients having skin findings of small 1-­ to 
2-­mm papules, pustules, and vesicles, typically on the scalp, intertrigi­
nous areas, and trunk (Fig. 60.5). The lesions are often crusted and may 
have secondary bacterial infections. Fissures and confluence of papules 
can be seen. It can be confused with seborrheic dermatitis and other 
forms of diaper dermatitis (Table 60.2).
Patches and Plaques
Patches are confluent, flat lesions over 1 cm in size, while plaques are 
slightly raised lesions over 1 cm in size. Many of these conditions have 
overlapping features but can often be distinguished by their location, 
distribution, and response to certain treatments (see Table 60.1).
Neonatal lupus erythematosus is a unique annular erythematous 
eruption during the neonatal period. It affects 1 in 12,000–20,000 live 
births. Congenital cases are even more uncommon. Lesions of neo­
natal lupus are often scaly, annular plaques that usually occur on the 
face and scalp and may affect the periorbital and malar areas, creating 
Fig. 60.2  Transient neonatal pustular melanosis. Papules and papulo­
pustules rupture to leave a collarette of fine scales and eventual hyper­
pigmentation. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Cutaneous disorders of the 
newborn. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Der­
matology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011:18.)
Fig. 60.3  Acropustulosis of infancy. Multiple tense erythematous pap­
ules and pustules on the palm of this 4-­month-­old girl. (From Paller AS, 
Mancini AJ. Cutaneous disorders of the newborn. In: Paller AS, Mancini 
AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2011:19.)
Fig. 60.4  Neonatal acne (cephalic pustulosis) is usually found on the 
cheeks and scalp in the first 2–4 weeks of life; small red papules and 
pustules without comedones are evident. (Modified from Eichenfield 
LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadel­
phia: Saunders; 2001:94.)
Fig. 60.1  Papules surrounded by erythema are characteristic of ery­
thema toxicum. Typically it is located on the trunk but can be on the 
extremities as well.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1141
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
A
B
D
C
Fig. 60.5  Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). A–C, Erythematous and eroded papules in the neck fold and 
inguinal creases and over the trunk. Note the associated crusting, purpura, and umbilicated nature of some 
of the papules. D, Eroded, erythematous, and hemorrhagic papules in the groin of this infant with dissemi­
nated LCH. Note the associated jaundiced appearance, a result of massive liver involvement. (From Paller AS, 
Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:232, Fig. 10-­2.)
TABLE 60.1  Neonatal and Infantile Cutaneous Lesions
RASHES
Papules and Pustules
Erythema toxicum
Occurs first few days of life
Blotchy red macules with central papule, 
pustule, or vesicle
Transient neonatal pustular 
melanosis
Present at birth
More common in African-­American infants
Pustules resolve with hyperpigmented macules
Miliaria
Associated with overheating
Vesicles and pustules in occluded areas
Eosinophilic pustular 
folliculitis
Onset during infancy
Pruritic pustules on the head and neck
Acropustulosis of infancy
Onset during infancy
Pruritic pustules on the hands and feet
Neonatal cephalic pustulosis 
(neonatal acne)
Pink papules, predominately on face
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Crusted papules, predominately on the scalp 
and intertriginous areas
Herpes simplex virus
Onset from birth to 2 wk
Grouped vesicles and papulopustules favor 
scalp and trunk
Varicella
Diffuse vesicles and papules
Associated with sepsis, fever/hypothermia
Scabies
Pruritic papules, vesicles, and pustules
Can be widespread in infants, but 
concentrated in intertriginous areas
Syphilis
Widely scattered scaly red-­brown papules and 
plaques
Patches and Plaques
Neonatal lupus
Bright red annular patches and plaques 
distributed on cheeks and periorbital skin
Heart block is most common extracutaneous 
finding
Seborrheic dermatitis
Pink patches on the scalp, face, ears, and 
intertriginous areas
May have yellow, greasy scale
Erosions and fissures can be seen
Diaper dermatitis
Pink patches with erosions in the groin and 
buttocks
Can be multifactorial
FIXED LESIONS
Macules, Papules, and Pustules
Milia
Pinpoint white-­yellow papules without 
erythema
Typically on face, gingiva, or palate
Resolves with time
Sebaceous gland 
hyperplasia
Skin-­colored to yellow tiny papules on cheeks 
and nose
Secondary to maternal androgens
Resolve in first few months
Subcutaneous fat necrosis
Firm, indurated, tender plaques on back, arms, 
shoulders of newborns
Due to perinatal trauma, hypothermia, or 
hypoxemia
Monitor for hypercalcemia
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 60.1  Neonatal and Infantile Cutaneous Lesions—cont’d
Macules, Papules, and Pustules—cont’d
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Solitary yellow-­pink plaques on the face and 
scalp
May ulcerate and usually resolve 
spontaneously
Mastocytoma
Yellow to pink solitary plaques
Can urticate or swell with friction or rubbing
Composed of mast cells
Can be seen in infants but typically more 
common with toddlers
Urticaria pigmentosa
Condition with several mastocytomas
Rare in infants
Typically presents with lesions that will 
urticate
Over time, they become hyperpigmented
Rarely associated with systemic symptoms
Spider angioma
Rare in infants
Small blanching capillaries with “feeder 
vessel” on the trunk and face
Pyogenic granuloma
Solitary, small vascular papules that develop 
rapidly and bleed profusely
Typically seen in toddlers and occasionally 
infants
Patches and Plaques
Pink (Vascular or Other)
Hemangioma
Benign vascular tumors, typically present in 
first month of life
Grow rapidly for first several months and 
then involute slowly over a couple of 
years
PHACE/PELVIS
Syndromes associated with hemangiomas in 
particular locations on the face or back
Capillary malformation
Stable, pink, vascular patches; typically 
unilateral
In V1 distribution, can be associated with 
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Nevus simplex
Pink patches on glabella, eyelids, nape of 
neck, typically
Usually fade over first couple of years
Cutis marmorata 
telangiectasia congenita
Lacy, reticulated vascular patches
Do not resolve with rewarming of infant
May have atrophic changes or ulcerate
Kaposiform 
hemangioendothelioma
Rare vascular tumor
Firm, violaceous, and tends to proliferate
Can lead to consumptive coagulopathy 
(Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome)
Venous/lymphatic 
malformation
Slow-­flow vascular malformations
Typically present at birth
May be associated with atrophy or overgrowth
Hyperpigmented or Darker Pigment
Congenital melanocytic 
nevus
Pigmented macules, papules, patches, and 
plaques
Present in 2–3% of population
Neurocutaneous melanosis
Defined by a giant melanocytic nevus or 
greater than two CMNs
Associated with melanocytic infiltration of 
leptomeninges
Clinically symptomatic lesions have worse 
prognosis
Café-­au-­lait macules
Well-­demarcated tan macules or patches
Seen in 10–20% of population
Multiple lesions can be associated with 
neurofibromatosis
Dermal melanocytosis
Large, poorly demarcated, slate-­gray to blue 
patches on buttocks and lumbosacral region
Occurs normally in darker skin tones
Typically fades over time
Hypopigmented or Depigmented
Nevus depigmentosus
Hypopigmented patch that persists through life
Ash leaf spots
Hypopigmented macules that present in first 
few months to years of life
Typically seen with tuberous sclerosis
Piebaldism
Well-­circumscribed areas of depigmentation 
on the skin
Tends to be symmetric and stable in size
Waardenburg syndrome
White forelock, white patches on skin
Can have heterochromia of irides and hearing 
loss
Albinism
Diffuse congenital hypopigmentation of skin
Usually involves eyes and hair
Should be monitored closely by 
ophthalmologists
Evaluate for hearing loss
Patients need lifelong photoprotection
Other
Nevus sebaceus
Sebaceous gland hamartoma, usually present 
at birth
Yellow-­orange and smooth plaque
Thickens during puberty
Dermoid cyst
Typically found in head/neck region
Potential for intracranial connection
Aplasia cutis
Congenital absence of skin, typically on scalp
Can resemble scars when child is older
Hair collar sign
Ring of dense, darker hair encircling a scalp lesion
Can be a sign of spinal dysraphism
Hypertrichosis of lumbar 
area
Normal variant in certain ethnicities
Can be indicator of spinal dysraphism
Sacral dimples
Commonly seen
Large dimples along gluteal crease need to be 
evaluated for spinal dysraphism
Can be associated with hypertrichosis
TRANSIENT/CHANGING LESIONS
Patches
Segmental
Cutis marmorata
Lacy, reticulated vascular patches, often 
bilateral
Resolve with warming of infant and disappear 
over time
Diffuse
Harlequin color change
Marked erythema on dependent side
Simultaneous blanching on nondependent side
Transient
Distal Extremities
Acrocyanosis
Bluish-­purple discoloration of hands, feet, 
and lips
Occurs with crying and cold stress
CMN, congenital melanocytic nevi; PELVIS, perineal hemangioma, external genitalia malformations, lipomyelomeningocele, vesicorenal abnormalities, 
imperforate anus, and skin tag; PHACE, posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac defects, and eye abnormalities.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1143
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
Fig. 60.6  “Raccoon eyes” eruption of neonatal lupus erythematosus. 
(From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Der­
matology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:297.)
a “raccoon eyes” appearance (Fig. 60.6). Other manifestations may 
include transient hypopigmentation with epidermal atrophy or telan­
giectasia. Cutaneous lesions may be present at birth but often appear 
within the first 2–4 months of life. The lesions are usually exacerbated 
by sun exposure and are typically photodistributed. The majority of 
skin findings are transient, lasting up to 6–9 months.
Cutaneous findings and congenital heart block are each present 
individually in approximately 50% of affected infants; some studies 
have shown congenital heart block to be much less common. An over­
lap of both is present in approximately 10% of affected infants. The 
major morbidity and mortality of neonatal lupus result from congenital 
heart block.
The diagnosis of neonatal lupus includes examination of anti-­Ro, 
anti-­La, and anti-­U1RNP autoantibodies in both the infant and 
mother. Ninety-­five percent of mothers of infants with neonatal lupus 
have anti-­Ro antibodies. Skin biopsy is usually not necessary. Work-­up 
should include an ECG, platelet count, and liver function tests because 
approximately 35% of affected infants have liver disease or thrombo­
cytopenia. Rare reports of multisystem involvement, including neuro­
logic and respiratory findings, have been reported.
Mothers with high titers of anti-­Ro antibodies or with systemic 
lupus erythematosus have a higher risk of delivering an infant with 
neonatal lupus and should be counseled appropriately. Mothers with 
positive anti-­Ro or anti-­La antibodies will have an approximately 2% 
risk of their baby having neonatal lupus. Despite high antibody titers, 
fewer than half of mothers of affected infants are symptomatic at the 
time of delivery. In most of these mothers, evidence of connective tis­
sue disease, usually Sjögren syndrome or subacute cutaneous lupus, 
develops over time.
Differential diagnosis should include annular erythema of infancy, 
tinea corporis, and cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (CMTC). 
Treatment consists of photoprotection and topical steroids. Most 
cutaneous changes resolve spontaneously by 6–9 months of age as a 
result of a gradual decrease in maternal antibodies.
Seborrheic dermatitis, common during infancy, typically manifests 
within the first several weeks after birth. Characterized by erythema 
and a yellow, greasy scale, it usually resolves spontaneously within 
several months. The eruption occurs at sites where sebaceous glands 
are concentrated, such as the face, chest, posterior auricular scalp, and 
intertriginous areas (Fig. 60.7). Malassezia colonization plays a part in 
the development of seborrheic dermatitis. “Cradle cap” is seborrhea 
that is confined to the scalp. Involvement of the diaper area is charac­
terized by salmon-­colored patches that arise in skinfolds and spread to 
the genitalia, suprapubic area, and upper medial thighs. Scale may not 
be as apparent in intertriginous areas. Unlike atopic dermatitis, this 
eruption is not very pruritic. Secondary candidal or bacterial infection 
is common, particularly if erosions or fissures are seen.
The diagnosis is established clinically. The presence of greasy yellow 
scales and salmon-­colored patches, involvement of the scalp and inter­
triginous areas, early onset, and lack of pruritus or atopic history help 
distinguish seborrheic from atopic dermatitis. However, some infants 
have an overlap of seborrheic dermatitis and atopic dermatitis. Sebor­
rheic dermatitis should also be differentiated from LCH, in which the 
A
B
Fig. 60.7  A, Seborrheic dermatitis may occasionally be widespread. 
B, The body folds are often involved in seborrheic dermatitis. (From 
Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Mathes EF, et al., eds. Neonatal and Infant 
Dermatology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:225, Figs. 15.11 and 
15.12.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1144
SECTION 12  Dermatology
lesions are typically purpuric, erosive, or crusted, and from psoriasis 
(see Chapter 61). Skin biopsy findings, as well as hepatosplenomeg­
aly, purpura, lymphadenopathy, anemia, thrombocytopenia, external 
otitis, interstitial pneumonia, and osseous lesions, further distinguish 
LCH from seborrheic dermatitis.
Treatment of the scalp consists of mild keratolytic shampoos, such 
as those containing selenium sulfide or zinc pyrithione. Ketoconazole 
2% shampoo can be efficacious, particularly with controlling over­
growth of the yeast. Mineral oil may be helpful in removing thick, 
adherent scales. The scalp and diaper dermatitis may be treated with 
low-­potency topical corticosteroids and barrier ointments. Topical 
antifungal or antibacterial agents should be used for coexisting candi­
diasis or impetigo.
Diaper dermatitis is one of the most common dermatologic dis­
orders of infants and toddlers (see Table 60.2). It comprises a group 
of inflammatory conditions that involve the lower abdomen, genitalia, 
upper thighs, and buttocks. Clinical manifestations include erythema, 
edema, erosions, vesicles, and pustules. Secondary changes of postin­
flammatory hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation are common.
Diaper dermatitis is often multifactorial, including irritation from 
feces/urine, skin breakdown from maceration, and bacterial or fungal 
components. Although urinary ammonia was thought to be the pri­
mary factor in the development of diaper dermatitis, feces now appear 
to play a more important role. Fecal ureases, by converting urea to 
ammonia, cause the elevation of skin pH, which in turn increases fecal 
protease and lipase activity. These proteases and lipases cause the dis­
ruption of the epidermal barrier. Skin wetness, friction, maceration, 
and contact with feces, urine, and microbes further compromise epi­
dermal integrity. This results in increased permeability of the skin to 
irritants such as soaps, powders, and detergents. Diaper dermatitis 
may begin as early as 1–2 months of age and may become a chronic or 
recurrent problem in older infants as well.
Allergic contact dermatitis is another component to consider, 
although it is more common in toddlers and children than neonates. 
TABLE 60.2  Diaper Dermatitis
Disease
Clinical Manifestation
Other Features
Treatment
Friction
Inner surface of thighs, genitalia, buttocks, abdomen Course waxes and wanes
Aggravated by talc
Responds well to diaper changes
Avoidance of diapers
Irritant
Mild erythema with shiny surface and occasional 
papules
Confined to convex surfaces
Spares intertriginous areas
Exacerbated by heat, moisture, and 
sweat retention
Gentle cleansing
Regular diaper changes
Barrier creams (zinc oxide, Vaseline)
Low-­potency topical steroids can help
Allergic contact
Typically confined to convex surfaces
Skin involved is in direct contact with offending 
agent
Mild cases: diffuse erythema, papules, vesicles, 
scaling
Severe cases: papules, plaques, psoriasiform 
lesions, ulcerations, infiltrative nodules
Often related to topical antibiotics 
(neomycin, bacitracin)
Certain emulsifiers in topical products
Preservatives in wet wipes can be an 
offender
Remove offending agent
Judicious use of low-­potency topical 
steroids
Barrier creams/ointments
Seborrheic dermatitis
Salmon-­colored patches
Often have yellow, greasy scale
Fissures, erosions, maceration, and weeping can 
be seen
Axillae, ear creases, and neck are often 
involved
“Cradle cap” on scalp
Hypopigmentation often seen in 
patients with darker skin tones
Low-­potency topical steroids
If coexistent infection—antifungal or 
antibacterial agents
Candidiasis
Usually involves intertriginous areas and convex 
surfaces
Bright-­red papules and plaques
Satellite lesions on abdomen and thighs
Oral thrush may be present
Often occurs after treatment with 
systemic antibiotics or local topical 
steroid use
Topical anticandidal agent, including 
nystatin
Intertrigo
Well-­demarcated, macerated plaques with weeping
Gluteal cleft and fleshy folds of thighs
May be associated with miliaria
Avoiding excessive heat
Cool clothing
Psoriasis
Bright red, scaly, well-­demarcated plaques
Can persist for months
Less responsive to topical treatment
Red, sometimes scaly
Can be present on extremities or trunk
Nail changes seen
Family history
Low-­potency topical steroids
Moisturizers
Staphylococcal infection
Many thin-­walled pustules with pink-­red base
Collarette of scale after rupturing
Antistaphylococcal therapy
Acrodermatitis enteropathica 
(zinc deficiency)
Early lesions are vesicular and pustular
Become confluent, pink, dry, scaly, crusty plaques
Perioral skin typically also involved
Irritability or listlessness
Failure to thrive, alopecia, diarrhea
Secondary to zinc deficiency or inborn 
error of zinc transporter
Treat with zinc replacement
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
May mimic candidiasis or seborrheic dermatitis
Persistent, does not improve with standard 
treatments
Clusters of infiltrative, crusted, hemorrhagic papules
Ulceration can be seen
Involvement of groin, axillae, 
periauricular skin, hairline, and scalp
Anemia, thrombocytopenia, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and osseous 
lesions
Chemotherapy
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1145
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
Offenders can be dispersed dyes from disposable diapers and methyli­
sothiazolinone in wet wipes. The differential diagnosis may also include 
seborrheic dermatitis, skin or perianal infections (particularly due to 
group A streptococcus), and psoriasis (see Chapter 61).
FIXED LESIONS
Macules, Papules, and Pustules
Milia are pinpoint white or yellow papules that are commonly present 
in 40–50% of neonates. Located predominantly on the face, they may 
also be seen in the oral cavity, where they are referred to as Epstein 
pearls (palate) or Bohn nodules (gingiva). The lesions represent 
keratin-­filled epidermal inclusion cysts, which usually resolve spon­
taneously during the first few weeks of life. Unusually widespread or 
persistent lesions may be associated with defects such as hereditary 
trichodysplasia, oral-­facial-­digital syndrome, or particular subtypes of 
epidermolysis bullosa (EB). Milia may be present in several genoder­
matoses, including Bazex-Dupré-Christol, Rombo, and Brook-­Spiegler 
syndromes; atrichia with papular lesions; and pachyonychia congenita 
type 2. Treatment is typically not needed, though topical retinoids have 
been used.
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia is characterized by the presence of 
multiple flesh-­ to yellow-­colored tiny papules primarily on the nose 
and cheeks of full-­term infants. The increased sebaceous cell size and 
number as well as sebaceous gland volume may result from maternal 
androgen stimulation. Spontaneous resolution occurs within the first 
4–6 months of life.
Subcutaneous fat necrosis is a condition of otherwise healthy infants 
that is associated with preceding trauma, cesarean section, cold injury 
(including therapeutic hypothermia), or hypoxia. Over half of patients 
will develop lesions within the first week of life. This disorder occurs 
primarily in healthy full-­term and postmature infants. It is thought to 
be due to the higher ratio of saturated to unsaturated fat in neonates, 
thereby predisposing the fat to crystallization with colder temperatures. 
Single or multiple erythematous to violaceous, indurated, tender nod­
ules or plaques arise on the buttocks, thighs, back, cheeks, and arms. 
In rare cases, lesions liquefy, ulcerate, and drain an oily substance (Fig. 
60.8). The diagnosis can be confirmed by the histopathologic findings of 
fat lobules containing pathognomonic needle-­shaped clefts surrounded 
by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and for­
eign body giant cells. Intact lesions heal spontaneously within several 
months, whereas ulcerated lesions may heal more slowly and result 
in scarring. All patients should be screened for hypercalcemia, which 
may be present in nearly 70% of patients. Fortunately, hypercalcemia 
tends to be asymptomatic, without evidence of irritability, hypotonia, 
or weight loss, though life-­threatening hypercalcemia may occur. The 
hypercalcemia may be delayed, with normal serum calcium early in the 
course of this disorder but elevated levels arising several weeks later. 
In most patients, the hypercalcemia resolves within 4 weeks of initial 
detection. Some recommend screening at 30, 45, and 60 days following 
resolution of skin lesions. The differential diagnosis includes cold pan­
niculitis, cellulitis, and sclerema neonatorum.
Juvenile xanthogranulomas (JXGs) are rare, benign, solitary col­
lections of non–Langerhans cell histiocytes, thought to be reactive in 
nature. They typically present during the neonatal and infantile period 
and usually resolve over subsequent months or years. Multiple lesions 
may exist and should raise suspicion for extracutaneous disease. The 
incidence of extracutaneous JXG is rare, and the eye is thought to be 
the most common site, occurring in 0.24% of patients. Multiple JXGs 
should trigger a thorough review of symptoms, as neurofibromatosis 
(NF)-­1 is associated with multiple JXGs. Recommendations for oph­
thalmology examinations are somewhat controversial and are likely 
low yield, unless there are ocular or visual symptoms. A skin biopsy 
is diagnostic and shows collections of histiocytes and multinucleated 
giant cells called Touton giant cells.
A mastocytoma is a solitary skin-­colored to light red or tan papule 
or plaque that is often located on the trunk, extremities, or neck. Some 
lesions may have a yellow or pink hue. The lesion may appear at birth 
or within the first few months of life. Histopathologic study reveals the 
dermis densely infiltrated with mast cells. The characteristic finding 
on physical examination is that stroking the lesion causes histamine 
release that results in tense edema within the lesion and an erythem­
atous flare, known as the Darier sign. A skin biopsy and special stains 
for mast cells may confirm the clinical diagnosis. Symptoms such as 
pruritus or flushing, when present, are usually mild. Treatment is not 
usually necessary unless the patient has symptoms of excessive hista­
mine release. The condition is self-­limited and resolves spontaneously 
over several years. The lesions do not need to be excised.
Urticaria pigmentosa is characterized by the development of mul­
tiple mastocytomas, usually within the first 8–12 months of life (Fig. 
60.9). The lesions may vary in size from a few millimeters to several 
centimeters. Some lesions may not become pigmented until the child 
is approximately 6 months of age or older. Therefore, early lesions of 
Fig. 60.8  Subcutaneous fat necrosis. Indurated, erythematous plaques 
on the shoulders and back of this 1-­week-­old boy. (From Paller AS, 
Mancini AJ. Cutaneous disorders of the newborn. In: Paller AS, Mancini 
AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2011:14.)
Fig. 60.9  Urticaria pigmentosa.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1146
SECTION 12  Dermatology
urticaria pigmentosa may resemble recurrent urticaria until pigmen­
tation is noted. The Darier sign, or urtication of the lesions upon rub­
bing, is seen in urticaria pigmentosa as well. Rarely, these lesions may 
produce enough histamine release to cause flushing, diarrhea, vomit­
ing, tachycardia, and hypotension. Parents should be counseled about 
the avoidance of mast cell–degranulating agents.
Antihistamines should be used in any patient who experiences 
prominent histamine effects. Patients should be monitored closely 
for any symptoms that suggest systemic mastocytosis. In rare cases, 
other organs may be involved, including the intestines, bone, liver, 
spleen, and bone marrow. Intestinal involvement may be manifested by 
chronic diarrhea. The liver and spleen should be palpated for hepato­
splenomegaly, and the patient should be monitored for any symptoms 
of bone involvement. Routine bone marrow and hematologic exam­
inations are not required. Systemic manifestations are more common 
in adults; infants or children with significant systemic symptoms may 
require further evaluation. In most infants and young children, urti­
caria pigmentosa remits spontaneously by adulthood. Children who 
present at an older age tend to have a more persistent condition that is 
less likely to resolve.
Plaques and Patches
Pink (Vascular or Other)
Vascular birthmarks can be classified into two groups: tumors and mal­
formations (Table 60.3). Infantile hemangiomas are the most common 
of the vascular tumors, and their behavior is characterized by a growth 
phase (endothelial proliferation), followed by a plateau or stabilization 
phase and then an involutional phase. Vascular malformations are 
usually apparent at birth and tend to be relatively stable developmen­
tal abnormalities of vessels, including any combination of capillaries, 
veins, arteries, and lymphatic vessels (Table 60.4).
Infantile hemangiomas are the most common benign tumors 
occurring in children. These lesions develop in approximately 4% of 
White infants by 1 year of age. Females are affected approximately 3 
times as often as males. The incidence is higher in premature infants. 
Other risk factors for hemangiomas include low birthweight and mul­
tiple gestations. The natural course of infantile hemangiomas includes 
proliferative and involutional phases that end in complete, sponta­
neous regression in most cases. There is some thought that infantile 
hemangiomas may be triggered by hypoxia, either through maternal 
events or the infant factors.
There are three types of infantile hemangiomas:
	1.	 Superficial hemangiomas, once referred to as strawberry marks, 
are the most common type (60%). They are bright red with well-­
demarcated borders (Fig. 60.10). Often, a pale pink stain or bruise­
like patch is noted at birth before taking its more characteristic 
form.
	2.	 Deep hemangiomas, previously known as cavernous hemangiomas, 
are the least common of the three types (15%). They typically have 
a blue-­violaceous to skin-­colored surface. These lesions involve the 
deep reticular dermis and subcutaneous tissue. These may not be 
noted until the infant is a few months old.
	3.	 Mixed hemangiomas (25%) possess both superficial and deep com­
ponents (Fig. 60.11).
Most infantile hemangiomas occur on the head and neck, but any 
area of the body may be involved. Infantile hemangiomas may be indis­
tinguishable from port-­wine stains in the early weeks of life. Lesions 
must be followed closely during the first few weeks after birth to deter­
mine whether a proliferative phase is present. Although the cause 
of infantile hemangiomas is not clear, their natural course has been 
well documented. The initial lesion may be a white macule with cen­
tral threadlike telangiectases or a red macule resembling a port-­wine 
stain. A peripheral zone of pallor representing vasoconstriction may 
be noted at this stage. Within the first few months of life, the macule 
becomes raised and enlarges. During the first 6 months of life, infantile 
hemangiomas proliferate at a rapid rate, and after 6 months, the lesions 
grow at a slower rate. Deep hemangiomas (and to a lesser extent mixed 
TABLE 60.3  Types of Vascular Tumors and 
Vascular Malformations
Vascular Tumors
Vascular Malformations
Hemangioma
Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma
Tufted hemangioma
Noninvoluting congenital hemangioma 
(NICH)
Rapidly involuting congenital 
hemangioma (RICH)
Capillary malformation
Venous malformation
Lymphatic malformation
Arteriovenous malformation 
(AVM)
Mixed
TABLE 60.4  Differentiation of Infantile 
Hemangiomas vs Vascular Malformations
Infantile Hemangioma
Vascular Malformations
Up to 55% present at birth
90% recognized at birth
Rapid postnatal growth and slow 
involution
Static malformation of dysplastic 
vessels that grows proportionally 
with child
Rapid endothelial cell turnover
Normal endothelial cell turnover and 
proliferation
Increased incidence in female-­to-­
male ratio (3:1–5:1)
Female-­to-­male incidence ratio 1:1
Fig. 60.10  A superficial hemangioma on the abdomen.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1147
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
hemangiomas) have a slightly delayed onset of growth but also have 
sustained growth when compared to superficial hemangiomas. Involu­
tion may begin as early as the first year of life and is heralded by a color 
change from bright cherry red to dull red violet. Deep hemangiomas 
start to lose their blue-­violet hue. In time, the central portion of the 
superficial hemangioma develops a grayish-­white color that eventually 
extends to the periphery of the lesion. Lesions on the lips and nose 
and deep hemangiomas usually involute more slowly. It is not possi­
ble to predict precisely how long an infantile hemangioma will take to 
involute. Statistically, 50% of lesions are gone by 5 years of age, 70% by 
7 years, and more than 90% by 9 years. Once resolved, residual skin 
changes such as hypopigmentation, atrophy, and telangiectases may be 
present in up to 10–20% of affected patients. If infantile hemangiomas 
have grown rapidly during their proliferative phase or were very exo­
phytic, residual fibrofatty tissue may also be seen.
Infantile hemangiomas have many potential complications and 
associations (Table 60.5). For most, no treatment is needed. Manage­
ment of infantile hemangiomas is based on a variety of factors. These 
include the size of the lesion, location of the lesion, age of the patient, 
rate of growth/involution at the time of presentation, and risk or pres­
ence of complications. β Blockers, such as oral propranolol or topical 
timolol 0.5% solution, are the initial treatment of choice. The most 
common adverse events are sleep changes and cool extremities, but 
more serious concerns are hypotension, bradycardia, and hypoglyce­
mia, though these are rare. A pretreatment screening should include 
clinical examination to identify patients who are at risk for cardiac or 
pulmonary abnormalities.
Lesions that may need to be treated include those on the midface, 
labial, periorbital, genital, or diaper area. These lesions warrant close 
clinical observation during the rapid growth phase of early infancy. 
Additional therapeutic modalities that are more rarely used include 
intralesional steroids, pulsed dye laser therapy, surgery, embolization, 
and sclerosing agents.
Location of infantile hemangiomas (segmental on face or beard dis­
tribution) as well as on the spine and lower back should raise concern 
for PHACE syndrome or PELVIS/SACRAL syndrome, respectively.
Posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anoma­
lies, cardiac defects, and eye abnormalities (PHACE) syndrome is a 
rare syndrome that affects a subgroup of infants with infantile hemangi­
omas. It is likely the most common vascular neurocutaneous disorder. 
The cutaneous findings tend to be larger hemangiomas (>5 cm) and 
also tend to be segmental, rather than arising from one point. These 
hemangiomas can be more confluent, have a telangiectatic appearance, 
Fig. 60.11  A mixed hemangioma with prominent deep component on 
the trunk.
TABLE 60.5  Complications and Syndromes of Infantile Hemangiomas
Location
Complication
Lips/perineal/lumbosacral area
Seen in rapidly growing lesions, especially of oral mucosa and genital area
Risk for infection, scarring, hemorrhage; can be very painful
High output, extensive lesions
Congestive heart failure; hypothyroidism
Extensive lesions with a large vascular supply may compromise cardiac function
“Beard” distribution
Symptomatic subglottic hemangiomas may occur in 50–60% of patients with extensive “beard” involvement
Refer for laryngoscopy to evaluate risk for respiratory or airway compromise
Often manifests within first 2–3 mo of life
Periorbital distribution
Associated ocular complications in up to 80% of patients
Screening by an ophthalmologist to rule out astigmatism or amblyopia
Ear lesions
Location can cause the obstruction of auditory canal or decreased auditory conduction
Monitor for otitis media or speech delay
Lumbosacral hemangiomas
High risk for spinal dysraphism; imaging of all midline lumbosacral hemangiomas should be considered
Increased risk with other lumbosacral abnormalities (e.g., hypertrichosis, dimple, tags)
Associated urogenital/anogenital anomalies may be present
Large, extensive cervicofacial 
hemangiomas
PHACE syndrome
Benign neonatal hemangiomatosis
Multiple cutaneous hemangiomas without evidence of visceral hemangiomatosis
History taking/physical examination should be performed thoroughly to rule out systemic involvement
Consider liver ultrasound for infants with five or more cutaneous hemangiomas
Benign clinical course with involution of hemangiomas within first year
Disseminated neonatal 
hemangiomatosis
Multiple cutaneous hemangiomas with evidence of visceral hemangiomatosis
Liver most commonly affected; can affect lungs, gastrointestinal tract, eyes, mouth, and tongue
Work-­up necessary to determine the extent of systemic involvement; aggressive treatment usually needed
PHACE, posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac defects, and eye abnormalities.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1148
SECTION 12  Dermatology
or be composed of grouped papules. They are nearly always located 
on the head or face. It is important to distinguish them from capillary 
malformations. Approximately 20% of all infants with segmental facial 
hemangiomas have extracutaneous anomalies.
Criteria for PHACE syndrome include one segmental hemangioma 
of the head (>5 cm in diameter) plus one major criterion or two minor 
criteria. Major and minor criteria involve a group of cerebrovascular, 
structural brain, cardiovascular, ocular, and ventral/midline defects.
Cerebral vascular anomalies are the most common extracutaneous 
manifestation. The changes tend to be arterial, unlike Sturge-­Weber 
syndrome, which involves capillaries. Imaging (MRI/magnetic reso­
nance angiography [MRA] of the head and neck) greatly aids in the 
work-­up of a patient with a segmental hemangioma on the face/head, 
looking for arterial changes, as a subset of patients are at increased risk 
for vasculopathy and ischemic stroke, though this remains a poorly 
understood complication.
Many congenital brain abnormalities have been noted in patients 
with PHACE syndrome: The most common ones are malformations 
of the posterior fossa and cerebellum. Most patients with congenital 
lesions will have normal neurologic examinations during infancy, and, 
thus, screening should not be based on abnormalities with the neuro­
logic examination.
Cardiovascular anomalies may be seen on echocardiogram in up to 
40% of patients and include coarctation of the aorta (most common), 
aberrant subclavian aneurysm, ventricular septal defect, and arterial 
aneurysms. Ocular abnormalities are somewhat rare in PHACE syn­
drome but include microphthalmia, optic nerve hypoplasia, persistent 
fetal vasculature, and morning glory disk anomalies. Midline defects 
including sternal cleft, supraumbilical abdominal raphe, and subtle 
changes such as sternal pits, dimples, or papules can be seen. A screen­
ing echocardiogram should be done for children who are at risk for 
PHACE syndrome.
Treatment typically is propranolol, and for patients with life-­
threatening hemangiomas, it can be initiated prior to obtaining imag­
ing results. Propranolol is typically well tolerated in patients with 
PHACE syndrome, though it is recommended that they undergo a 
physical exam and echocardiogram prior to initiation, to make sure 
there is not coarctation of the aortic arch.
PELVIS, LUMBAR, and SACRAL syndromes are all different 
acronyms to describe disorders that include a segmental heman­
gioma of the perineal area or midline lower back with underlying 
abnormalities. The acronyms PELVIS (perineal hemangioma, exter­
nal genitalia malformations, lipomyelomeningocele, vesicorenal 
abnormalities, imperforate anus, and skin tag) and SACRAL (spinal 
dysraphism, anogenital anomalies, cutaneous anomalies, renal and 
urologic anomalies, associated with angioma of lumbosacral local­
ization) have been used to describe associations with occult spinal 
dysraphism. The risk of a spinal anomaly is ∼35% with a solitary 
lumbosacral hemangioma. MRI is more sensitive than ultrasound 
in evaluating for underlying spinal abnormalities in lumbosacral 
lesions, such as tethered cord.
Capillary malformations (also known as port-­wine stains or nevus 
flammeus) occur in 0.3% of all newborns. They are present at birth and 
represent progressive ectasia of the superficial vascular plexus. These 
lesions do not undergo spontaneous resolution. They are usually uni­
lateral and segmental but can be bilateral (Fig. 60.12). The face and 
neck are the most commonly affected sites. Capillary malformations 
are typically pink to red during infancy and darken to reddish-­purple 
hues with advancing age. Affected adults frequently have thickened, 
nodular port-­wine stains that may be associated with soft tissue hyper­
trophy. Capillary malformations occur as isolated cutaneous lesions or 
in conjunction with other abnormalities.
Sturge-­Weber syndrome includes ipsilateral association of a facial 
capillary malformation, almost always involving the V1 distribution 
of the trigeminal nerve, eye abnormalities (primarily glaucoma), and 
vascular malformations of the ipsilateral leptomeninges and brain. 
The incidence of Sturge-­Weber syndrome is approximately 5–10% in 
infants with a capillary malformation of the V1 distribution of the tri­
geminal nerve. Consequences of Sturge-­Weber syndrome may include 
seizures, developmental delay, hemiplegia, and glaucoma. Neuroimag­
ing may be helpful in demonstrating the characteristic calcifications of 
the leptomeninges and the abnormal cerebral cortex, although these 
changes may be quite subtle with early studies. Having MRI findings to 
diagnose Sturge-­Weber syndrome prior to developing symptoms does 
not necessarily result in better outcomes. Newborns at risk for Sturge-­
Weber syndrome should have careful clinical follow-­ups, including 
monitoring eye pressure for glaucoma. Early referral to a pediatric 
neurologist for education of parents to help monitor for neurologic 
symptoms is also recommended.
Other syndromes associated with capillary malformations include 
Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome and Parkes-­Weber syndrome. Klippel-­
Trenaunay syndrome is characterized by a capillary malformation, 
venous and/or lymphatic malformation, and soft tissue and/or bone 
overgrowth of the affected limb. Parkes-­Weber syndrome is the asso­
ciation of arteriovenous malformations, limb overgrowth, and the 
variable presence of lymphedema and multiple arteriovenous shunts. 
Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome is a slow-­flow capillary-­venous malfor­
mation, whereas Parkes-­Weber syndrome is a fast-­flow arterial-­venous 
malformation. Both entities can result in overgrowth and hypertrophy 
of the affected limb; however, Parkes-­Weber syndrome usually results 
in increased morbidity and clinical consequences.
Treatment of a capillary malformation is best accomplished with 
the pulsed dye laser. Several treatments are generally required over 
months to years to achieve desired fading. Depending on the location 
of the capillary malformation, the response to the pulsed dye laser may 
be limited. Many experts believe that early initiation of pulsed dye laser 
therapy results in superior cosmetic results.
Fig. 60.12  Capillary malformation of the back and flank, extending 
down the right arm.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1149
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
Nevus simplex (salmon patch) is the most common vascular lesion 
in infancy. These lesions consist of ectatic capillaries and are present at 
birth in about 40% of infants. These pink to red macules can be located 
on the nape of the neck, glabella, forehead, upper eyelids, and naso­
labial regions. More atypical locations include the lateral forehead, 
nose, upper and lower lip, and back. Unusually persistent or prominent 
nevus simplex can be associated with Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome, 
Nova syndrome, nevus simplex with odontodysplasia, macrocephaly-­
capillary malformation syndrome, and Roberts-­SC syndrome.
No treatment is necessary because most of these fade by 1–2 years 
of age. Persistent lesions can be treated successfully with the pulsed dye 
laser if cosmetically disturbing.
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (CMTC) manifests 
as an erythematous to dark, bluish-­purple, reticulated vascular patch 
that does not resolve with physiologic warming. This disorder is char­
acteristically more segmental and asymmetric than physiologic cutis 
marmorata. The clinical findings are most often noted within the first 
few days of life. Associated features may include cutaneous atrophy and 
ulcerations of the skin. CMTC has also been reported to be associated 
with additional abnormalities, including body asymmetry (hypotro­
phy or hypertrophy of affected limb), other vascular malformations, 
developmental delay, and glaucoma (with lesions in the V1/V2 trigem­
inal nerve distribution). CMTC may be difficult to differentiate from 
a reticulated capillary malformation. The clinical course of CMTC is 
characterized by gradual fading within the first 1–2 years of life, and 
treatment is generally not required.
Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon is the presence of thrombocy­
topenia, hemolytic anemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and consumptive 
coagulopathy in association with a vascular tumor. Kasabach-­Merritt 
phenomenon is associated with distinct vascular lesions: namely, 
kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) or tufted angioma, but not 
infantile hemangiomas. KHE and tufted angiomas are rare vascular 
tumors thought to exist on a spectrum. They can be locally destructive, 
infiltrating underlying soft tissue. Clinical examination findings, his­
tologic findings, and the behavior of associated vascular tumors differ 
from those of conventional infantile hemangiomas. These lesions are 
often firm and violaceous with a shiny texture and may proliferate for 
several years. This condition can be life-­threatening and may warrant 
aggressive multimodal therapeutic modalities. Treatment of choice is 
complete excision, if possible, but may not be feasible given location, 
size, or tissue infiltration. Other treatments include sirolimus, high-­
dose systemic corticosteroids, compression therapy, embolization, 
irradiation, low-­molecular-­weight heparin, and interferon alfa. Siroli­
mus has been used with promising results.
Venous and lymphatic malformations are slow-­flow vascular mal­
formations that are often present at birth. Venous malformations are 
bluish, poorly demarcated, compressible masses. The characteristic 
bluish hue is caused by the presence of ectatic venous channels in the 
dermis. Often there may be associated swelling with changes in posi­
tion or activity. Venous malformations can be segmental or more gen­
eralized, and radiologic imaging may assist in determining the extent 
of the lesion. Evaluation for central nervous system abnormalities with 
cranial imaging is recommended for patients with venous malforma­
tions of the face, to rule out developmental intracranial venous abnor­
malities that usually are asymptomatic. Many lesions manifest with 
pain caused by muscle involvement or with episodes of thrombosis or 
hematoma. Other associated risks include bone abnormalities (thin­
ning, demineralization, or hypoplasia) and chronic localized intravas­
cular coagulation. Treatment is aimed at correcting disfigurement and 
functional impairments. Therapy can include sclerotherapy, deep laser 
surgery, compression, and surgical excision. In many cases, it may be 
best to not intervene and to treat symptomatically.
Lymphatic malformations, previously referred to as lymphangio­
mas, are usually skin-­colored masses that may have superficial clear 
or hemorrhagic vesicles that occasionally leak lymphatic fluid. These 
lesions can be classified as macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed. Mac­
rocystic malformations often occur on the head and neck and are fre­
quently diagnosed by prenatal ultrasonography. When such a large 
lymphatic malformation occurs on the head and neck region, it is often 
referred to as cystic hygroma. Microcystic malformations are usually 
more superficial lesions with a “frog spawn” appearance (hemorrhagic 
and clear vesicles) that intermittently leak lymphatic fluid. This char­
acteristic lesion was previously referred to as lymphangioma circum­
scriptum. These lesions usually become more evident in childhood 
rather than infancy. Large lymphatic malformations may impinge on 
vital structures and cause severe compromise in the neonatal period. 
Cellulitis is a potential complication of lymphatic malformations and 
may require prophylactic antibiotics if recurrent. Treatment includes 
sclerotherapy, sirolimus, and surgery in select lesions; surgical ther­
apy of these lesions is often difficult and may result in recurrences and 
complications.
Hyperpigmented or Darker Pigmented Lesions
Several hyperpigmented or darker pigmented lesions can be seen 
during the neonatal period and infancy, while others can present later 
in childhood (Table 60.6).
Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) are pigmented macules, pap­
ules, patches, or plaques that are present at birth or early infancy in 
approximately 2–3% of children. The lesions are often tan at birth and 
become darker and hairier during infancy and childhood. Congenital 
nevi can be divided into small (<1.5 cm), medium (1.5–20 cm), large 
(20–40 cm), and giant (>40 cm) lesions on the basis of their projected 
adult size. In neonates and infants, lesions larger than 9 cm on the 
head and larger than 6 cm on the body constitute giant CMN (Fig. 
60.13). Most CMN are small to medium in size. The incidence of giant 
melanocytic nevi is approximately 1/20,000 live births. The majority of 
CMN have a variant in NRAS.
The malignant potential of CMN remains an area of great contro­
versy. The risk for malignant transformation in the general population 
for small and medium congenital nevi is thought to be <1%, and there 
are no universal guidelines for their management. For comparison, 
the overall risk for melanoma in the general population in the United 
States is 2%. Removal of these nevi can wait until later childhood, when 
local anesthesia and outpatient surgery are feasible.
The risk for malignant transformation of giant CMN is another 
controversial issue. Interestingly, long-­term prospective studies have 
shown melanoma of the central nervous system to be more common 
than melanoma of the skin. The incidence of melanoma is approxi­
mately 8% in those with CMN >60 cm with projected adult size. These 
large lesions warrant close observation and serial photography. Care­
ful annual or semiannual examinations with palpation of the nevi are 
essential, as melanoma can arise from deep portions of the nevi with 
little or no apparent surface alterations. Removal of giant congenital 
nevi is also controversial from a future-­melanoma-­risk standpoint. 
Removal may require extensive grafting as well as soft tissue expansion 
procedures.
Neurocutaneous melanosis is defined as the presence of giant (>40 
cm) and/or multiple CMN, in association with benign or malignant 
melanocytic infiltration of the leptomeninges. Clinically symptomatic 
neurocutaneous melanosis substantially worsens the prognosis of large 
or giant CMN and usually presents around or before 2 years of age, 
but some may not show symptoms until the second or third decade 
of life. Most symptomatic patients die within 3 years of the onset of 
initial neurologic symptoms, typically from central nervous system 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1150
SECTION 12  Dermatology
melanoma or mechanical obstruction. The most frequent clinical man­
ifestations include hydrocephalus, seizures, papilledema, headaches, 
increase in head circumference, paresis, and developmental delay. 
Location overlying the axial skeleton and many satellite lesions are pre­
dictors of neurocutaneous melanosis.
Screening MRI of the central nervous system is currently the best 
predictor of all adverse outcomes. MRI with contrast of the head and 
spine within the first 6 months of life is suggested in newborns with 
giant CMN, particularly in the posterior axial distribution and espe­
cially if satellite nevi are present. An MRI is also recommended for any 
infant with two or more CMN, regardless of size. MRI abnormalities of 
the brain have been identified in asymptomatic patients with giant or 
multiple CMN. The most common imaging abnormalities in asymp­
tomatic patients seen were T1 shortening in the cerebellum, temporal 
lobes, pons, and medulla. Radiologic findings can be very subtle and 
may be missed by radiologists unfamiliar with this entity. The risk of 
melanoma is higher in those with multiple CMN, particularly if neuro­
logic abnormalities are noted on screening MRI.
Café-­au-­lait macules are well-­circumscribed tan macules that usu­
ally measure <0.5 cm but may be as large as 15–20 cm in diameter. The 
TABLE 60.6  Congenital and Acquired Disorders of Hyperpigmentation
Disorder
Congenital or Acquired
Clinical Features
Freckles (ephelides)
Acquired
Small tan to brown, 1-­ to 5-­mm macules
Increase in number and pigmentation in summer and spring due to sunlight
Seen in fair-­skinned individuals in sun-­exposed areas
Lentigines
Acquired
Uniform, dark, brown/black 2-­ to 5-­mm macules
No seasonal variation or change with sun exposure
Can be anywhere on the body, including mucous membranes
Café-­au-­lait spots
Congenital or acquired
May be seen at birth or later in life
Tan to brown discrete macules or patches
Round or oval
Six or more lesions >5 mm in prepubertal persons meets diagnostic criteria for 
neurofibromatosis (NF)
NF lesions are smooth and well demarcated
McCune-­Albright syndrome spots are larger and more jagged
Dermal melanocytosis 
(mongolian spots)
Congenital
Brown, blue-­gray patches often seen on lower trunk
Seen usually in African-­Americans, Asians, or Native Americans
Usually fades over time
Nevus of Ota
Congenital or acquired
50% present at birth; 50% develop in second decade
Unilateral, blue-­gray pigmentation in trigeminal nerve distribution
Commonly involves ipsilateral sclera
May darken or enlarge over time
Nevus of Ito
Congenital or acquired
Patchy blue-­gray pigmentation of shoulder, supraclavicular area
May increase in size and color over time
Congenital melanocytic nevus
Congenital
Tan, brown, dark brown macules, patches, plaques, seen at birth or early infancy
Variable color and texture
Large, giant, or multiple nevi increase risk for neurocutaneous melanosis
Nevus spilus (speckled 
lentiginous nevus)
Congenital or acquired
Well-­demarcated, hyperpigmented patch with smaller, darker macules and papules within 
larger patch
May be extensive and segmental in distribution
Small risk for malignant transformation
Acquired melanocytic nevi
Acquired
May start as hyperpigmented macules (junctional melanocytic nevi)
Over time, can become elevated papules (compound melanocytic nevi)
Peaks in number during second and third decade of life
Abnormalities in color, borders, size, symmetry may suggest malignancy
Melanoma
Acquired
Variegation in color, texture, or border of congenital or acquired melanocytic nevi
Rare in childhood or infancy
Risk correlated with family history and sun exposure in childhood
Fig. 60.13  Giant congenital melanocytic nevus of the lower back. Imag­
ing should be considered to evaluate for tethered cord or spinal dysra­
phism, as well as melanosis of the spine or brain.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1151
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
lesions are found on any cutaneous site and may be present at birth or 
appear during early childhood. Although café-­au-­lait spots are seen in 
10–20% of normal individuals, the presence of many macules should 
raise the clinical suspicion of NF or other genetic disorders (see Table 
60.6). The presence of six or more café-­au-­lait spots (>0.5 cm in pre­
pubertal children; >1.5 cm in postpubertal children) fulfills one of the 
diagnostic criteria for NF-­1. Although the lesions are not pathogno­
monic, they are present in most patients with NF and tend to be larger 
and more numerous. Café-­au-­lait spots have also been associated with 
tuberous sclerosis, McCune-­Albright syndrome, Turner syndrome, 
Bloom syndrome, ataxia-­telangiectasia, Russell-­Silver syndrome, 
Fanconi anemia, epidermal nevus syndrome, Gaucher disease, and 
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome.
Dermal melanocytosis (mongolian spots) are large, poorly demar­
cated, slate-­gray to blue-­black patches usually located over the but­
tocks or lumbosacral region of normal infants. The condition occurs in 
approximately 80–90% of Black infants, 75% of Asian infants, and 10% 
of White infants. Dermal melanocytosis may be single or multiple and 
frequently measure up to 10–20 cm in diameter. This benign disorder is 
present at birth, usually fades during early childhood, and necessitates 
no therapeutic intervention. In rare cases, the lesions may persist into 
adulthood and may benefit from therapy with lasers that treat dermal 
pigmentation. These lesions should not be confused with bruises. Der­
mal melanocytosis is also seen in Hurler, Hunter, GM1 gangliosidosis, 
Niemann-­Pick, mucolipidosis, and mannosidosis syndromes.
The nevus of Ota and nevus of Ito are special variants of dermal 
melanocytosis commonly seen in Asian and Black individuals. In 
contrast to mongolian spots, these conditions tend to persist through­
out adulthood. The nevus of Ota is a slate-­gray to blue-­black patch 
located in the distribution of the trigeminal nerve. The condition is 
usually unilateral and involves the forehead, temple, periorbital region, 
nose, and cheek. Pigmentation of the sclera, iris, and choroid occurs 
in about 50% of affected individuals. The disorder may be cosmeti­
cally disfiguring, and laser treatment may be promising in some cases. 
The nevus of Ito is a similar lesion occurring in the distribution of 
the lateral supraclavicular and brachial nerves. The condition is usually 
unilateral and involves the shoulder, neck, upper arm, scapular, and/or 
deltoid regions. It may be seen alone or in conjunction with the nevus 
of Ota.
Hypopigmented and Depigmented Lesions
These conditions are often cosmetically disfiguring and persistent. 
They can be markers of serious systemic diseases. Pigmentary disor­
ders may be localized or generalized; congenital or acquired; and tran­
sient, stable, or progressive (Table 60.7).
Nevus depigmentosus is a benign, solitary, hypopigmented macule 
or patch that is noted at birth. It is not depigmented as the name sug­
gests. It typically remains stable in size and may grow in proportion to 
the patient as they grow. It should be differentiated from vitiligo.
Ash leaf spots are hypopigmented macules, sometimes present at 
birth or within the first few months or years of life, that allow early iden­
tification of individuals with tuberous sclerosis (Fig. 60.14). Although 
occasionally observed in normal infants, the characteristic lesions 
are present in up to 90% of patients with tuberous sclerosis. They are 
TABLE 60.7  Congenital and Acquired Disorders of Hypopigmentation and Depigmentation
Disorder
Congenital or Acquired
Clinical Features
Piebaldism
Congenital
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Leukoderma of frontal scalp
White forelock
Usually involves face, neck, trunk, flank, and extremities
Waardenburg syndrome is a variant, with sensorineural deafness, limb defects, and Hirschsprung 
disease
Nevus depigmentosus
Congenital
Well-­circumscribed hypopigmented patch (not typically depigmented)
May be isolated or segmental
Usually present at birth or infancy
Wood lamp may aid in diagnosis
Often found on trunk or extremities
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Congenital
Whorls or streaks of hypopigmentation that follow lines of Blaschko
Usually present at birth, but may present in first few years of life
Can be associated with central nervous system, eye, or musculoskeletal abnormalities
Nevus anemicus
Congenital
Rubbing or temperature change causes erythema of surrounding skin
Often unilateral and on trunk
Not accentuated by Wood lamp
Asymptomatic
Ash leaf spot
Congenital
Hypopigmented macules/patches often present at birth
Wood lamp may aid in diagnosis
Solitary lesion often of no significance
Multiple lesions are associated with tuberous sclerosis
Vitiligo
Acquired
Complete loss of pigment in involved areas
May be segmental in distribution
Hyperpigmentation can be seen at the edges of lesions
Infrequently seen with autoimmune disorders, such as hypothyroidism
Albinism
Congenital
Complete depigmentation or hypopigmentation in skin
Affects eyes and hair
Increased risk for skin cancer
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1152
SECTION 12  Dermatology
usually 2–3 cm in size and are located on the trunk and extremities. The 
macules may be lancet shaped or may have a confetti-­like or irregularly 
shaped appearance. Wood lamp examination may facilitate identifica­
tion. Although tuberous sclerosis is an autosomal dominant disorder, 
spontaneous gene variants are responsible for up to 50% of new cases. 
Other cutaneous findings include facial angiofibromas (adenoma seba­
ceum), periungual or subungual fibromas, gingival fibromas, shagreen 
patches (connective tissue hamartomas), and fibrous plaques (typically 
on the forehead). Systemic manifestations include seizures, intellectual 
disability, cardiac rhabdomyomas, renal angiomyolipomas and cysts, 
retinal nodular hamartomas, and pulmonary cysts. Imaging studies of 
the brain may demonstrate cortical tubers or subependymal nodules, 
which are pathognomonic for tuberous sclerosis.
Piebaldism is characterized by circumscribed areas of depigmenta­
tion in the newborn. The leukoderma is usually located on the frontal 
scalp and is associated with a white forelock; however, the depigmented 
patches characteristically involve the trunk, upper arms, and legs. 
Hyperpigmented or normally pigmented macules or patches may 
occur within the depigmented patches. This rare condition is transmit­
ted in an autosomal dominant pattern. The disorder is usually present 
at birth but may not be recognized until later because of the light color 
of neonatal skin. A Wood lamp may enhance the contrast between 
depigmented and normal skin.
Piebaldism is a stable condition throughout life, and most affected 
individuals are otherwise normal. Sun protection and cosmetic camou­
flage of the depigmented skin are the mainstays of therapy.
Waardenburg syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized 
by a white forelock, areas of leukoderma, congenital sensorineural 
deafness, heterochromia of the irides, and lateral displacement of the 
medial canthi. Other features may include a flattened nasal bridge, 
confluent eyebrows, hypoplasia of the nasal alae, speech impairment 
that may or may not be related to presence of a cleft lip or palate, and 
various skeletal abnormalities. It is most commonly inherited in an 
autosomal dominant fashion, though autosomal recessive inheritance 
patterns are sometimes seen.
Albinism is manifested by diffuse congenital hypopigmentation or 
depigmentation of the skin, hair, and eyes. This heterogeneous group 
of disorders is composed of approximately 10 types of oculocutaneous 
albinism and 5 forms of ocular albinism. Most types of oculocutaneous 
albinism are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The variants 
of ocular albinism are transmitted in an X-­linked or autosomal reces­
sive mode of inheritance.
The various forms of albinism can usually be diagnosed by findings 
on physical examination. These features include absent or reduced pig­
mentation of skin and hair and ophthalmologic findings such as foveal 
hypoplasia, nystagmus, photophobia, transillumination of the irides, 
fundal depigmentation, and decreased visual acuity. Patients should be 
monitored closely by ophthalmologists and evaluated for hearing loss. 
In White persons, the skin is usually milk white and the hair is white, 
blond, or light brown. The pupils are usually pink, and the irides are 
blue or gray. In African-­Americans, the skin may appear tan or white 
and is frequently freckled. The hair is usually blond or red, and the eyes 
are blue or hazel.
Treatment of albinism includes photoprotection and sun avoidance. 
Individuals are predisposed to severe actinic damage and should be 
monitored closely for the development of actinic keratoses, basal cell 
carcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas, and melanomas.
Other
Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn is a hamartoma of sebaceous gland deri­
vation. Typically present at birth, these lesions are variable in size, usually 
solitary, and located on the scalp, face, and neck. During infancy, they are 
well-­circumscribed, hairless, yellowish-­orange, smooth, velvety, or waxy 
plaques. These nevi tend to thicken and become verrucous during puberty.
Because up to 15% of these lesions develop secondary benign or 
malignant neoplasms during adolescence or adulthood, prophylactic 
surgical excision is recommended before puberty.
Dermoid cysts are nontender, noncompressible, firm, congenital 
subcutaneous nodules found along sites of closure of embryonic clefts. 
Dermoids are lined by stratified squamous epithelium that contains 
mature adnexal structures. Although these lesions can be noted in 
newborns, they may not be detected until later in infancy or in child­
hood after the lesion enlarges or becomes inflamed. Lesions are often 
described as rubbery and may be blue to skin-­colored in appearance. 
A tuft of hair may be seen protruding from an orifice in the dermoid. 
Dermoid cysts are often found in the head and neck region, often the 
lateral portion of an eyebrow.
The most important concern with dermoid cysts is the potential 
for an intracranial connection. Up to 25% of midline or nasal dermoid 
cysts may have an intracranial connection; all midline head and spinal 
lesions should be imaged. If a connection is present, the patient is at 
risk for infection because the dermoid cyst and sinus can serve as a 
portal of entry for bacteria. These patients should be referred to neu­
rosurgery for removal and repair. Dermoid cysts that are not midline, 
including those commonly seen at the lateral brow area, should also 
be excised because of the potential risk for infection and bony erosion. 
After surgical excision, lesions do not usually recur.
Aplasia cutis congenita is a heterogeneous group of disorders 
in which there is a congenital absence of skin (Fig. 60.15). This disor­
der may involve the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissues. The 
most common type of aplasia cutis is membranous aplasia cutis. These 
lesions are well-­demarcated, small, oval, 1-­ to 5-­cm defects on the ver­
tex of the scalp. They are easily identified by their classic “punched-­
out” appearance and may have an atrophic surface with a glistening, 
membrane-­like surface at birth. In older children, these lesions resemble 
scars. If the lesion is associated with a hair collar or midline in location, 
the clinician should evaluate for the potential of cranial dysraphism.
The defect is usually solitary; however, in a minority of patients, 
multiple sites may be affected. Aplasia cutis can also occur on the trunk 
and limbs, where the defects are often bilateral and symmetric; extrem­
ity lesions must be distinguished from EB. Aplasia cutis in the midline 
lumbosacral area is of particular importance because it may be associ­
ated with spinal dysraphism.
Lesions of membranous aplasia cutis usually necessitate no further 
investigation, and gradual epithelialization typically occurs sponta­
neously. However, large, deep, or widespread lesions with underlying 
bone defects may necessitate surgical intervention to facilitate healing.
Fig. 60.14  Ash leaf macule of tuberous sclerosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1153
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
The term hair collar sign is a designation for hypertrichosis that 
usually either partly or completely encircles a congenital scalp lesion 
(Fig. 60.16). Usually the ring of hair is denser, darker, and coarser in 
texture than the normal scalp hair. A hair collar sign surrounding a 
congenital scalp nodule is a marker for cranial dysraphism, includ­
ing encephaloceles and meningoceles. If a hair collar sign is seen in 
combination with a capillary malformation or aplasia cutis, the risk for 
cranial dysraphism is increased substantially. Therefore, all congenital 
midline lesions with a hair collar sign should be imaged to evaluate for 
an intracranial connection. MRI is the gold standard, but it occasion­
ally misses a small intracranial connection. Lack of a hair collar sign 
in aplasia cutis correlates with a negative predictive value of abnormal 
imaging findings. Therefore, MRI is likely not needed in patients with 
aplasia cutis who do not have a hair collar sign.
Aplasia cutis typically is an isolated finding, but it can be associated 
with some syndromes, including Adams-­Oliver syndrome. This rare con­
dition also includes CMTC and limb defects. In the setting of aplasia cutis, 
a good physical and evaluation for limb abnormalities is recommended.
Lumbosacral hypertrichosis may be a normal variant, especially in 
certain ethnic groups. However, hypertrichosis in this area in association 
with other stigmata indicative of a neurologic defect is highly suggestive 
of spinal dysraphism. The area may be poorly circumscribed, and the hair 
can be light or dark. The hypertrichosis is often present at birth. Com­
plete neurologic examination should be performed. There are no defined 
parameters to determine further evaluation of isolated hypertrichosis, 
though suspicion for spinal dysraphism is higher if additional cutaneous 
markers, such as a vascular stain or a mass, are also present. If a spinal 
defect is suspected, further evaluation by MRI of the spine is necessary.
Lumbosacral dimples are common findings in neonates. Large, deep 
dimples that are located in the superior portion of the gluteal crease should 
be radiologically imaged to rule out dermal sinuses communicating 
directly with the spinal canal. These dimples should not be probed because 
of the potential communication with the spinal canal. Sacral dimples seen 
in association with other cutaneous findings such as hypertrichosis, vas­
cular birthmarks, a mass, or a deviated gluteal cleft carry particularly high 
risk for spinal dysraphism. Imaging should be performed with MRI of the 
spine as ultrasound has low sensitivity for subtle findings.
Infantile hemangiomas that overlie the midline of the back are 
strong markers for spinal dysraphism, most often lipomyelomeningo­
cele, intraspinal lipoma, or a tethered cord. Infantile hemangiomas that 
are larger than 4 cm and overlap the midline appear to carry greater 
risk for spinal dysraphism, and MRI should be performed. The risk for 
spinal dysraphism is increased when hemangioma is seen in associa­
tion with other cutaneous findings such as sacral dimples, hypertricho­
sis, or a deviated gluteal cleft.
A solitary midline capillary malformation of the back without addi­
tional clinical findings may be a marker for spinal dysraphism, but this 
association is less clear. All affected infants should be evaluated for 
additional neurocutaneous stigmata. If a lumbosacral capillary malfor­
mation is detected with other cutaneous markers of spinal dysraphism, 
imaging is warranted.
TRANSIENT AND PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES TO THE 
SKIN
Many entities unique to newborns are caused by physiologic phenom­
ena in response to the infant’s transition to the new environment. Most 
such entities are benign and self-­limited.
Cutis Marmorata
Cutis marmorata is characterized by symmetric reticulated cyanosis 
involving the trunk and extremities. This marbled appearance usually 
appears when the skin is cool and resolves upon rewarming of the infant. 
This benign condition typically improves with age. When this vascular 
pattern is seen in older infants or children, it may be associated with 
Down syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, or hypothyroidism.
Cutis marmorata should be differentiated from CMTC. The per­
sistent cutis marmorata of CMTC is characteristically asymmetric; often 
segmental, mottled, or marble-­like; and more localized than physio­
logic cutis marmorata. In addition, the reticulated mottling of CMTC is 
darker in color and does not resolve with rewarming. Although CMTC 
improves with age, the abnormal vascular pattern is more persistent than 
that seen in physiologic cutis marmorata. It may be an isolated entity or 
may have distinct associations, including atrophy or hypertrophy of the 
affected extremity, ulcerations, or coexistent vascular malformations and 
tumors, and other extracutaneous anomalies. If CMTC is generalized or 
involves the face, patients should be evaluated for glaucoma as well.
Harlequin Color Change
The harlequin color change is a distinctive condition observed in 
infants lying on their sides. It is characterized by marked erythema on 
the dependent side of the infant’s body with simultaneous blanching 
Fig. 60.15  Congenital absence of skin (aplasia cutis congenita) on the 
scalp of a neonate; multiple lesions can be seen.
Fig. 60.16  A classic hair collar sign (from aplasia cutis).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1154
SECTION 12  Dermatology
of the nondependent side (Fig. 60.17). This phenomenon occurs more 
often in premature infants but may be observed in full-­term newborns. 
The change may be caused by autonomic immaturity, which results in 
altered peripheral vascular tone.
Although it typically occurs within the first 3 weeks of life, harle­
quin color change is most often noted at 2–5 days of age. The changes 
develop abruptly and usually resolve within 20 minutes.
The harlequin syndrome is characterized by hemifacial flushing, 
tearing, and rhinorrhea with contralateral hypohidrosis (Fig. 60.18). 
Frey syndrome (auriculotemporal nerve syndrome) is characterized 
by unilateral (occasionally bilateral) facial flushing and sweating, trig­
gered by the introduction of solid foods.
Acrocyanosis
The normal newborn usually displays a bluish-­purple discolor­
ation of the hands, feet, and lips. Referred to as acrocyanosis, this 
typically occurs in association with crying or cold stress and can be 
seen in >30% of infants. It results from increased peripheral arterio­
lar tone, which leads to vasospasm and subsequent venous pooling. 
Acrocyanosis should be differentiated from central cyanosis, which is 
noted on mucosal surfaces. Physiologic acrocyanosis gradually resolves 
spontaneously during the neonatal period.
RARE AND GENETIC DISORDERS
Epidermolysis Bullosa
EB represents a group of diseases manifested by spontaneous or fric­
tion (trauma)-­related skin and oral mucosa–related fragility and bulla 
formation, inherited as autosomal or dominant disorders. Subgroups 
include:
EB simplex (suprabasal, basal) (Figs. 60.19 and 60.20 and Table 60.8)
EB junctional (Herlitz, other) (Table 60.9)
EB dystrophic (dominant, recessive) (Table 60.10) and Kindler syndrome
Neonates may present at birth with lower extremity ulcerations 
(congenital localized absence of skin: Bart syndrome) that may resem­
ble cutis aplasia (see Fig. 60.19). Blisters, bulla, and erosions also 
develop after birth secondary to minor trauma (see Fig. 60.20).
More severe subtypes may heal with scarring; infection is a risk 
in all subtypes. EB is also associated with congenital pyloric outlet 
obstruction; airway (laryngeal involvement) obstruction is a less com­
mon complication.
Ichthyosis
These heterogeneous disorders are characterized by cutaneous scaling 
in a syndromic or nonsyndromic pattern, presenting in the newborn 
as lamellar ichthyosis, congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, or col­
lodium baby (Figs. 60.21, 60.22, and 60.23 and Table 60.11).
Neutrophilic Dermatosis
Sweet syndrome is an acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis that is 
often associated with another primary disorder including congenital 
Fig. 60.17  The dependent side is bright red in this infant with the harle­
quin color change. (From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:19, Fig. 2.10.)
Fig. 60.18  Harlequin syndrome. Transient unilateral flushing associated 
with hyperhidrosis, tearing, and rhinorrhea. (From Eichenfield LF, Frie­
den IJ, Mathes EF, et al., eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology. 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:420, Fig. 25.17.)
Fig. 60.19  Congenital localized absence of skin can be seen in all types 
of epidermolysis bullosa. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Mathes EF, 
et al., eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2015:143, Fig. 11.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1155
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
infection (HIV), immune deficiency (common variable immune defi­
ciency, chronic granulomatous disease), neoplasia, inflammatory 
bowel disease, lupus, and autoinflammatory disorders. It is character­
ized by high fevers with erythematous, painful raised papular nodules 
usually on the face and upper extremities (Fig. 60.24). Pathologic vari­
ants in POMP are associated with immune deficiency, autoimmunity, 
and neonatal-­onset Sweet syndrome.
CANDLE (early-­onset chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatitis 
with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature) presents in the new­
born with recurrent lesions and fevers similar to Sweet syndrome. 
CANDLE is due to pathologic variants in PSMB8, which is a com­
ponent of immunoproteasome. The rash precedes the lipodystrophy 
(Fig. 60.25) and is seen on the trunk, limbs, fingers, and face. The rash 
is annular and produces hyperpigmentation after an acute episode.
Immune Disregulation
Neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID), 
also known as chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and articular 
syndrome (CINCA), may manifest at birth or infancy with intermit­
tent fevers and a papular urticaria-­like nonpruritic rash (Fig. 60.26). 
During episodes there may be arthralgias and arthritis leading in 
Fig. 60.20  Blistering caused by the edge of a diaper in an infant with a 
milder form of epidermolysis bullosa. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, 
Mathes EF, et al., eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology. 3rd ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2015:143, Fig. 11.3.)
TABLE 60.8  Characteristics of Major Forms 
of Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex (EBS), Basal
Type
Clinical Manifestations
EBS, localized 
(formerly Weber-­
Cockayne)
Easy blistering on palms and soles
May be focal keratoderma of palms and soles in adults
~25% show oral mucosal erosions
Rarely show reticulated pigmentation, especially on 
arms and trunk, and punctate keratoderma (EBS 
with mottled pigmentation)
EBS, generalized, 
intermediate 
(formerly Koebner)
Generalized blistering
Variable mucosal involvement
Focal keratoderma of palms and soles
Nail involvement in 20%
Improves with advancing age
EBS, generalized, 
severe (formerly 
Dowling-­Meara)
Most severe in neonate, infant; improves beyond 
childhood
Large, generalized blisters; later, smaller 
(herpetiform) blisters
Mucosal blistering, including esophageal
Nails thickened, shed but regrow
May have natal teeth
EBS with mottled 
pigmentation
Reticulated hyperpigmentation, especially on arms 
and trunk
Punctate keratoses and keratoderma
From Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016:319, Table 13-­2.
TABLE 60.9  Characteristics of Major Forms 
of Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa (JEB)
Type
Clinical Manifestations
JEB, generalized 
severe (formerly 
Herlitz)
50% of patients die by 2 yr old
Blisters heal with atrophic scarring but no milia
Periungual and fingerpad blistering, erythema
Blistering of oral and esophageal mucosae
Laryngeal and airway involvement with early 
hoarseness
Later, perioral granulation tissue with sparing of lips
Anonychia
Dental enamel hypoplasia, excessive caries
Growth retardation
Anemia
JEB, generalized 
intermediate 
(formerly non-­
Herlitz)
Less severe, but similar manifestations to Herlitz type, 
including dental, nail, and laryngeal involvement
Granulation tissue is rare
Perinasal cicatrization
Less mucosal involvement
Alopecia
Anemia but not as severe as JEB, generalized severe
JEB, localized
Localized blisters without residual scarring or 
granulation tissue
Minimal mucosal involvement
Dental and nail abnormalities as in JEB, generalized 
severe
JEB, generalized 
with pyloric atresia
Usually lethal in neonatal period
Generalized blistering, leading to atrophic scarring
May be born with large areas of cutis aplasia
No granulation tissue
Nail dystrophy or anonychia
Pyloric atresia, genitourinary malformations
Rudimentary ears
Dental enamel hypoplasia (survivors)
Variable anemia, growth retardation, mucosal 
blistering
From Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016:321, Table 13-­4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1156
SECTION 12  Dermatology
TABLE 60.10  Characteristics of Major Forms of Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa
Type
Clinical Manifestations
Dominant dystrophic
Onset at birth to early infancy
Blistering predominates on dorsum of hands, elbows, knees, and lower legs
Milia associated with scarring
Some patients develop scarlike lesions, especially on the trunk
80% have nail dystrophy
Recessive dystrophic, severe 
generalized
Present at birth
Widespread blistering, scarring, milia
Deformities: pseudosyndactyly, joint contractures
Severe involvement of mucous membranes, nails; alopecia
Growth retardation, poor nutrition
Anemia
Mottled, carious teeth
Osteoporosis, delayed puberty, cardiomyopathy, glomerulonephritis, renal amyloidosis, IgA nephropathy
Predisposition to squamous cell carcinoma in heavily scarred areas
Recessive dystrophic, generalized 
intermediate
Generalized blisters from birth with milia, scarring
Less anemia, growth retardation, mucosal but more esophageal issues with advancing age
IgA, immunoglobulin A.
From Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:323, Table 13-­6.
Neonatal Presentations of Ichthyoses
Vernix-like
hyperkeratosis
Collodion baby
Harlequin ichthyosis
KID syndrome
Constrictive scales
with deformities
Harlequin ichthyosis
Netherton syndrome
KID syndrome
CIE
Erythroderma
Generalized scaling
Also
consider
Also
consider
Also
consider
Omenn syndrome
SCID
Ectodermal dysplasias
Erythrodermic psoriasis
XLI
Netherton syndrome
Sjögren-Larsson syndrome
Trichothiodystrophy
Neutral lipid storage
disease
Lamellar ichthyosis
CIE
Self-healing collodion baby
Harlequin ichthyosis {mild)
Sjögren-Larsson syndrome
Trichothiodystrophy
Neutral lipid storage
Disease
Ectodermal dysplasias
Gaucher disease
Blisters / erosions
Epidermolytic
Ichthyosis
Ichthyosis bullosa of
Siemens
Epidermolysis bullosa
TEN
SSSS
Immunobullous disease
Mastocytosis
Fig. 60.21  Neonatal presentations of ichthyoses. The spectrum of possible presentations of ichthyosis in the 
neonate and the possible underlying forms of ichthyosis. In some cases, disorders beyond ichthyosis must 
be considered (“also consider”). Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome, trichothiodystrophy, and neutral lipid storage 
disease are italicized, as they rarely present as collodion babies. CIE, congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma; 
KID syndrome, keratitis-­ichthyosis-­deafness syndrome; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; SSSS, 
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis; XLI, X-linked ichthyosis. (From Crai­
glow BG. Ichthyosis in the newborn. Semin Perinatol. 2013;37:26–31 [Fig. 2, p. 28].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1157
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
A
B
Fig. 60.22  Collodion baby. A, A shiny transparent membrane covered this baby at birth. B, She later devel­
oped lamellar ichthyosis. (From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:26, 
Fig. 2.29.)
A
B
C
D
Fig. 60.23  Congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma in two children. A, Congenital erythroderma persisted in 
this child. B, Note the marked scaling on her hands. C, Generalized erythema with fine scaling was noted 
on the first day of life. D, Shortly after his first birthday, he developed a new pattern of migrating, scaly, ery­
thematous plaques typical of Netherton syndrome. Microscopic examination of his hair revealed trichorrhexis 
invaginata (bamboo hair). (From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:28, 
Fig. 2.31.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1158
SECTION 12  Dermatology
TABLE 60.11  Ichthyoses and Ichthyosis Syndromes
VARIANT
Genetics
Incidence
Clinical Features
Onset
Congenital ichthyosiform 
erythroderma
OMIM #242100
Autosomal recessive
TGM-­1, ABCA12, NIPAL4 
(ICHTHYIN) ALOX12B, 
ALOXE3
1/50,000–1/100,000
Collodion baby
Fine white scale on trunk, face, and scalp
Large scale on legs
Variable erythroderma
Birth
Lamellar ichthyosis
OMIM #242300
Autosomal recessive
TGM-­1, ABCA12, NIPAL4 
(ICHTHYIN), CYP4F22, LIPN
1/100,000
Collodion baby
Generalized large, dark, platelike scale
Ectropion, eclabium
Mild palmoplantar keratoderma
Birth
Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis
OMIM #113800
Autosomal dominant (most 
common)
Autosomal recessive, sporadic
KRT1, KRT10
Rare
Widespread blisters at birth
Increased erythema, scale with age
Marked scale in intertriginous areas, palms, soles
Malodor from bacterial overgrowth
Birth
Ichthyosis vulgaris
OMIM #146700
Autosomal dominant 
FILAGGRIN
1/250 (may be higher)
Generalized mild scale sparing flexures
Improves with age
After 3 mo
X-­linked ichthyosis
OMIM #308100
X-­linked recessive
Steroid sulfatase gene
1/2,000–1/6,000 males
Large “dirty” scales on trunk, extremities sparing 
flexures
Variable in female carriers
Corneal opacities in Descemet membrane
Cryptorchidism
Placental sulfatase deficiency with prolonged 
maternal labor
Within first 3 mo
Harlequin ichthyosis
OMIM #242500
Autosomal recessive
ABCA12
Very rare
Thick plates of “armor”-­like scale in neonate
Overall survival just over 50%
Death in first 3 mo of life most common
Birth
SYNDROMIC
Syndrome/Disease
Genetics
Clinical Features
Netherton syndrome
OMIM #256500
Autosomal recessive
SPINK5
Hair shaft anomaly (trichorrhexis invaginata most common), ichthyosis 
linearis circumflexa, severe atopic dermatitis, failure to thrive
Refsum disease, infantile
OMIM #266510
Autosomal recessive
PEX1, PXMP3, PEX26
Retinitis pigmentosa, cerebellar ataxia, chronic polyneuritis with 
deafness, skin resembles ichthyosis vulgaris
Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome
OMIM #270200
Autosomal recessive
ALDH3A2 (fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase gene)
Spastic paralysis, intellectual disability, seizures, glistening dots on 
retina, dental bone dysplasia, similar skin findings to congenital 
ichthyosiform erythroderma
Conradi-­Hunermann syndrome 
(chondrodysplasia punctata type 2)
OMIM #302900
X-­linked dominant
EBP gene
Chondrodysplasia punctata, alopecia, skeletal anomalies, cataracts, 
dysmorphic facies, ichthyosiform erythroderma
KID (keratitis-­ichthyosis-­deafness) 
syndrome
OMIM #148210
Autosomal dominant (sporadic)
GJB2 encoding connexin 26
Fixed keratotic plaques, keratoderma, atypical ichthyosis with 
prominent keratoses on extremities and head, neurosensory deafness, 
keratoconjunctivitis
CHILD syndrome
OMIM #308050
X-­linked recessive
NSDHL
Congenital hemidysplasia, unilateral ichthyosiform nevus (epidermal 
nevus), limb defects, cardiovascular and renal anomalies
From Cohen BA. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2013:27–28, Tables 2.2 and 2.4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1159
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
A
B
C
Fig. 60.24  A–C, Sweet syndrome. A 2-­year-­old girl developed fever, 
arthritis, leukocytosis, and widely disseminated, red-­to-­violaceous 
plaques and nodules, which demonstrated intense neutrophilic inflam­
mation on skin biopsy. An extensive evaluation failed to reveal any 
underlying disease. Although she responded quickly to systemic cor­
ticosteroids, it took nearly a year to wean her because of frequent 
recurrences. (From Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2013:189, Fig. 7.32.)
Fig. 60.25  Annular, purpuric plaques of CANDLE (early-­onset chronic 
atypical neutrophilic dermatitis with lipodystrophy and elevated tem­
perature) syndrome. (From Torrelo A. CANDLE syndrome as a par­
adigm of proteasome-­related autoinflammation. Frontiers Immunol. 
2017;8:927, Fig. 5.)
some to permanent joint deformity. Neurologic manifestations include 
chronic aseptic meningitis, cerebral atrophy, cognitive decline, optic 
nerve edema, and hearing loss. Leukocytosis and elevations of CRP 
and ESR indicate the inflammatory state. This cryopyrin-­associated 
autoinflammatory disease is due to pathologic variants in NLRP3 (see 
Chapter 54).
STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) is 
due to a gain-­of-­function pathologic variant in TMEM173 (STING1) 
and presents as an autoinflammatory disease with neonatal or infancy 
onset. Manifestations include failure to thrive, recurrent fevers, spon­
taneous or cold-­induced (malar or digits) rash (Fig. 60.27), gingi­
vostomatitis, interstitial lung disease, polyarthritis, and increased 
inflammatory markers including CRP, ESR, and antinuclear antibody 
(ANA). Heterozygous variants in STING1 are also associated with 
familial chilblain lupus (see Chapter 44).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1160
SECTION 12  Dermatology
B
A
Fig. 60.26  Neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID). A, An urticaria-­like rash is usually 
present at birth or during the first months of life. B, The rash is nonpruritic and papular. (Courtesy Dr. Raphaela 
Goldbach-­Mansky.)
P8
P9
P9
P13
P13
P14
Fig. 60.27  STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). Cutaneous involvement observed in 
patients. Representative cutaneous involvement observed in four patients of the cohort, demonstrating ery­
thematous infiltrated plaques with ulcerations on the dorsal side of the fingers and mild nail dystrophy (P8), 
roundlike ulcerations on the dorsal side of the right leg and ulceration of the nose and the right cheek (P9), 
facial erythema and telangiectatic lesions of the cheeks and erythema and ulceration of the outer helix of the 
right ear (P13), and urticarial-­like lesions of the right elbow (P14). (From Fremond ML, Hadchouel A, Berteloot 
L, et al. Overview of STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAV1) among 21 patients. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol: In Practice. 2021;9[2]:803–818 [Fig. 2A, p. 808].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1161
CHAPTER 60  Congenital Cutaneous Lesions and Infantile Rashes
Erosions/ulcers
Vesicles/bulIae
Generalized
Generalized
Localized
Localized
BI
Sucking blisters
Membranous ACC
Bullous mastocytosis
AE
Infectious
HSV
SSSS
Scabies
GBS
Syphilis
Neonatal VZV
Infectious
Neonatal candidiasis
HSV
Staphylococcal pustulosis
Congenital candidiasis
Scabies
Aspergillus
Chikungunya
Cytomegalovirus
GBS
GAS
Haemophilus influenza
Listeria
Neonatal VZV
Pseudomonas
Non-infectious
ETN
Neonatal pustular melanosis
IP
DIRA
HIES
LCH
Neonatal Behçet syndrome
Pustular eruption of Down syndrome
Pustular psoriasis
Sweet syndrome
Non-infectious
EB
IP
CEP
HEP
DCM
BP
LABD
EI
PV
PG
PF
TEN
TP
Localized
Head/neck
NCP
EPF
EPD
Trunk
Miliaria
Hands/feet
Acropustulosis
Pustules
Generalized
Infectious
HSV
SSSS
Aspergillus
Congenital syphillis
GBS
Intrauterine VZV
Pseudomonas
Noma
Zygomycosis
Diaper
Irritant diaper erosions
Infantile hemangioma
AE
Perinatal gangrene of buttock
Head/neck
Scalp electrode trauma
ACC
EPD
AE
Extremities/hands
Sucking blister
Trauma from adhesives
Non-infectious
EB
BCIE
Congenital deficiency of protein C
Congenital deficiency of protein S
Congenital deficiency of
fibrinogen
CEVD
Focal dermal hypoplasia
Porphyrias
Pyoderma gangrenosum
TEN
Fig. 60.28  Diagnostic algorithm for vesiculopustular eruptions in neonates based on primary lesion mor­
phology and distribution. Conditions highlighted in green are common, yellow are uncommon, and red are 
rare. ACC, aplasia cutis congenita; AE, acrodermatitis enteropathica; BCIE, bullous congenital ichthyosiform 
erythroderma; BI, bullous impetigo; BP, bullous pemphigoid; CEP, congenital erythropoietic porphyria; CEVD, 
congenital erosive and vesicular dermatosis; DCM, diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis; DIRA, deficiency of inter­
leukin-­1 receptor antagonist; EB, epidermolysis bullosa; EI, epidermolytic ichthyosis; EPD, erosive pustular 
dermatosis of the scalp; EPF, eosinophilic pustular folliculitis; ETN, erythema toxicum neonatorum; GAS, 
group A streptococcus; GBS, group B streptococcus; HEP, hepatoerythropoietic porphyria; HIES, hyper-­
immunoglobulin E syndrome; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IP, incontinentia pigmenti; LABD, linear immuno­
globulin A bullous dermatosis; LCH, Langerhans cell histiocytosis; NCP, neonatal cephalic pustulosis; PF, 
pemphigus foliaceus; PG, pemphigoid gestationis; PV, pemphigus vulgaris; SSSS, staphylococcal scalded 
skin syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis; TP, transient porphyrinemia; VZV, varicella zoster virus. (From 
Lalor LE, Chiu YE. Rare vesiculopustular eruptions of the neonatal period. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47[1]:53–75 
[Fig. 1, p. 54].)
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Neonates and infants can have a variety of congenital birthmarks and 
transient rashes. It is necessary to identify the primary skin lesion, any 
secondary skin lesions or changes, and the size, color, distribution, 
and configurations of the lesions to develop an appropriate differential 
diagnosis. Many entities unique to neonates are benign and self-­limited 
and often require only reassurance to the parents.
Red flags are lesions consistent with HSV, Staphylococcus aureus, or 
LCH (see Table 60.2); those consistent with neurocutaneous diseases, 
such as ash leaf spots; or a capillary malformation in V1 distribution 
(see Table 60.1). The location of infantile hemangiomas in a beard 
distribution or on the spine and lower back should raise concern for 
PHACE or PELVIS/SACRAL syndrome (see Table 60.5). Lesions found 
on the midline of the back or head such as hemangiomas or hair collar 
sign can be associated with spinal dysraphism (see Table 60.1 and Fig. 
60.12).
An approach to the diagnosis of erosive, vesicular, bullous, and pus­
tular lesions is noted in Fig. 60.28.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1161.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rashes: Papules and Pustules
Bolognia J, Jorrizo J, Schaffer J. Dermatology. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 
2012.
Chia PS, Leung C, Hsu YL, et al. An infant with transient neonatal pustular 
melanosis presenting as pustules. Pediatr Neonatol. 2010;51(6):356–358.
Ehrhardt MJ, Humphrey SR, Kelly ME, et al. The natural history of skin-­
limited Langerhans cell histiocytosis: a single-­institution experience. J 
Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014;36(8):613–616.
Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-­based 
recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. 
Pediatrics. 2013;131(suppl 3):S163–S186.
Good LM, Good TJ, High WA. Infantile acropustulosis in internationally 
adopted children. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65(4):763–771.
Hashizume S, Ansai S, Kosaka M, et al. Infantile case of eosinophilic pustular 
folliculitis successfully treated with topical indomethacin. J Dermatol. 
2014;41(2):196–197.
Toyonaga E, Abe R, Moriuchi R, et al. Indomethacin for refractory infantile 
eosinophilic pustular folliculitis. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(3):367–368.
Rashes: Patches and Plaques
Chang MW, Nakrani R. Six children with allergic contact dermatitis 
to methylisothiazolinone in wet wipes (baby wipes). Pediatrics. 
2014;133(2):e434–e438.
Gleicher N, Elkayam U. Preventing congenital neonatal heart block in 
offspring of mothers with anti-­SSA/Ro and SSB/La antibodies: a review 
of published literature and registered clinical trials. Autoimmun Rev. 
2013;12(11):1039–1045.
Lee LA. The clinical spectrum of neonatal lupus. Arch Dermatol Res. 
2009;301(1):107–110.
Llanos C, Friedman DM, Saxena A, et al. Anatomical and pathological findings 
in hearts from fetuses and infants with cardiac manifestations of neonatal 
lupus. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012;51(6):1086–1092.
Padilla-­Espana L, Diaz Cabrera R, Del Boz J, et al. Congenital lupus with 
multiorgan involvement: a case report and review of literature. Pediatr 
Dermatol. 2015;32(3):401–404.
Silverman E, Jaeggi E. Non-­cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus 
erythematosus. Scand J Immunol. 2010;72(3):223–225.
Vanoni F, Lava SAG, Fossali EF, et al. Neonatal systemic lupus erythematosus 
syndrome: a comprehensive review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 
2017;53:469–476.
Fixed Lesions: Macules, Papules, and Pustules
Del Pozzo-­Magaña BR, Ho N. Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn: a 20-­
year retrospective study. Pediatr Dermatol. 2016;33:e353–e355.
Haveri FT, Inamadar AC. A cross-­sectional prospective study of cutaneous 
lesions in newborn. ISRN Dermatol. 2014;2014:360590.
Mahe E, Girszyn N, Hadj-­Rabia S, et al. Subcutaneous fat necrosis 
of the newborn: a systematic evaluation of risk factors, clinical 
manifestations, complications and outcome of 16 children. Br J Dermatol. 
2007;156(4):709–715.
Mitra S, Dove J, Somisetty SK. Subcutaneous fat necrosis in newborn—an 
unusual case and review of literature. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;170(9):1107–
1110.
Murphy JT, Soeken T, Megison S, et al. Juvenile xanthogranuloma: diverse 
presentations of noncutaneous disease. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
2014;36(8):641–645.
Samuelov L, Kinori M, Chamlin SL, et al. Risk of intraocular and other 
extracutaneous involvement in patients with cutaneous juvenile 
xanthogranuloma. Pediatr Dermatol. 2018;35:329–335.
Stefanko NS, Drolet BA. Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn and 
associated hypercalcemia: a systematic review of the literature. Pediatr 
Dermatol. 2019;36:24–30.
Wang AR, Bercovitch L. Congenital milia en plaque. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2016;33:e258–e259.
Fixed Lesions: Plaques and Patches
Adams D, Trenor C, Hammill A, et al. Efficacy and safety of sirolimus 
in the treatment of complicated vascular anomalies. Pediatrics. 
2016;137(2):e20153257.
Chiu YE, Drolet BA, Blei F, et al. Variable response to propranolol treatment 
of kaposiform hemangioendothelioma, tufted angioma, and Kasabach-­
Merritt phenomenon. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;59(5):934–938.
Drolet BA, Chamlin SL, Garzon MC, et al. Prospective study of spinal 
anomalies in children with infantile hemangiomas of the lumbosacral skin. 
J Pediatr. 2010;157(5):789–794.
Drolet BA, Trenor 3rd CC, Brandão LR, et al. Consensus-­derived practice 
standards plan for complicated kaposiform hemangioendothelioma. J 
Pediatr. 2013;163(1):285–291.
Garzon M, Epstein L, Heyer G, et al. PHACE syndrome: consensus-­derived 
diagnosis and care recommendations. J Pediatr. 2016;178:24.
Johnson EF, Smidt AC. Not just a diaper rash: LUMBAR syndrome. J Pediatr. 
2014;164(1):208–209.
Leaute-­Labreze C, Boccara O, Degrugillier-­Chopinet C, et al. Safety of oral 
propranolol for the treatment of infantile hemangioma: a systematic 
review. Pediatrics. 2016;138(4):e20160353.
Leaute-­Labreze C, Hoeger P, Mazereeuw-­Hautier J, et al. A randomized, 
controlled trial of oral propranolol in infantile hemangioma. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:735–746.
Liang MG, Frieden IJ. Infantile and congenital hemangiomas. Semin Pediatr 
Surg. 2014;23(4):162–167.
Marqueling AL, Oza V, Frieden IJ, et al. Propranolol and infantile 
hemangiomas four years later: a systematic review. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2013;30(2):182–191.
Olsen G, Hansen L, Stefanko N, et al. Evaluating the safety of oral propranolol 
therapy in patients with PHACE syndrome. Jama Dermatology. 
2020;156:186–190.
Schumacher WE, Drolet BA, Maheshwari M, et al. Spinal dysraphism 
associated with the cutaneous lumbosacral infantile hemangioma: a 
neuroradiological review. Pediatr Radiol. 2012;42(3):315–320.
Siegel DH, Tefft KA, Kelly T, et al. Stroke in children with posterior fossa 
brain malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, co-­arctation of 
the aorta and cardiac defects and eye abnormalities (PHACE) syndrome: a 
systematic review of the literature. Stroke. 2012;43(6):1672–1674.
Smith C, Friedlander S, Guma M, et al. Infantile hemangiomas: an updated 
review on risk factors, pathogenesis, and treatment. Birth Defects Res. 
2017;109:809–815.
Steiner J, Drolet B. Classification of vascular anomalies: an update. Semin 
Intervent Radiol. 2017;34:225–232.
Wassef M, Blei F, Adams D, et al., ISSVA Board and Scientific Committee. 
Vascular anomalies classification: recommendations from the International 
Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):e203–
e214.
Yu X, Zhang J, Wu Z, et al. LUMBAR syndrome: a case manifesting as 
cutaneous infantile hemangiomas of the lower extremity, perineum 
and gluteal region, and a review of published work. J Dermatol (Tokyo). 
2017;44:808–812.
Zallmann M, Leventer R, Mackay M, et al. Screening for Sturge-­Weber 
syndrome: a state-­of-­the-­art review. Pediatr Dermatol. 2018;35:30–42.
Fixed Lesions: Hyperpigmented or Darker Pigment
Alikhan A, Ibrahimi OA, Eisen DB. Congenital melanocytic nevi: where 
are we now? Part I. Clinical presentation, epidemiology, pathogenesis, 
histology, malignant transformation, and neurocutaneous melanosis. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2012;67(4):495.e1–e17.
Kinsler V, O’Hare P, Bulstrode N, et al. Melanoma in congenital melanocytic 
naevi. Br J Dermatol. 2017;176:1131–1143.
Polubothu S, McGuire N, Al-­Olabi L, et al. Does the gene matter? Genotype-­
phenotype and genotype-­outcome associations in congenital melanocytic 
naevi. Br J Dermatol. 2020;182:434–443.
Price H, O’Haver J, Marghoob A, et al. Practical application of the new 
classification scheme for congenital melanocytic nevi. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2015;32:23–27.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
1161.e2
Schaffer JV. Update on melanocytic nevi in children. Clin Dermatol. 
2015;33(3):368–386.
Sibbald C, Pope E, Randhawa H, et al. Neurocutaneous melanosis and 
congenital melanocytic nevi: a retrospective review of clinical and 
radiologic characteristics. Br J Dermatol. 2015. [Epub ahead of print].
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) National Cancer 
Institute website http://www.seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/melan.html.
Waelchli R, Aylett S, Atherton D, et al. Classification of neurological 
abnormalities in children with congenital melanocytic naevus syndrome 
identifies magnetic resonance imaging as the best predictor of clinical 
outcome. Br J Dermatol. 2015;173:739–750.
Fixed Lesions: Other
Browning JC. Aplasia cutis congenita: approach to evaluation and 
management. Dermatol Ther. 2013;26(6):439–444.
Humphrey S, Hu X, Adamson K, et al. A practical approach to the evaluation 
and treatment of an infant with aplasia cutis congenita. J Perinatol. 
2018;38:110–117.
Kuemmet T, Miller J, Michalik D, et al. Low risk of clinically important central 
nervous system dysraphism in a cohort study of 69 patients with isolated 
aplasia cutis congenita of the head. Pediatr Dermatol. 2020;37:455–460.
Sewell MJ, Chiu YE, Drolet BA. Neural tube dysraphism: review of cutaneous 
markers and imaging. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015;32(2):161–170.
Transient and Physiologic Changes of the Skin
Bui T, Corap A, Bygum A. Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita: a 
literature review. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019;14(1):283.
Cizmeci MN, Alagoz D, Avsar MI, et al. Harlequin color change after 
abdominal paracentesis in a newborn with neonatal hemochromatosis. 
Pediatr Dermatol. 2014;31(6):e114–e115.
Haveri FT, Inamadar AC. A cross-­sectional prospective study of cutaneous 
lesions in newborn. ISRN Dermatol. 2014;2014:360590.
Rare and Genetic Disorders
Bonnekoh H, Butze M, Kallinich T, et al. Spectrum of genetic 
autoinflammatory diseases presenting with cutaneous symptoms. Acta 
Derm Venereol. 2020;100:adv00091.
Dávila-­Seijo P, Hernández-­Martin A, Torrelo A. Autoinflammatory syndromes 
for the dermatologist. Clin Dermatol. 2014;32:488–501.
Fine JD, Bruckner-­Tuderman L, Eady RAJ, et al. Inherited epidermolysis 
bullosa: updated recommendations on diagnosis and classification. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:1103–1126.
Garćia-­Romero MT, Ho N. Pediatric Sweet syndrome. A retrospective study. 
Int J Dermatol. 2015;54:518–522.
Gray PEA, Bock V, Ziegler DS, et al. Neonatal Sweet syndrome: a potential 
marker of serious systemic illness. Pediatrics. 2012;129(5):e1353–e1358.
Heath MS, Ortega-­Loayza AG. Insights into the pathogenesis of Sweet’s 
syndrome. Fron Immunol. 2019;10:414.
Intong LRA, Murrell DF. Inherited epidermolysis bullosa: new diagnostic 
criteria and classification. Clin Dermatol. 2012;30:70–77.
Melki I, Rose Y, Uggenti C, et al. Disease-­associated mutations identify a novel 
region in human STING necessary for the control of type 1 interderson 
signaling. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;140:543–552.
Navarini AA, Satoh TK, French LE. Neutrophilic dermatoses and 
autoinflammatory diseases with skin involvement—innate immune 
disorders. Semin Immunopathol. 2016;38:45–56.
Rodriguez-­Pazos L, Ginarte M, Vega A, et al. Autosomal recessive congenital 
ichthyosis. Actas Dermo-­Sifiliográficas. 2013;104:270–284.
Shwin KW, Lee CCR, Goldbach-­Mansky R. Dermatologic manifestations of 
monogenic autoinflammatory diseases. Dermatol Clom. 2017;35(1):21–38.
Vahlquist A, Fischer J, Törmä H. Inherited nonsyndromic ichthyoses: an 
update on pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol. 
2018;19:51–66.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
