1047
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Puberty is defined by both biologic and social standards. Puberty is the 
time when there is an increase in sex steroid production, resulting in 
physical changes such as breast development in females and testicular 
enlargement in males, as well as maturation of processes required for 
future fertility. Puberty, also known as adolescence, is the time when 
children make the transition to adult patterns of behavior, which 
involve maturity, responsibility, and sexuality.
NORMAL PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Terminology
Various terms are used to discuss puberty (Table 55.1). Bone age refers 
to the degree of epiphyseal calcification, width, and proximity to adja­
cent metaphyses and is a marker of physical maturity that normally cor­
responds to chronologic age. Dental age generally correlates with bone 
age. Bone age is derived by comparing a radiograph of the left hand 
and wrist to gender-­appropriate standards in Greulich and Pyle’s bone 
age atlas. In infants and toddlers, a more accurate assessment of bone 
age can be determined from a radiograph of the hemi-­skeleton, with 
primary attention to epiphyses of the long bones. Delayed or advanced 
bone age occurs in many conditions; bone age is strongly influenced 
by sex steroid production. The timing of the onset of puberty is usually 
more closely linked to the bone age than to the chronologic age when 
the two are significantly discordant. Regardless of chronologic age, lin­
ear growth ceases when the bone age reaches 15 years in females and 
18 years in males.
Anatomy
Puberty is controlled by the production of gonadotropin-­releasing 
hormone (GnRH) in the anterior hypothalamus. GnRH-­containing 
cell bodies project axons to the median eminence, where they termi­
nate on the hypothalamic portal vessels. This system is referred to as 
the GnRH pulse generator. After GnRH reaches the anterior pituitary 
gland via the portal vasculature, it stimulates the production of both 
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) by 
the gonadotroph cells. In females, both FSH and LH are required for 
estrogen production by ovarian granulosa cells. The regulated secre­
tion of FSH and LH is also required for follicle growth, ovulation, and 
maintenance of the corpus luteum. In males, FSH regulates spermato­
genesis by Sertoli cells within the seminiferous tubules, and LH acti­
vates Leydig cells to produce testosterone (Fig. 55.1). Androgens cause 
development of male internal and external reproductive organs and 
secondary sexual characteristics in both sexes by binding to receptor 
proteins in the cells of target tissues. Sex steroids also exert a negative 
feedback effect on the pituitary gland and hypothalamus.
Physiology
Perinatal Period and Infancy
Maternal estrogens stimulate breast development in both male and 
female fetuses. Maternal estrogens also stimulate uterine developmen­
tal and endometrial growth; at birth, withdrawal of the high levels of 
maternal estrogen and placental progesterone causes the infant endo­
metrium to regress or even slough and manifests as vaginal bleeding.
At birth, levels of LH and FSH in both sexes rise markedly and 
remain elevated for several months. In the female, FSH stimulates ovar­
ian granulosa cells to produce 17β-­estradiol sufficient to maintain pre­
natal breast development for up to 8 months of life. Estrogen-­induced 
vaginal cornification is generally evident as abundant vaginal discharge 
at birth and is maintained as long as estrogens are produced. Ovarian 
size from birth to 3 months ranges from 0.7 to 3.6 cm3, decreasing to 
2.7 cm3 by 12 months and to 1.7 cm3 by 24 months; this size persists 
until the onset of puberty. Ultrasound studies of the ovaries in normal 
infants show many microcysts.
Male breast development regresses rather quickly after birth. Ele­
vated LH levels after birth stimulate Leydig cell production of testos­
terone for 6–12 months, leading to further genital development. Penis 
length increases from 3–5 cm in the full-­term newborn to 4.5–6 cm by 
2–3 years.
Childhood
By 2 years of age, serum gonadotropin levels decrease, and thus serum 
sex steroid levels also decrease, frequently to levels undetectable by 
conventional assays.
Beginning approximately at ages 6–7 years in females and 7–8 years 
in males, adrenal androgen production begins to increase and can 
be detected by the presence of increasing concentrations of the weak 
adrenal androgen dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfated 
derivative, DHEA sulfate (DHEAS). Despite these serum levels, there 
is initially no secondary sexual (pubic or axillary) hair development.
Adolescence
Beginning on average at about 10.5 years in females and 11.5 years in 
males, there is the return of activity of the hypothalamic GnRH pulse 
generator, leading to increased serum levels of FSH and LH. The kiss­
peptin (KISS1 gene)/G-­protein-­coupled receptor (GPR54) (also called 
KISS1 receptor) system stimulates the GnRH neurons and is involved 
Disorders of Puberty
Peter M. Wolfgram and Bethany Auble
55
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1048
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
in the feedback regulation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal 
axis by gonadal steroids. The trigger mechanism for this resurgence is 
unknown, but it may be linked to attainment of a critical body mass or 
fat mass. Leptin, a hormone produced by fat cells, may be the connec­
tion between weight (fat mass) and pubertal events. In early puberty, 
the activity of the hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator is mostly 
evident overnight (sleep-­entrained), with pulses increasing in number 
and amplitude and eventually occurring every 60–90 minutes. Over 
time, this process begins to occur during the daytime; there is always 
greater gonadotropin secretion at night. Because of the longer half-­life 
of sex steroids, serum levels of estradiol and testosterone show little, 
if any, diurnal variation. Testosterone levels may be slightly higher in 
the morning with advancing puberty. There is central sensitivity to the 
negative feedback effects of sex steroids, leading to significant eleva­
tions of gonadotropins when sex steroid production is impaired. The 
function of the hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator can be accelerated 
in the setting of obesity, and LH and FSH secretion can revert to the 
prepubertal pattern in the setting of significant weight loss, as occurs in 
females with anorexia nervosa.
Usually within 6 months of the onset of this heightened GnRH 
pulse generator activity in females, there is also increasing production 
of androgens by the adrenal glands, the major source of androgens in 
females. In males, the testes are the main source of androgens, although 
male adrenarche also begins about 6 months after gonadarche.
Sex Steroid Effects
In response to FSH, both testes and ovaries enlarge, starting gonadarche. 
Ovarian granulosa cells produce 17β-­estradiol, which causes estro­
gen effects that generally occur in a fixed order (Table 55.2). Growth 
increase is one of the early effects of estrogen. Growth is stimulated 
by estrogen-­stimulated increased production of growth hormone and 
insulin-­like growth factor 1. Estrogens along with growth hormone 
and thyroid hormones increase bone mineralization and growth.
In response to LH, testicular Leydig cells produce testosterone, 
which is converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), leading to androgen 
effects that generally occur in the same order (Table 55.3).
Note that growth is not stimulated early in puberty by rising testos­
terone; in fact, during the phase when testosterone levels are beginning 
to rise, growth is usually slowed perceptibly from a prepubertal height 
velocity of perhaps 5 cm/yr to a velocity as slow as 4 cm/yr for 12–18 
months. As levels of testosterone increase closer to 400 ng/dL and testis 
volume increases to between 10 and 12 mL, males make the transition 
to rapid growth. Rapid growth for males thus occurs for about 2 years 
in middle puberty, and slower growth continues for 2–3 more years.
Testosterone
Estrogen
LH
FSH
GnRH
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Testis
Ovary
Progesterone
Fig. 55.1  Normal hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis. FSH, follicle-­
stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; LH, 
luteinizing hormone. (Courtesy of Sex Development: Genetics and Biol­
ogy: An initiative of the Research Program in Disorders of Sex Devel­
opment, funded by the NHMRC Australia. http://www.dsdgenetics.org/
index.php?id=48.)
TABLE 55.2  Estrogen Effects
Vaginal and urethral cornification
Breast development, often asymmetric
Linear growth
Fat development
Uterine development
Menarche: 2–2.5 yr after breast buds
TABLE 55.1  Puberty Terminology
Gonadarche: maturation of the gonads under the control of the 
hypothalamus (GnRH) and pituitary gland (FSH and LH)
Thelarche: presence of breast development in girls
Gynecomastia: presence of breast development in boys
Adrenarche or development of androgen-­regulated pubarche: 
secondary sexual characteristics, including pubic hair, axillary hair, apocrine 
(underarm) odor, and acne, in both sexes
Menarche: time of the first menstrual period
Spermarche: time when a boy is first able to produce sperm
FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hor­
mone; LH, luteinizing hormone.
TABLE 55.3  Androgen Effects
Psychologic changes
Skin and hair oils, sweat odors
Areolar growth and pigment
Sexual skin pigment and folding
Phallic growth
Voice change
Sexual hair growth
Hairline recession
Statural growth
Muscle mass/strength
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1049
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
Benign adolescent gynecomastia occurs in as many as 40–60% of 
normal males; enough estrogen relative to the amount of testosterone 
is produced so that breast development occurs. Gynecomastia usually 
starts in early to middle puberty (peak age, 13 years), before adult male 
concentrations of testosterone are achieved. It typically starts on one 
side and resolves within 2 years. Gynecomastia is more common in 
obese males, although true breast tissue in this setting is often difficult 
to distinguish from fat tissue (lipomastia).
Chronology of Puberty
Females
Females begin puberty at an average age of 10.5 years (range, 8–13 
years; mean ± 2.5 standard deviations [SD]). There are data suggesting 
that female puberty begins at an earlier age and that African-Ameri­
can females begin puberty about 1 year earlier than White females, but 
this is not universally accepted. In 85% of females, the first clinically 
detectable sign of puberty is breast development (thelarche), although 
ovarian enlargement, which is not clinically detectable in a strict sense, 
occurs first. Breast buds appear as small nodules either directly under­
neath the nipples or slightly off center, causing the areolae and nipples 
to be pushed out and sometimes cause minor, transient discomfort or 
itching as the skin around the nipple is stretched. Breast development 
may be unilateral and asymmetric in its earliest stages. Pubic hair usu­
ally begins to develop within the next 6 months; in approximately 15% 
of females, pubic hair precedes breast development. Such discordance 
has no clinical significance. The female adolescent growth spurt com­
mences near the onset of thelarche, generally spanning a 2-­year period 
between the ages of 11 and 13 years. Axillary hair generally begins, 
on average, between 12 and 13 years. Menarche, a rather late event in 
female puberty, occurs on average between 12.2 and 12.8 years, typi­
cally 2–2.5 years following thelarche. Menarche is often preceded by a 
whitish, non–foul-­smelling vaginal discharge (physiologic leukorrhea) 
for up to 6 months. At the time of menarche, an adolescent female 
has reached 96.5% of her adult height potential. However, more linear 
growth may remain in clinical situations in which menarche occurs at 
a younger bone age than is typical for the average adolescent female. 
Menstrual cycles for the first 2 years after menarche are often anovula­
tory and irregular in frequency.
Males
Males begin puberty at an average age of 11.5 years (range, 9–14 years; 
mean ± 2.5 SD). The first clinically detectable sign of puberty is testic­
ular enlargement, a fact generally unknown to patients and their par­
ents. From birth to the start of puberty, male testicular volumes range 
between 1 and 2 mL as determined by using an orchidometer, a series 
of ellipsoid models of varying volumes (Fig. 55.2). Stretched penile 
length (measured with a rigid tape measure on the dorsum of the penis 
from the pubic symphysis to the tip of the nonerect penis without con­
sidering any foreskin tissue) averages about 3.5 cm (range, 2.8–4.2 cm) 
at birth and grows by an average of 2.5 cm until the start of puberty. 
The onset of male puberty is considered to have begun when at least 
one of the two testicles reaches 4 mL in volume. It takes approximately 
5–6 years for the testicles to reach the average adult volume of 18 mL. 
Approximately 75–80% of the adult testicle consists of seminiferous 
tubules; testosterone-­producing Leydig cells make up the remainder.
Within 6 months after the start of testicular enlargement, pubic hair 
can be found; pubic hair precedes testicular enlargement in approxi­
mately 15%. The presence of pubic hair is incorrectly considered the 
first evidence of puberty in males by both patients and parents. Pubic 
hair is followed by the development of axillary hair at approximately 14 
years of age. During this time, penile enlargement also occurs, reach­
ing a mean adult length of 12.4 ± 1.6 cm at 20 years of age. The male 
adolescent growth spurt typically occurs between the ages of 13 and 15 
years, commencing when the testicular volumes reach 12 mL. By age 
15 years, a male has attained 98% of his final adult height. The ability of 
adolescent males to produce sperm, as evidenced by detection of sper­
matozoa in urine samples, begins between 13.5 and 15 years.
Clinical Staging of Puberty
Standardized staging of pubertal development in both sexes allows for 
comparison between children, as well as longitudinal monitoring of 
individual children (Fig. 55.3).
Breast development in females, genitalia in males, and pubic hair 
in both sexes are scored according to five-­stage systems referred to as 
Tanner stages 1–5. Axillary hair in both sexes is rated by a three-­stage 
system referred to as stages 1–3. Puberty itself is not staged because 
different components of puberty may occur at different stages.
Females
For breast development, Tanner stage 1 refers to no breast develop­
ment; Tanner stage 2, to the presence of just breast buds (one or two); 
Tanner stage 3, to the beginning of formation of the peripheral mound 
with elevation of the breast; Tanner stage 4, to a further increase in 
breast size, with the formation of the so-­called “double contour,” in 
which the areola and papilla are both raised off the surface of the whole 
breast; and Tanner stage 5, to adult size, with a return to the single 
contour in which the surface of the areola is again flush with that of the 
breast. It may be difficult to differentiate between Tanner stages 3 and 
5 because the only difference between these two stages is breast size 
(determined mostly by fat content). Thus, small breasts, especially in 
an older adolescent female, should not necessarily be construed as Tan­
ner stage 3, especially if she has already menstruated, which typically 
occurs when the breasts have reached Tanner stage 4 and/or if women 
in the family typically have small breasts.
Males
For external genitalia, Tanner stage 1 refers to the prepubertal state (tes­
tes <4 mL in volume); Tanner stage 2, to slight enlargement of the testes 
and scrotum; Tanner stage 3, to lengthening of the penis and further 
Fig. 55.2  Prader orchidometer is a series of plastic or wooden ovoid-­
shaped pieces attached by a string representing different testicular vol­
umes (1 mL, 2 mL, 3 mL, 4 mL, 5 mL, 6 mL, 8 mL, 10 mL, 12 mL, 15 mL, 
20 mL, and 25 mL). (From Zitelli BJ, McIntire, SC, Nowalk AJ, eds. Zitelli 
and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2018:348, Fig. 9.5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1050
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
enlargement of the testes and scrotum; Tanner stage 4, to continued 
penile growth in both length and width with development of the glans; 
and Tanner stage 5, to adult appearance. An alternative, simplified, and 
equally accurate approach involves only sizing of the testicles, whereby 
4 mL represents the start of puberty, 12 mL correlates with the start of 
the growth spurt, and 18 mL is the average adult size. In some cases, the 
appearance of pubic hair does not occur until the testicular volumes 
reach 12–15 mL. Testicular volumes may differ at all stages between 
sides but not usually by more than one size on a standard orchidome­
ter. It is important not to confuse a hydrocele with an enlarged testis.
Females and Males
Tanner staging of pubic hair is similar in both sexes. Tanner stage 1 is 
defined by having no pubic hair. Tanner stage 2 is characterized by the 
presence of a few, countable strands of curly, coarse, pigmented hair 
along the labia minora in females or at the base of the penis and/or 
on the scrotum in males. Lighter and softer hair (lanugo) in the pubic 
region is not pubic hair. On occasion, especially in individuals from 
ethnic populations from Mediterranean countries or Northern India, 
there may be an extension of coarse body hair (hypertrichosis) to the 
pubic region that can be difficult to discern from pubic hair. Tanner 
stage 3 refers to the presence of coarser, darker, and curlier hairs, the 
number of which is no longer countable, which have spread more lat­
erally. Tanner stage 4 refers to a thick, fully triangular pattern of hair 
growth, without spread to the thighs. Finally, Tanner stage 5 refers to 
the adult pattern in which there is spread of hair to the medial thighs. 
The designation Tanner stage 6 is used to describe hair growing up the 
linea alba, referring to the so-­called male escutcheon.
Axillary hair is the simplest component of puberty to quantify. Stage 
1 refers to the absence of any hair. Stage 2 refers to a countable number 
of curly, coarse, pigmented strands in at least one armpit. Stage 3 refers 
to the adult complement, which is merely more hair than is present in 
stage 2. For the individual with shaved axillae, it is safe to assume either 
stage 2 or stage 3 hair is present.
Family Patterns
The timing of puberty is affected by familial patterns; both parents’ his­
tories are important in assessing the child with early or late puberty. 
The following information is useful for establishing the parental effect:
 
• Age of their mother’s menarche
 
• Age their father began shaving on a daily basis
 
• Age when their parents stopped growing
PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY
Definition
The onset of puberty, at least in females, may be occurring earlier than 
in the past; therefore, the definition of precocious puberty has been 
modified to refer to the appearance of any feature of puberty before 8 
years of age in females and before 9 years of age in males. Some experts 
would argue that the definition of precocious puberty in African-Amer­
ican and Hispanic females would be younger than 7 years, but the strict 
definition remains younger than 8 years. The family pattern must also 
be considered; an early onset of puberty is frequently familial.
Normal Variants
Idiopathic Isolated Premature Thelarche
This common condition is the development of breast tissue in females 
before 8 years of age in White children and 7 years of age in African-
American children, with no other manifestations of puberty (Fig. 55.4). 
Elevated serum estrogen levels for age have been difficult to demon­
strate, although higher levels than in age-­matched normal females have 
been measured by an ultrasensitive estradiol assay. Development of 
breast tissue commonly begins between 2 and 3 years of age; it may be 
present from birth. The observed tissue may be asymmetric, unilateral, 
or bilateral. When asymmetric or unilateral, parents are typically con­
cerned about the possibility of malignancy, an extremely rare occur­
rence in childhood. The early breast tissue frequently regresses without 
intervention, but it may persist. If it persists, the degree of development 
I
I
II
II
III
III
IV
IV
V
V
3
4
10
16
25
<2,5
2,5-3,2
3,6
4,1-4,5
>4,5
Fig. 55.3  Tanner stages. (Illustrations by Michał Komorniczak.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1051
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
does not usually exceed Tanner stage 3. The bone age, if determined, 
is not frequently advanced, and there is no associated growth spurt. If 
these simple clinical criteria are met, no hormonal studies or additional 
radiologic procedures are necessary.
Physiologic breast enlargement also occurs in neonates from pla­
cental transfer of estrogens. Most marked in the first weeks of life, it 
usually regresses by 1–2 months.
Idiopathic Isolated Precocious Adrenarche
This common, normal variant is characterized by the development of 
pubic hair, axillary hair and odor, and/or a small amount of acne in 
White females before the age of 8 years, in African-American females 
before the age of 7 years, and in males before the age of 9 years. It 
appears to result from early production of adrenal androgens. Pre­
cocious adrenarche occurs much more commonly in females than 
in males and develops most often in obese and/or African-American 
females and in brain-­injured children. There is no associated evidence 
of virilization (no growth spurt, no significant advancement of bone 
age, no increase in muscle bulk, no voice deepening, and no tempo­
ral hair recession). In females, there is no associated clitoromegaly and 
no evidence of estrogen-­mediated components of puberty; in males, 
there is no phallic or testicular enlargement. If a child presents at a 
very young age, it is generally presumed that an organic cause (such 
as congenital adrenal hyperplasia) will be found. However, in infant 
males with isolated scrotal hair, typically no cause is found, and the 
hair subsequently falls out. In most cases of idiopathic precocious adre­
narche (benign premature adrenarche), serum levels of DHEA and/or 
DHEAS are consistent with the reference range of Tanner staging of the 
hair growth, and the 8:00 a.m. 17-­hydroxyprogesterone level is normal. 
If these criteria are met, no additional laboratory studies are indicated. 
This pubertal variant was considered benign and self-­limited, but data 
suggest that at least in females with associated low birthweight, it may 
suggest an increased risk for polycystic ovary disease.
Isosexual Central Precocious Puberty
Central sexual precocity results from activation of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­gonadal axis at an earlier-­than-­normal age (Figs. 55.1 and 
55.5). Isosexual development refers to pubertal changes appropriate for 
the sex of the child, such as breast budding in females and testicular 
enlargement in males. This is to be distinguished from contrasexual 
development, in which the pubertal features in females are mediated 
by male hormones (clitoromegaly) and those in males are mediated by 
female hormones (breast development).
Causes of isosexual precocious puberty are listed in Tables 55.4 and 
55.5 and Figs. 55.5 and 55.6. The majority of cases in females, who are 
at least 10-­fold more likely to be affected than males, are idiopathic, 
whereas only a small percentage of affected males have no definable 
cause. Ovarian size, as seen on an ultrasound, is generally a reflec­
tion of ovarian estrogen production. In true central puberty, pituitary 
gonadotropins cause both ovaries to increase in size.
In true male central puberty, testes enlarge and androgen produc­
tion increases. The size of testis enlargement sufficient to determine 
puberty is debatable. In general, prepubertal testes are <4 mL in vol­
ume and 2 cm in length. If on examination both testes are enlarged and 
androgen signs are present, it is likely puberty is underway and testis-­
derived testosterone levels are increasing. If basal pituitary gonado­
tropins are increasing, or if LH levels increase markedly after GnRH 
stimulation, the diagnosis is central precocious puberty.
Hypothalamic hamartomas, which may be associated with ecto­
pic secretion of GnRH or transforming growth factor-­α, are common 
causes of precocious puberty. Approximately 3% of children with neu­
rofibromatosis type 1 develop central precocity, usually caused by a 
hypothalamic optic glioma.
Central precocious puberty in the setting of untreated or under­
treated peripheral causes of puberty, such as virilizing congenital 
Fig. 55.4  Two-­year-­old twin sisters with idiopathic isolated premature 
thelarche manifested by isolated breast development to Tanner stage 3.
Fig. 55.5  A 3-­year-­old girl (left) with isosexual central precocious 
puberty characterized by both breast and pubic hair development, and 
tall stature, contrasted to a normal 5-­year-­old prepubertal girl (right).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1052
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
adrenal hyperplasia, is caused by premature activation of the GnRH 
pulse generator, presumably as a result of continuous central nervous 
system exposure to high levels of androgens (or androgens aromatized 
to estrogens). Precocious puberty with thelarche and menarche in the 
setting of long-­standing severe untreated primary hypothyroidism 
(Van Wyk–Grumbach syndrome) can occur, although the mechanism 
is not clear. It is clinically distinguished by the usual manifestations of 
hypothyroidism, including delayed growth and bone age, rather than 
the advanced bone age present with other causes of precocious puberty.
Incomplete Isosexual Precocity (Precocious 
Pseudopuberty)
Precocious pseudopuberty refers to gonadal or adrenal sex steroid secre­
tion not resulting from activation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal 
axis (pituitary independent). It is caused by excessive production of or 
exposure to either androgens or estrogens (see Table 55.4).
Androgen Exposure or Overproduction
Anabolic steroids have been taken by males and females to improve 
muscle development and athletic performance. In males, if anabolic 
steroids are taken at the age of puberty, secondary sexual development 
will progress, but the testes will remain small. In females, anabolic ste­
roids can produce clitoral enlargement (particularly in diameter), acne, 
and hirsutism, as well as emotional lability.
Females. Ovarian tumors producing androgens (thecoma) and 
sometimes also estrogen may be palpable on physical examination 
and are usually easily seen on a pelvic ultrasound. Arrhenoblastoma, a 
virilizing ovarian tumor, is rare in children. Gonadoblastomas, which 
TABLE 55.4  Classification of Sexual Precocity
TRUE PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY OR COMPLETE ISOSEXUAL 
PRECOCITY (GnRH-­DEPENDENT SEXUAL PRECOCITY OR 
PREMATURE ACTIVATION OF THE HYPOTHALAMIC GnRH 
PULSE GENERATOR)
Idiopathic true precocious puberty
CNS tumors
Optic glioma associated with neurofibromatosis type 1
Hypothalamic astrocytoma
Other CNS disorders
Developmental abnormalities including hypothalamic hamartoma of the tuber cinereum
Encephalitis
Static encephalopathy
Brain abscess
Sarcoid or tubercular granuloma
Head trauma
Hydrocephalus
Arachnoid cyst
Myelomeningocele
Vascular lesion
Cranial irradiation
True precocious puberty after late treatment of congenital virilizing adrenal 
hyperplasia or other previous chronic exposure to sex steroids
True precocious puberty due to gain-­of-­function pathologic variants in KISS1R/KISS1 genes
Central precocious puberty due to loss of function in MKRN3 or DLK1 genes 
(Figs. 55.6 and 55.7)
INCOMPLETE ISOSEXUAL PRECOCITY (HYPOTHALAMIC 
GnRH INDEPENDENT)
Males
Gonadotropin-­secreting tumors 
hCG-­secreting CNS tumors (e.g., chorioepitheliomas, germinoma, teratoma)
hCG-­secreting tumors located outside the CNS (hepatoma, teratoma, 
choriocarcinoma)
Increased androgen secretion by adrenal gland or testis
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CYP21 and CYP11B1 deficiencies)
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm
Leydig cell adenoma
Familial testotoxicosis (sex-­limited autosomal dominant pituitary gonadotropin-­
independent precocious Leydig cell and germ cell maturation)
Cortisol resistance syndrome
Females
Ovarian cyst
Estrogen-­secreting ovarian or adrenal neoplasm
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome
Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Iatrogenic or exogenous sexual precocity (including inadvertent exposure to 
estrogens in food, drugs, or cosmetics)
VARIATIONS OF PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Premature thelarche
Premature isolated menarche
Premature adrenarche
Adolescent gynecomastia in boys
Macro-orchidism
CONTRASEXUAL PRECOCITY
Feminization in Males
Adrenal neoplasm
Chorioepithelioma
CYP11B1 deficiency
Late-­onset adrenal hyperplasia
Testicular neoplasm (Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome)
Increased extraglandular conversion of circulating adrenal androgens to 
estrogen
Iatrogenic (exposure to estrogens)
Virilization in Females
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
CYP21 deficiency
CYP11B1 deficiency
3β-­HSD deficiency
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm (Cushing syndrome)
Virilizing ovarian neoplasm (e.g., arrhenoblastoma)
Iatrogenic (exposure to androgens)
Cortisol resistance syndrome
Aromatase deficiency
CNS, central nervous system; CYP11B1, 11-­hydroxylase; CYP21, 21-­hydroxylase; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic 
gonadotropin; 3β-­HSD, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 4,5-­isomerase.
Modified from Grumbach MM. True or central precocious puberty. In: Kreiger DT, Bardin CW, eds. Current Therapy in Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 1985–1986. Toronto, Canada: BC Decker; 1985:4–8.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1053
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
TABLE 55.5  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity
Disorder
Plasma 
Gonadotropins
LH Response 
to GnRH
Serum Sex Steroid 
Concentration
Gonadal Size
Miscellaneous
Gonadotropin Dependent
True precocious 
puberty
Prominent LH 
pulses (premature 
reactivation 
of GnRH pulse 
generator)
Pubertal LH 
response initially 
during sleep
Pubertal values of 
testosterone or estradiol
Normal pubertal testicular 
enlargement or ovarian 
and uterine enlargement
MRI of brain to rule out CNS 
tumor or other abnormality; 
skeletal survey for McCune-­
Albright syndrome (by US)
Incomplete Sexual Precocity (Pituitary Gonadotropin Independent)
Males
Chorionic 
gonadotropin-­
secreting tumor 
in males
High hCG, low LH
Prepubertal LH 
response
Pubertal value of 
testosterone
Slight to moderate 
uniform enlargement 
of testes
Hepatomegaly suggests 
hepatoblastoma; CT scan of 
brain if chorionic gonadotropin-­
secreting CNS tumor suspected
Leydig cell tumor in 
males
Suppressed
No LH response
Very high testosterone
Irregular, asymmetric 
enlargement of testes
Familial testotoxicosis
Suppressed
No LH response
Pubertal values of 
testosterone
Testes symmetric and 
>2.5 cm but smaller 
than expected for 
pubertal development; 
spermatogenesis occurs
Familial; probably sex-­limited, 
autosomal dominant trait
Virilizing congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH 
response
Elevated 17-­OHP in 
CYP21 deficiency 
or elevated 
11-­deoxycortisol in 
CYP11B1 deficiency
Testes prepubertal
Autosomal recessive; may be 
congenital or late-­onset form, 
may have salt loss in CYP21 
deficiency or hypertension in 
CYP11B1 deficiency
Virilizing adrenal 
tumor
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH 
response
High DHEAS and 
androstenedione values
Testes prepubertal
CT, MRI, or US of abdomen
Premature 
adrenarche
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH 
response
Prepubertal testosterone, 
DHEAS, or urinary 
17-­ketosteroid values 
appropriate for pubic 
hair stage 2
Testes prepubertal
Onset usually after 6 yr of age; 
more frequent in CNS-­injured 
children
Females
Granulosa cell tumor 
(follicular cysts may 
present similarly)
Suppressed
Prepubertal LH 
response
Very high estradiol
Ovarian enlargement on 
physical examination, 
CT, or US
Tumor often palpable on physical 
examination
Follicular cyst
Suppressed
Prepubertal LH 
response
Prepubertal to very high 
estradiol
Ovarian enlargement on 
physical examination, 
CT, or US
Single or recurrent episodes 
of menses and/or breast 
development; exclude McCune-­
Albright syndrome
Feminizing adrenal 
tumor
Suppressed
Prepubertal LH 
response
High estradiol and DHEAS 
values
Ovaries prepubertal
Unilateral adrenal mass
Premature thelarche
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH, 
pubertal
Prepubertal or early 
estradiol response
Ovaries prepubertal
Onset usually before 3 yr of age
Premature 
adrenarche
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH 
response
Prepubertal estradiol; 
DHEAS or urinary 
17-­ketosteroid values 
appropriate for 
pubic hair stage 2
Ovaries prepubertal
Onset usually after 6 yr of age; 
more frequent in brain-­injured 
children
Late-­onset virilizing 
congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH 
response
Elevated 17-­OHP in 
basal or corticotrophin-­ 
stimulated state
Ovaries prepubertal
Autosomal recessive
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1054
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
are not always virilizing, typically occur in phenotypic females who 
have Y chromosome material. Granulosa cell tumors usually cause 
estrogen overproduction but occasionally cause virilization due to 
excessive androgen production.
Adrenal tumors can be detected with ultrasonography, CT, or 
MRI. Androgens produced by adrenal tumors are not suppressed by 
dexamethasone. Excessive adrenal androgens may also be produced 
as a result of late-­onset or nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperpla­
sia, but the androgen production can be suppressed by dexameth­
asone. The enzymatic deficiency in late-­onset congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia is mild, inasmuch as it does not cause ambiguity of geni­
talia at birth; however, it is associated with an accelerated growth rate 
and advanced bone age and may be clinically recognized any time 
after birth.
Males. If both testes are slightly increased in volume and 
testosterone levels are increased but LH and FSH levels are low, there 
are two possibilities: either the testes are being stimulated by human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which acts like LH and does not 
increase testicular volume, as with FSH, or the testes are functioning 
autonomously. hCG levels must be determined, and if they are 
Disorder
Plasma 
Gonadotropins
LH Response 
to GnRH
Serum Sex Steroid 
Concentration
Gonadal Size
Miscellaneous
In Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright 
syndrome
Suppressed
Suppressed
Sex steroid pubertal or 
higher
Ovarian enlargement 
(visible on US); slight 
testicular enlargement
Skeletal survey for polyostotic 
fibrous dysplasia and skin 
examination for café-­au-­lait 
spots
Primary 
hypothyroidism
LH prepubertal; FSH 
may be slightly 
elevated
Prepubertal FSH may 
be increased
Estradiol may be pubertal
Testicular enlargement; 
ovaries cystic
TSH and prolactin elevated; 
T4 low
CNS, central nervous system; CYP, P450 cytochrome isoenzyme; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, 
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; 17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; T4, thyroxine; 
TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; US, ultrasonography.
TABLE 55.5  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity—cont’d
?
?
?
?
?
LEPR
GWAS ~92%
variance
unknown
>60%
unknown
Precocious
puberty
GnRH
deficiency
(CHH, KS)
>40%
unknown
Healthy population
Delayed
puberty
>90%
unknown
NEGR1
DLK1
MKRN3
TACR3
LGR4
GnRHR
FGFR1
GnRH
HS6ST1
IGSF10
EAP1
KISS1R
KISS1
NSMF
ANOS1
FTO
Fig. 55.6  Established genetic basis of common genetic variants of pubertal timing from genome-­wide associ­
ation studies (GWAS), conditions of GnRH deficiency (CHH and KS), precocious puberty, and delayed puberty 
and their overlap. Activating and inactivating pathologic variants in KISS1 and KISS1R cause the opposite 
phenotypes, precocious puberty and CHH, respectively. Bold circles highlight those genes whose pathologic 
gene variants have been identified in familial delayed puberty. CHH, congenital hypogonadotropic hypogo­
nadism; KS, Kallmann syndrome. (From Howard SR. The genetic basis of delayed puberty. Front Endocrinol 
(Lausanne). 2019;10:423 [published 2019 Jun 26], Fig. 5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1055
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
increased, tumors producing hCG must be identified and removed; 
such tumors may include hepatoma, germinoma, hepatoblastoma, 
teratoma, and chorioepithelioma.
If both testes are producing testosterone autonomously without 
gonadotropin stimulus, the condition of testotoxicosis is probable. Chil­
dren with this autosomal dominant disorder have signs of puberty by 4 
years of age (Fig. 55.8). Testosterone production and Leydig cell hyper­
plasia occur in the setting of prepubertal serum LH levels, because of 
a gain-­of-­function pathologic variant in the gene for the LH receptor, 
resulting in its constitutive activation. Affected males are fertile. Females 
who carry this pathologic variant do not develop precocious puberty.
If one testis is enlarged, a Leydig cell adenoma in that testicle is 
probably producing excess testosterone; the tumor must be removed. 
The high levels of testosterone suppress LH and FSH secretion, so the 
other testicle remains small. Depending on age, a testicular prosthesis 
may be inserted to replace the removed testicle.
If androgen signs are developing steadily but neither testis has 
enlarged, the androgen is presumed to be either from the adrenal 
glands or from an exogenous source. Inappropriate adrenal production 
of androgens results from tumors or abnormalities in steroid synthe­
sis enzymatic activity. An adrenal tumor would have affected growth 
whenever the gland started to function, but not necessarily beginning 
at birth. A defect in steroid synthesis caused by an enzymatic deficiency 
(usually 21-­hydroxylase) may be congenital, as in congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia, and the excess androgen production resulting from the 
enzymatic deficiency would have been produced from the time of birth, 
leading to increased growth velocity from early life. Children with con­
genital adrenal hyperplasia may have severe adrenal crises during an ill­
ness or surgery. A late-­onset or nonclassical form of adrenal hyperplasia 
may also occur. A tumor can be identified by CT, ultrasonography, or 
MRI and must be removed.
Estrogen Overproduction
The most common cause of premature progressive breast development 
is simple premature thelarche. In this case, a pelvic ultrasound study 
may show prepubertal ovaries varying from 1 to 3 mL in volume with 
many small estrogen-­producing follicular cysts. Some cysts may be 
larger (persistent follicular cysts). Estradiol is produced by the gran­
ulosa cells lining the follicles and causes vaginal discharge and breast 
development. Estradiol may cause uterine development as well but 
generally does not cause increased growth velocity. LH and FSH levels 
are low, and if estradiol is measured, it might be elevated but minimally 
so. The follicular cysts regress spontaneously (90% of the time) within 
a few weeks to months, and the vaginal cornification is lost within 1 
week of cyst regression. The breast tissue then softens but can remain 
for months and may never completely regress. Typically, premature 
thelarche due to persistent follicular cysts is usually benign and self-­
limited. However, 10% of the cysts may persist and enlarge, with some 
follicular cysts becoming large enough to threaten ovarian torsion and 
to necessitate surgical treatment.
Granulosa cell tumors are usually isolated occurrences but may 
occur as part of Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (oral melanosis and intestinal 
Normal allele imprinted
Mutant allele expressed
Clinical phenotype present
Normal allele imprinted
Normal allele expressed
No clinical phenotype
Mutant allele imprinted
Normal allele expressed
No clinical phenotype
A. Carrier Male
B. No Pathologic Variant
C. Affected Female
50% risk
Fig. 55.7  Imprinting pattern of maternally imprinted, paternally expressed genes MKRN3 and DLK1. A, 
Maternal allele is imprinted or silenced; mutant paternal allele is expressed, resulting in phenotype of central 
precocious puberty. B, Maternal allele is normally imprinted and normal paternal allele is expressed, result­
ing in normal puberty. C, Maternal allele containing pathologic variant is imprinted; normal paternal allele 
is expressed, resulting in no pathologic phenotype (i.e., normal puberty). (Modified figure courtesy Ross 
McGowan, Department of Zoology, University of Manitoba.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1056
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
polyps). Aromatase is the enzyme that is responsible for conversion of 
androgen to estrogen; aromatase excess is an autosomal dominant dis­
order that can lead to increased estradiol levels.
McCune-­Albright syndrome. This disorder (Fig. 55.9) consists of the 
clinical triad of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, hyperpigmented macules 
(café-­au-­lait spots) with irregular borders (“coast of Maine”), and 
multiple autonomous endocrinopathies (most commonly gonadotropin-­
independent precocious puberty, but also hyperthyroidism, acromegaly, 
and hypercortisolemia) (Table 55.6). Precocious puberty occurs much 
more commonly in females than in males. Patients have a somatic 
mutation in their GNAS1 gene that occurs early in embryogenesis and 
results in somatic mosaic constitutive activation of adenylyl cyclase 
in affected tissues. This activation leads to the autonomous function 
of involved tissues, resulting, in the case of affected endocrine glands, 
in unregulated production of hormone. Precocity in females, often 
heralded by menstrual bleeding, frequently occurs before 2 years of 
age. The ovaries are enlarged and have many follicular cysts; the patient 
has elevated levels of estradiol. Later, when the GnRH pulse generator 
is activated subsequent to unabated sex steroid exposure, the patient 
may transition from gonadotropin-­independent to central precocious 
puberty.
Neurofibromatosis type 1. Neurofibromatosis type 1 can present 
with precocious puberty secondary to a hypothalamic tumor. Pseudo-­
thelarche/gynecomastia can present due to a plexiform neurofibroma 
deep to the areola with either asymmetric (more common) or bilateral 
apparent breast tissue growth. Management is dependent on the rate of 
growth and degree of tissue involvement. Surgery is typically delayed 
until normal breast tissue has matured, but with the introduction of 
MEK inhibitor therapy, consideration for reducing a large tumor 
burden prior to surgery could be considered.
Vaginal Bleeding
The usual progression of puberty in females dictates that breast and 
uterine development begin about 2 years before the menses. When the 
rate of pubertal progression is accelerated, menses may start as early as 
1–1.5 years after thelarche; if the rate is slow, menses may start perhaps 
3–4 years after thelarche. In any case, vaginal bleeding is always a much 
later sign than breast development, and whenever vaginal bleeding 
occurs too early—especially if it ever occurs before breast development 
starts—it must be investigated thoroughly.
Gynecomastia
Breast tissue frequently develops in males during mid-­puberty, when the 
production of estrogen from testosterone in the testes temporarily over­
balances the testosterone effects. Only rarely does breast tissue develop in 
prepubertal males, inasmuch as young males do not respond to transient 
gonadotropin stimulation with estrogen production. Differential diagno­
sis includes estrogen-­producing tumors (gonadal or adrenal), exogenous 
estrogen, hCG-­producing tumors, aromatase excess, certain types of male 
pseudohermaphroditism, and Klinefelter syndrome. Certain medications 
and illicit drugs are associated with gynecomastia. A prolactinoma should 
be considered, especially in the setting of galactorrhea.
Evaluation of gynecomastia in prepubertal males may include 
karyotyping and measurement of gonadotropins, estradiol, testoster­
one, hCG, TSH, and prolactin level. Imaging is dictated by the results.
Diagnostic Approach to Precocious Puberty
In the initial evaluation of the child with precocious puberty, the clini­
cian attempts to determine:
 
• Whether the process is a normal variant or pathologic
 
• The rate of progression of the pubertal changes
Fig. 55.8  A boy with familial testotoxicosis associated with significant penile enlargement, moderate pubic 
hair growth, and mild to moderate testicular enlargement over a 1.75-­year period. Left, At 2 years of age. 
Right, At 3.75 years of age.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1057
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
Fig. 55.9  A 12-­year-­old girl with McCune-­Albright syndrome with a café-­au-­lait spot with an irregular border 
(“coast of Maine”) on the back (left) and representative lesion of fibrous dysplasia involving the left humerus 
(right).
TABLE 55.6  Clinical Manifestations of McCune-­Albright Syndrome in 158 Reported Patients*
Manifestation
% OF PATIENTS
Mean Age at Diagnosis 
(yr) and Range
Comments
Total 
(n = 158)
Male 
(n = 53)
Female 
(n = 105)
Fibrous dysplasia
97
51
103
7.7 (0–52)
Polyostotic more common than monostotic
Café-­au-­lait lesion
85
49
86
7.7 (0–52)
Variable size and number of lesions, irregular 
border (coast of Maine)
Sexual precocity
52
8
74
4.9 (0.3–9)
Common initial manifestation
Acromegaly/gigantism
27
20
22
14.8 (0.2–42)
17/26 of patients with adenoma on MRI/CT
Hyperprolactinemia
15
9
14
16.0 (0.2–42)
23/42 of acromegalic patients with PRL
Hyperthyroidism
19
7
23
14.4 (0.5–37)
Euthyroid goiter is common
Hypercortisolism
5
4
5
4.4 (0.2–17)
All primary adrenal
Myxomas
5
3
5
34 (17–50)
Extremity myxomas
Osteosarcoma
2
1
2
36 (34–37)
At site of fibrous dysplasia, not related to 
prior radiation therapy
Rickets/osteomalacia
3
1
3
27.3 (8–52)
Responsive to phosphorus plus calcitriol
Cardiac abnormalities
11
8
9
(0.1–66)
Arrhythmias and CHF reported
Hepatic abnormalities
10
6
10
1.9 (0.3–4)
Neonatal icterus is most common
*Evaluations include clinical and biochemical data; other rarely described manifestations include metabolic acidosis, nephrocalcinosis, developmental 
delay, thymic and splenic hyperplasia, and colonic polyps.
CHF, congestive heart failure; PRL, prolactin.
Modified from Ringel MD, Schwindinger WF, Levine MA. Clinical implications of genetic defects in G proteins: the molecular basis of McCune-­
Albright syndrome and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Medicine (Baltimore). 1996;75:171–184.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1058
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
 
• Whether the process originates centrally or peripherally
Initial evaluation should include:
 
• Medical history: prenatal and birth history, growth patterns; 
excessive responses to illness (adrenal crisis); exposure to exoge­
nous sex steroids; history of intracranial insults (hydrocephalus, 
meningitis, or encephalitis)
 
• Review of symptoms: growth records, head size since birth, vision 
problems, headache, age at onset of androgen signs (behavior 
changes, need for increased hair washing because of oiliness, need 
for deodorant), age at onset of estrogen signs (vaginal discharge or 
breast budding), café-­au-­lait spots (“coast of Maine” in McCune-­
Albright syndrome or “coast of California” in neurofibromatosis)
 
• Family history: timing of maternal and paternal growth and 
pubertal development; siblings and cousins with early develop­
ment; neurofibromatosis
 
• Physical examination: vital signs, height, weight, head circum­
ference, tooth age, café-­au-­lait spots, neurofibromata, pubic and 
axillary hair, body odor, skin and hair oils, visual fields, optic 
discs, breast development, vaginal cornification/discharge, 
penis/clitoris size, scrotal/labial development, testicular vol­
ume, pubic hair stages, facial asymmetry or bone abnormalities 
(fibrous dysplasia of McCune-­Albright syndrome), neurologic 
status, affect or mood, intellectual ability
The first test is usually a determination of bone age; if the bone age 
is not significantly advanced (within 1 year or 2 SD) and not associated 
with an increase in height velocity, the results suggest a normal variant, 
a slowly progressive process, or a process of relatively short duration. 
If the bone age is significantly advanced, an evaluation is mandatory 
(Table 55.7). Clinical and laboratory findings in sexual precocity are 
listed in Table 55.5.
For females with breast development, pelvic ultrasonography and 
determination of central precocity are the initial diagnostic tests. Because 
of the pulsatile secretion of serum gonadotropins, random measure­
ments of LH and FSH even by ultrasensitive immunochemiluminescent 
assay (ICMA) are occasionally low and appear prepubertal even in the 
setting of central activation. If this occurs and there is clinical suspicion 
nonetheless of maturation of the GnRH pulse generator, a GnRH stimu­
lation test should be performed. With central precocity, as with normal 
puberty, endogenous GnRH that “primes” the pituitary gonadotrophs is 
being produced, so that after administration of a single pharmacologic 
dose of GnRH (Leuprolide), there is copious release of LH. If, on the 
other hand, the precocity has a peripheral basis, the high levels of circu­
lating estradiol, through central negative feedback, prevent the gonad­
otrophs from releasing LH in response to the exogenous GnRH bolus.
If a female with advanced bone age presents only with contrasexual 
androgenic effects (specifically, evidence of virilization), measurement 
of gonadotropins and estradiol is not indicated as an adrenal cause 
should be considered. Measurement of serum 17-­hydroxyprogesterone 
is the diagnostic test for 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, the most common 
enzyme abnormality associated with nonclassical or late-­onset adrenal 
hyperplasia. On occasion, an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
stimulation test may need to be performed to determine the specific 
enzymatic deficiency. Screening for Cushing syndrome with a 24-­hour 
urine collection with measurement of free cortisol (and creatinine to 
document completeness of the collection) or midnight salivary cortisol 
may also be indicated if the appropriate “cushingoid” body habitus is 
present. Linear growth is attenuated with Cushing syndrome, which is 
in contrast to most other causes of precocious puberty. Given the typi­
cal lack of ovarian involvement in the pathology of virilization in girls, 
MRI of the head is not usually indicated.
For males, the testicular examination guides the evaluation by sug­
gesting whether there is a testicular or adrenal source of the androgens. 
Testotoxicosis and hCG-­producing tumors cause some testicular 
enlargement but less than expected for the degree of virilization.
Treatment of Precocious Puberty
General Issues
Not all cases of precocious puberty necessitate treatment. Cases of 
idiopathic precocious thelarche and adrenarche should be monitored, 
because their manifestations are not typically progressive and there is 
no significant early onset of the other components of puberty or short 
stature. In addition, not all children with central precocious puberty 
require treatment, inasmuch as a significant number of cases are either 
slowly progressive and/or transient. Unless there is rapid progression 
and/or significant psychosocial difficulties, most children with cen­
tral precocity should be observed for a 3-­ to 6-­month period before 
therapy is initiated. The reasons that favor treatment include preser­
vation of acceptable final height, prevention of psychologic trauma 
TABLE 55.7  Diagnostic Approach to 
Precocious Puberty
Females with Breast Development, with or Without 
Androgen Effects
Random serum FSH and LH measurement by ICMA; estradiol measurement
GnRH stimulation test (if random FSH and LH levels are uninformative)
Pelvic ultrasonography
Prepubertal ovaries: ultrasonography (or other radiologic imaging) to image 
adrenal glands and question about exogenous sources
One enlarged ovary: either functioning ovarian cyst or solid granulosa cell 
tumor
Bilaterally enlarged ovaries for age: GnRH test to distinguish between central 
precocity (usual) or McCune-­Albright syndrome (rare)
Head MRI with contrast medium (if central precocity is confirmed 
biochemically and is progressive)
Females with Contrasexual Androgen Effects (Virilization)
Serum total testosterone (provides an index of the severity of the process)
17-­Hydroxyprogesterone (for CAH)
ACTH stimulation test (for CAH) (optional)
Midnight salivary cortisol or 24-­hr urine free cortisol and creatinine (for 
Cushing syndrome)
Abdominal/pelvic MRI (if testing suggests either an adrenal or ovarian tumor)
Males with Isosexual Precocity
Prepubertal testes: ultrasonography (or other radiologic imaging) of the 
adrenal glands; question about exogenous sources
One enlarged testis: ultrasonography (or other radiologic imaging) of this 
testis for an androgen-­producing tumor
Bilaterally enlarged testes for age: GnRH test to distinguish between central 
precocity and other causes (familial testotoxicosis, hCG-­producing tumor, 
CAH with adrenal rests, or hypothyroidism)
If central precocity is confirmed biochemically, head MRI with contrast
Tests to Consider, in Either Sex, Depending on Clinical 
Presentation
Serum hCG
Prolactin
T4 and TSH
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperpla­
sia; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing 
hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; ICMA, immunochemilu­
minescent assay; LH, luteinizing hormone; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­
stimulating hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1059
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
(menstruation at an early age), reversal of mature physical appear­
ance to decrease the risk of pregnancy in females (because other peo­
ple assume that affected children are older than they appear), and 
reduction of aggressiveness and preoccupation with sexuality. Serious 
psychologic effects of early puberty are not usually encountered. If a 
decision is made to initiate treatment, the goal of therapy is to inhibit 
secretion and/or effects of estrogens in females and androgens in males 
(Table 55.8).
Central Precocious Puberty
The goal of therapy is to inhibit secretion of gonadotropins and reduce 
production of sex steroids by the administration of GnRH agonist 
analogs with a prolonged duration of action (Table 55.9). This causes 
downregulation of pituitary GnRH receptors, preventing the response 
to endogenous GnRH and thus decreasing LH and FSH secretion. Sev­
eral doses of GnRH are necessary to produce the antagonistic response 
because the treatment initially stimulates the axis and only later results 
in downregulation of pituitary GnRH receptors. Accurate verification 
of adequate suppression of the axis typically requires repeat GnRH 
testing, although random LH-­ICMA levels may be sufficient.
Therapy is stopped around 11 years in females and 12 years in males 
so that puberty can resume and be concordant with peers. Successful 
GnRH agonist treatment is associated with a stabilization of andro­
gen effects in males and estrogen effects in females; there is no effect 
on androgen-­mediated events in females as androgens are predomi­
nately produced by the adrenal glands. Complete reversal of physical 
changes to the prepubertal state is unusual. Height velocity and the rate 
of bone age maturation should slow; on some occasions, height veloc­
ity becomes subnormal. This is not necessarily problematic as long 
as bone age maturation slows commensurately. Final height is opti­
mized with earlier initiation of therapy. Once GnRH analog therapy 
is discontinued, reactivation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal 
axis occurs within 12 months. Long-­term fertility data in individuals 
treated with GnRH analogs as children continue to grow, but studies 
suggest successful childbearing in women and normal testicular func­
tion in young adult men following GnRH therapy.
Large tumors in the hypothalamic-­pituitary region are surgically 
removed, and both the tumor and the surgery can precipitate cen­
tral precocious puberty. However, hypothalamic hamartomas are 
benign and tend to grow very slowly; therefore, surgery is usually not 
recommended.
Precocious Pseudopuberty (Incomplete Isosexual Precocity)
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause (Table 55.10). The preco­
cious puberty of McCune-­Albright syndrome is treated with inhibitors 
(testolactone or anastrozole) of aromatase, the enzyme that converts 
androgen to estrogen. The results of this approach are variable, and 
sometimes a GnRH agonist must be added if central puberty is also 
present. Ketoconazole is an effective therapy for familial testotoxicosis 
(due to a constitutively active LH receptor) because it has the desirable 
and reversible side effect of interfering with sex steroid synthesis; spi­
ronolactone is an androgen receptor blocker.
DELAYED OR ABSENT PUBERTY
Delayed puberty is the failure of development of any pubertal feature 
by 13 years of age in females or by 14 years of age in males. A lower 
cutoff may be appropriate in a child with a strong familial pattern of 
early puberty.
Differential Diagnosis
Delay or absence of puberty is caused by:
 
• Constitutional (self-­limited) delay: a variant of normal
 
• Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: low gonadotropin levels as 
a result of a defect of the hypothalamus and/or pituitary gland 
(Tables 55.11 and 55.12 and Fig. 55.10)
 
• Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism: high gonadotropin levels 
as a result of a lack of negative feedback because of a primary 
gonadal problem (see Tables 55.11 and 55.12). Girls may have 
isolated absence of adrenarche with normal breast development 
(see later discussion).
Constitutional (Self-­Limited) Delay of Growth and Puberty
This is the most common cause of delayed puberty and is thought to be 
a normal variant. It is usually diagnosed in males, probably as a result 
TABLE 55.8  Objectives for the Management 
and Treatment of True Precocious Puberty
Detection and treatment of an expanding intracranial lesion
Arrest of premature sexual maturation until the normal age at onset of puberty
Regression of secondary sexual characteristics already present
Attainment of normal mature height; suppression of the rapid rate of skeletal 
maturation
Prevention of emotional disorders and handicaps and alleviation of parental 
anxiety; promotion of understanding by counseling, early sex education, and 
acceleration of social age
Reduction of risk of sexual abuse and early sexual debut
Prevention of pregnancy in girls
Preservation of future fertility
Diminishment of the increased risk of breast cancer associated with early 
menarche
From Grumbach MM. True or central precocious puberty. In: 
Krieger DT, Bardin CW, eds. Current Therapy in Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 1985–1986. Toronto, Canada: BC Decker; 1989:4–8.
TABLE 55.9  GnRH Analogs Used to Treat 
Precocious Puberty
Leuprolide acetate (Lupron Depot) given as an intramuscular injection every 
1–3 mo*
Leuprolide acetate (Lupron) given as a daily subcutaneous injection
Nafarelin acetate (Synarel) given b.i.d. by an intranasal route
*Preferred because of infrequent dosing.
b.i.d., twice a day; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone.
TABLE 55.10  Treatment of Precocious 
Pseudopuberty (Incomplete Isosexual 
Precocity)
Tumors
Surgical removal
Chemotherapy and/or radiation as indicated
Illicit or unintentional administration of exogenous estrogens or androgens 
should be uncovered and eliminated
Familial testotoxicosis: ketoconazole or spironolactone and testolactone
Adrenal hyperplasia: exogenous glucocorticoid
Hypothyroidism: levothyroxine
McCune-­Albright syndrome: testolactone or anastrozole
GnRH agonist therapy may need to be added to any of the above medical 
therapies if central puberty becomes superimposed at an early age
GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1060
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
TABLE 55.11  Classification of Delayed Puberty and Sexual Infantilism
Idiopathic (Constitutional or Self-­Limited) Delay in Growth 
and Puberty (Delayed Activation of Hypothalamic LRF Pulse 
Generator)
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism: Sexual Infantilism 
Related to Gonadotropin Deficiency
CNS Disorders
Tumors
Craniopharyngiomas
Germinomas
Other germ cell tumors
Hypothalamic and optic gliomas
Astrocytomas
Pituitary tumors (including MEN-­1, prolactinoma)
Other Causes
Langerhans histiocytosis
Postinfectious lesions of the CNS
Vascular abnormalities of the CNS
Radiation therapy
Congenital malformations, especially associated with craniofacial anomalies
Head trauma
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Isolated Gonadotropin Deficiency
Kallmann syndrome
With hyposmia or anosmia
Without anosmia
LHRH receptor pathologic variant
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (DAX1 pathologic variant)
Isolated LH deficiency
Isolated FSH deficiency
Prohormone convertase 1 deficiency (PCI)
Idiopathic and Genetic Forms of Multiple Pituitary Hormone 
Deficiencies Including PROP1 Pathologic Variant (see Table 
55.12 and Figs. 55.6 and 55.10)
Miscellaneous Disorders
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
CHARGE syndrome
Functional gonadotropin deficiency
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita
Chronic systemic disease and malnutrition
Septo-­optic dysplasia
Sickle cell disease
Hartsfield syndrome
Cystic fibrosis
Gordon Holmes syndrome
AIDS
Solitary median maxillary incisor syndrome
Miscellaneous Disorders—cont’d
Chronic gastroenteric disease
Börjeson-­Forssman-­Lehmann syndrome
Chronic renal disease
Malnutrition
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia
Psychogenic amenorrhea
Impaired puberty and delayed menarche in female athletes and ballet dancers 
(exercise amenorrhea)
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Cushing disease
Hyperprolactinemia
Marijuana use
Gaucher disease
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism
Males
The syndrome of seminiferous tubular dysgenesis and its variants (Klinefelter 
syndrome)
Other forms of primary testicular failure
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Testicular steroid biosynthetic defects
Sertoli cell–only syndrome
LH receptor pathologic variant
Anorchia and cryptorchidism
Trauma/surgery
Females
The syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome) and its variants
XX and XY gonadal dysgenesis
Familial and sporadic XX gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Familial and sporadic XY gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Aromatase deficiency
Other forms of primary ovarian failure
Premature menopause
Radiation therapy
Chemotherapy
Autoimmune oophoritis
Galactosemia
Glycoprotein syndrome type 1
Resistant ovary
FSH receptor pathologic variant
LH/hCG resistance
Polycystic ovarian disease
Trauma/surgery
Noonan or pseudo-­Turner syndrome
Ovarian steroid biosynthetic defects
CNS, central nervous system; CHARGE, coloboma, heart malformations, choanal atresia, growth retardation, genital anomalies, ear anomalies; FSH, 
follicle-­stimulating hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; LHRH, luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone; LRF, 
luteinizing hormone–releasing factor; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.
of ascertainment bias of referral patterns. The cause is unknown, but 
approximately 50% of affected patients have a first-­degree relative with 
delayed puberty and/or late growth. This tendency can occur in a child 
of the same gender as the affected parent or in a child of the opposite 
gender. An affected child typically presents in early adolescence when 
peers are beginning to develop and having growth spurts, but the 
patient is not. The patient’s height is usually at or below the 3rd percen­
tile (see Chapter 56). In the classic case, the affected child had a normal 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1061
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
length at birth, a slowdown in height velocity between 6 months and 2 
years of age that resulted in short stature, and a normal or near-­normal 
height velocity thereafter along the child’s current height percentile. 
The physical examination findings are unremarkable, and, depending 
on the age, the child may have delayed puberty. The cardinal diag­
nostic result is a bone age that is moderately delayed in comparison 
with chronologic age. There may also be a history of delayed dentition. 
Without intervention, final adult height usually reaches or approxi­
mates the target height range. However, children with constitutional 
delay may have a blunted pubertal growth spurt in relation to their 
peers, and therefore may not reach their genetic target height range.
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
A variety of central nervous system insults may disrupt production 
of gonadotropins. The GnRH pulse generator may be disrupted by an 
interfering substance, such as excess prolactin (with or without hypo­
thyroidism), or by stress, chronic illness, malnutrition, or excessive 
physical activity. The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus may be damaged 
by trauma, radiation, infection, infiltration, increased intracranial 
pressure, or surgery. The most common mass lesions are craniophar­
yngiomas, gliomas, and cysts. Congenital conditions or malformations 
may have allowed enough GnRH for infantile development but not 
enough for pubertal needs.
TABLE 55.12  Molecular Basis for Developmental Disorders Associated with Hypogonadotropic 
Hypogonadism
Gene
Phenotype
Complex Phenotype
Isolated Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
Kallmann Syndrome or Normosmic Idiopathic Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism (with the Same Variant Gene) (See 
Table 55.13)
KAL1 (Xp22.3)
X-­linked Kallmann syndrome
Anosmia/hyposmia, renal agenesis, dyskinesia
FGFR1 (8p11.2)
Autosomal dominant Kallmann syndrome (± recessive)
Anosmia/hyposmia, cleft lip/palate
FGF8 (ligand for FGFR1) (10q25)
NSMF (9p34.3)
Autosomal dominant/oligogenetic Kallmann syndrome
PROK2 (3p21.1)
Autosomal recessive Kallmann syndrome
PROKR2* (20p12.3)
CHD7 (8p12.1)
Autosomal dominant (some)
CHARGE syndrome; includes hyposmia
Normosmic Isolated Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
GNRH1 (8p21-­11.2)
Autosomal recessive
GNRHR* (4q13.2-­3)
Autosomal recessive (± dominant)
GPR54* (19p13.3)
Autosomal recessive
SNRPN
Prader-­Willi syndrome, obesity
Lack of function of paternal 15q11-­q13 
region or maternal uniparental disomy
LEP (7q31.3)
Autosomal recessive
Obesity
LEPR (1p31)
Autosomal recessive
Obesity
NR0B1 (X21.3-­21.2)
X-­linked recessive
Adrenal hypoplasia
TAC3 (12q13-­12)
Autosomal recessive
TACR3 (4q25)
Autosomal recessive
Multiple Pituitary Hormone Deficiencies
PROP1
POU1F1
Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, and LH/FSH (less 
commonly, later-­onset ACTH deficiency)
HESX1
Autosomal recessive and heterozygous pathologic variants
Septo-­optic dysplasia
Multiple pituitary deficiencies including diabetes insipidus, 
but LH/FSH uncommon
LHX3
Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, FSH/LH
Rigid cervical spine
PHF6
X-­linked; GH, TSH, ACTH, LH/FSH
Börjeson-­Forssman-­Lehmann: intellectual 
disability; coarse facies
*A G protein–coupled receptor.
ACTH, corticotrophin; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hor­
mone; LH, luteinizing hormone; PRL, prolactin; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1062
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Kallmann syndrome. This is the combination of an impaired or 
absent sense of smell and gonadotropin deficiency. Other features 
include color blindness, atrial septal defects, and renal structural 
anomalies (unilateral renal agenesis). The X-­linked form is caused by a 
mutation of the KAL gene; there are autosomal recessive and autosomal 
dominant forms (Table 55.13).
LH and FSH deficiencies may also be isolated or caused by mul­
tiple pituitary hormone deficiencies. The latter condition may be a 
result of pituitary damage from trauma, radiation, infection, sickle cell 
disease, compression by infiltrate or tumor, or autoimmune processes. 
In differentiating primary pituitary deficiency from that secondary 
to hypothalamic deficiency, the clinician should remember that all 
pituitary hormones except prolactin are stimulated by hypothalamic 
releasing hormones; prolactin is inhibited by hypothalamic prolactin 
inhibitory factor. Therefore, if all pituitary hormones, including pro­
lactin, are deficient, the problem is in the pituitary gland. If prolactin 
levels are present or even elevated but the other pituitary hormones 
are deficient, the problem is above the pituitary gland in the stalk or 
hypothalamus. In the case of isolated LH and FSH deficiencies, the 
primary abnormality may lie within the pituitary or hypothalamic 
neurons producing GnRH; however, increasingly there is evidence of 
primary abnormalities being further upstream. In particular, defects in 
molecules required for proper migration of GnRH neurons (including 
the KAL gene) or lack of necessary signaling to GnRH-­producing neu­
rons (e.g., defects in kisspeptin or neurokinin B and their receptors) 
can result in LH and FSH deficiency through inappropriate GnRH 
secretion.
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Males
If the testes are small, they may have been damaged by torsion, sickle 
cell disease, infection, autoimmune disease, chemotherapy, or radia­
tion and may not be able to respond to LH and FSH stimulation. If the 
bone age is >10 years and the hypothalamus has probably matured, the 
serum LH and FSH may then be high.
When the testis size is prepubertal and LH is present but testoster­
one is not increasing, there may be a problem with the LH receptor.
Klinefelter syndrome. This occurs in 1:500 males and is often 
associated with a 47,XXY karyotype; common features include cognitive 
delays, adolescent gynecomastia (often pronounced), and small, firm 
testes. The testes rarely exceed 5 mL in volume (approximately 25% 
of the average adult volume). Patients, often tall and thin with an 
eunuchoid habitus, may have delayed puberty. Virilization may be 
incomplete, the phallus is often smaller than average, and infertility 
nears 100%. These children will need testosterone treatment to fully 
attain secondary sexual characteristics.
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Females
In this condition, the ovary may be unable to synthesize estrogen (an 
inherited metabolic defect, possibly associated with excess adrenal 
mineralocorticoid and hypertension), the ovary may not be formed 
normally (dysgenesis), or the ovary may have been damaged by any of 
the factors listed for testicular damage and by galactosemia.
The ovary may be intact but may not be stimulated by gonado­
tropins. Gonadotropins are present but not effective if there is an FSH 
receptor problem.
Olfactory tract
ANOS1
FGFR1/FGF8
PROKR2/PROK2
CHD7
NSMF
HS6ST1
SEMA3A
GNRH1
KISS1/KISS1R
TAC3/TACR3
LEP/LEPR
GNRHR
Neuronal migration
and differentiation
(1) Developmental defects
    of GnRH neurons
(2) Impaired GnRH secretion
(3) GnRH resistance
(4) Gonadotropin deficiency
GnRH+
neuron
GnRH-
receptor
LH
FSH
α
α
β
β
LH
FSH
β
β
GnRH
Fig. 55.10  Pathologic variants in single genes at many levels of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis can 
cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hor­
mone; LH, luteinizing hormone. (Modified from Beate K, Joseph N, de Roux N, Wolfram K. Genetics of isolated 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: role of GnRH receptor and other genes. Int J Endocrinol. 2012;2012:147893, 
Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1063
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
Turner syndrome. The two most common features of Turner 
syndrome are short stature (involving the limbs to a greater degree 
than the trunk) and ovarian insufficiency (Fig. 55.11). Lymphedema 
and a webbed neck are diagnostic features present in a neonate. 
Additional features include a shield chest, increased carrying angle 
(cubitus valgus), short fourth metacarpal, hypoplastic nails, renal 
anomalies, and left-­sided heart defects (coarctation of the aorta, 
bicuspid aortic or mitral valves, etc.). Approximately 50% of affected 
females have no stigmata except short stature and thus are typically 
identified later. About 20% may have spontaneous puberty with 
functioning ovaries for at least a short period of time, which is in 
large part dependent on the child’s karyotype, but the infertility rate 
is >99%.
Females with Delayed or Absent Adrenarche
If a female has advanced breast development but no androgen 
signs, she may have a deficiency of androgen receptors, as occurs 
in androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular feminization). 
In females, the androgens come predominantly from the adre­
nal glands (adrenarche). If the bone age has not passed 8 years, 
when DHEAS generally increases, adrenarche may simply be 
delayed (delayed adrenarche). If bone age is advanced, however, 
there is a deficiency in androgen production. In addition, there 
may be an inherited problem in androgen synthesis from an 
enzyme deficiency or the adrenal glands may be damaged sec­
ondary to autoimmune, infectious, or hypoxic injury. In these 
latter conditions, other signs of adrenal insufficiency would be 
evident.
TABLE 55.13  Genetic Heterogeneity of Kallmann Syndrome
Location
Phenotype
Inheritance
OMIM
Gene
1q32.1
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 13 with or without anosmia
AR
614842
KISS1
2q14.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 15 with or without anosmia
AD
614880
HS6ST1
3p14.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 18 with or without anosmia
AR/AD/Digenic
615267
IL17RD
3p13
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 4 with or without anosmia
AD
610628
PROK2
4q13.2
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 7 with or without anosmia
AR
146110
GNRHR
4q24
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 11 with or without anosmia
AR
614840
TACR3
4q27
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 25 with or without anosmia
AD
618841
NDNF
5q31.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 17 with or without anosmia
AD
615266
SPRY4
7q21.11
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 16 with or without anosmia
AD
614897
SEMA3A
7q31.32
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 22 with or without anosmia
AR
616030
FEZF1
8p21.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 20 with or without anosmia
AD
615270
FGF17
8p21.2
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 12 with or without anosmia
AR
614841
GNRH1
8p11.23
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 2 with or without anosmia
AD
147950
FGFR1
8q12.2
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 5 with or without anosmia
AD
612370
CHD7
9q34.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 9 with or without anosmia
AD
614838
NSMF
10q24.32
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 6 with or without anosmia
AD
612702
FGF8
10q26.12
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 14 with or without anosmia
AD
614858
WDR11
11p14.1
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 24 with or without anosmia
AR
229070
FSHB
12q13.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 10 with or without anosmia
AR
614839
TAC3
12q21.33
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 19 with or without anosmia
AD
615269
DUSP6
19p13.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 8 with or without anosmia
AR
614837
KISS1R
19q13.33
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 23 with or without anosmia
AR
228300
LHB
20p12.3
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 3 with or without anosmia
AD
244200
PROKR2
20p12.1
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 21 with or without anosmia
AD
615271
FLRT3
Xp22.31
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 1 with or without anosmia
XLR
308700
ANOS1
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (www.OMIM.org); XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Fig. 55.11  A 16-­year-­old girl with Turner syndrome (45,XO), character­
ized by short stature, absence of thelarche, webbed neck, and increased 
carrying angles.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1064
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Diagnostic Approach to Delayed Puberty
A normal growth rate with delayed, but not absent, puberty and a fam­
ily history of “late blooming” suggests the diagnosis of constitutional 
delay of growth and puberty, which is the most commonly encountered 
cause (see Tables 55.11 and 55.12). A bone age that correlates with the 
patient’s pubertal status confirms the clinical impression; no other test­
ing is necessary.
Initial evaluation should include:
 
• Medical history: trauma, illness, medications (e.g., stimulants, 
chemotherapy), radiation, infection, malnutrition, autoimmune 
problems, sickle status, stresses, growth records, galactosemia
 
• Review of symptoms: vision problems, headache, vomiting, 
inability to detect odors (hyposmia or anosmia), age at onset of 
androgen signs, age at onset of estrogen signs, small genitalia at 
birth, signs of primary adrenal insufficiency such as hyperpig­
mentation, need for deodorant, need to wash hair more frequently
 
• Family history: timing of maternal and paternal growth and puber­
tal development; siblings and cousins with delayed development
 
• Physical examination: signs of chronic disease, temperature, 
blood pressure, height, weight, head circumference, dental age, 
tanning (hyperpigmentation), pubic and axillary hair, adult 
body odor, skin and hair oils, visual fields, optic discs, ability 
to detect odors, breast development, vaginal cornification/dis­
charge, penis size, scrotal development, testicular volume, pubic 
hair stages, neurologic status, affect or mood, intellectual ability, 
dysmorphic features
Initial laboratory evaluation screens for chronic disease include 
CBC, chemistry profile, and sedimentation rate, as well as free thyroxine 
and thyroid-stimulating hormone (hypothyroidism) and prolactin level 
(hyperprolactinemia). If growth is slow, the clinician should measure 
insulin-­like growth factor-­1 level (a marker of basal growth hormone 
activity) and consider growth hormone testing. The clinician should 
measure testosterone levels in males and estradiol levels in females.
Measurements of random FSH and LH and results of a GnRH 
stimulation test may differentiate between hypogonadotropic hypogo­
nadism and primary gonadal failure (Figs. 55.12 and 55.13). Elevated 
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13.5 years in males
Serum gonadotropins
Elevated
Karyotype
Normal
46,XY
Growth pattern
Sense of smell
MRI
Bone age delayed
Mass
Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus
Primary
testicular
failure
Klinefelter
syndrome
(onset of puberty
often normal but
poor progression
follows)
Constitutional delay
in growth and
puberty
CNS
tumor
Kallmann
syndrome
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)
Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)
Normal
Anosmia or
hyposmia
Normal
Normal without
growth spurt
Consistently short
for chronologic
age but appropriate
for bone age
Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus
47,XXY
Low
Fig. 55.12  Flow chart for the evaluation of delayed puberty in males. A brain MRI with absent olfactory bulb 
and/or sulcus is consistent with Kallmann syndrome, while a normal MRI suggests isolated gonadotropin 
deficiency. CNS, central nervous system. (From Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, et al., eds. Williams 
Textbook of Endocrinology. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:1156.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1065
CHAPTER 55  Disorders of Puberty
gonadotropin levels support a diagnosis of primary gonadal failure. 
Chromosomal karyotyping is then performed (Klinefelter syndrome in 
males and Turner syndrome in females). GnRH stimulation testing, with 
measurement of serum LH levels over 3–4 hours, is often employed. Its 
rationale is based on the fact that a child in puberty has a significant rise 
in serum LH over baseline. Unfortunately, the GnRH test is not helpful 
in distinguishing between constitutional delay and hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism because in both cases, the LH response is blunted sec­
ondary to lack of endogenous GnRH priming of the gonadotrophs. 
However, the child with constitutional delay eventually develops an 
appropriate pubertal response to GnRH stimulation testing.
If Kallmann syndrome is being considered, an MRI scan may show 
abnormalities in the olfactory region. If a 46,XX female has unexplained 
ovarian failure, ovarian antibodies (21-­hydroxylase antibodies) are 
obtained and müllerian-­inhibiting substance or anti-­müllerian hor­
mone (AMH) can also be utilized in females to assess ovarian follicle 
reserve and potential fertility. An hCG stimulation test to evaluate abil­
ity to produce testosterone and a serum level of müllerian-­inhibiting 
substance (secreted by Sertoli cells) are useful for determining whether 
functional testicular tissue is present.
Treatment of Delayed Puberty
If delayed puberty is physiologic, there is no medical necessity for 
initiating sex steroid replacement. “Watchful waiting” is usually the 
appropriate course of action. Adolescent males with constitutional 
delay of growth and puberty who are short, underdeveloped, and 
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13 years in females
Serum gonadotropins
Elevated
Karyotype
Normal
46,XX
Growth pattern
Sense of smell
MRI
Bone age delayed
Signs of increased
intracranial
pressure or visual
abnormalities
Primary ovarian
failure–autoimmune
or other etiology
Tumer syndrome (may
or may not have somatic
stigmata of Tumer
syndrome but short stature
is extremely common)
Absence or abnormality
of one X chromosome or
mosaicism with 45,X
cell line
Anosmia or
hyposmia
Normal
Karyotype
Normal secondary sexual
development with primary amenorrhea
Normal without
growth spurt
Consistently short
for chronologic
age but appropriate
for bone age
Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus
46,XY
Low
Mass
Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus
Constitutional
delay in growth
and puberty
CNS
tumor
Kallmann
syndrome
Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
Syndrome
of
androgen
resistance
Anatomic
defect or
abnormality
in LH
pulsatility
Normal
Normal
Fig. 55.13  Flow chart for the evaluation of delayed puberty in females. A brain MRI with absent olfactory 
bulb and/or sulcus is consistent with Kallmann syndrome, while a normal MRI suggests isolated gonadotropin 
deficiency. CNS, central nervous system; LH, luteinizing hormone. (From Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, 
et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:1157.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1066
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
psychologically affected frequently benefit from a short course of tes­
tosterone therapy. This is usually given as long-­acting intramuscular 
testosterone at a dosage of 50–100 mg every 4 weeks for typically 6 
months. Treatment is generally begun at about 13 years of age and, 
if possible, when the testes are about 6–8 mL in volume. These doses 
stimulate height and weight gain, allow adequate virilization (increased 
pubic and axillary hair growth and penile enlargement), and do not 
typically suppress pituitary FSH and LH secretion, thereby allowing 
simultaneous endogenous pubertal progression (testicular enlarge­
ment). This narrows the physical gap between the patient and peers 
without causing undue advancement of bone age. Acne is the principal 
side effect, and the final adult height is not altered. It is the hope that at 
the conclusion of treatment, the male will continue to grow and develop 
rapidly with the testosterone treatment perceived as a “jump starter” 
of endogenous puberty. A short course of low-­dose anabolic steroids, 
such as oxandrolone or fluoxymesterone, can also be employed in pre­
pubertal and pubertal males, and low-­dose estradiol has been used in 
prepubertal and pubertal females with constitutional delay.
Treatment of hypogonadism is aimed at mimicking normal physi­
ology with stepwise replacement of testosterone in males and estrogen 
and progesterone in females. For males with hypogonadism, low-­
dose parenteral testosterone is initiated at 50 mg every 4 weeks, with 
increases in 50-­mg increments made over a 2-­ to 3-­year period. Most 
adult men receive 200 mg every 2 weeks, which is based on the daily 
adult male testosterone production rate of 6 mg. Some adult men are 
treated with 300 mg every 2 weeks. Adult men can use testosterone 
by patch, which is often associated with local irritation, or by alcohol-­
based gel, but typically in growing adolescents, intramuscular testos­
terone is prescribed.
For females, daily estrogen therapy is given for 1 year. This can be 
either in the form of conjugated estrogens (Premarin) at 0.3 mg daily 
for the first 6 months and 0.625 mg daily for the second 6 months, 
or with an analogous schedule of ethinyl estradiol replacement or 
through a weekly applied 17β-­estradiol patch. This duration does not 
place the uterus at undue risk for hyperplasia and malignancy, but after 
2 years of therapy (or if spotting occurs prior), progesterone should 
be added. Options to consider when adding progesterone include con­
tinuing the purely estrogen-­containing pills (conjugated estrogens or 
ethinyl estradiol) or the 17β-­estradiol patches in conjunction with oral 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera) or switching the patient over 
to conventional oral contraceptives. If the patient is not put on a con­
ventional oral contraceptive, the estrogen (pill or patch) is prescribed 
on days 1–23 of the calendar month with addition of medroxyproges­
terone acetate on days 10–23. With this approach, withdrawal bleeding 
generally occurs between day 23 and the end of the month, although 
there can be some variability in the timing between patients.
Patients of either sex with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are 
potentially fertile, but sex steroid therapy alone is ordinarily not suffi­
cient to initiate gametogenesis, although there are rare cases in males in 
which testosterone replacement alone has stimulated spermatogenesis. 
The general approach to fertility induction in either sex involves the 
addition of either cyclic gonadotropin therapy or pump-­driven GnRH 
therapy at the age of desired conception. Finally, if hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism is present as one component of hypopituitarism, it is crit­
ical to adequately replace all deficient hormones. In contrast, patients 
with primary hypogonadism have intrinsic gonadal damage and are 
normally infertile.
   	 SUMMARY  AND R ED F L AGS
Early, late, or asynchronous puberty can indicate underlying pathology. 
Red flags related to puberty are listed in Table 55.14. Important find­
ings not to miss are listed in Table 55.15.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 55.14  Red Flags Related to Puberty
Pubertal changes in African-American females beginning before age 6 yr 
(excluding isolated thelarche from birth to 2 yr of age)
Pubertal changes in White females beginning before age 7 yr (excluding 
isolated thelarche from birth to 2 yr of age)
Pubertal changes in all males beginning before 9 yr of age
Absence of pubertal changes in females by 13 yr of age
Absence of pubertal changes in males by 14 yr of age
Neurologic signs and symptoms (headaches, visual disturbances)
Vaginal bleeding before breast development
Significantly asymmetric gonadal size in either sex (males, by clinical 
examination; females, by pelvic ultrasonography)
Testicular underdevelopment
Females with advancing breast development but no androgen signs
Galactorrhea
Pelvic mass
TABLE 55.15  Things Not to Miss with 
Regard to Puberty
Dysmorphic features
Unusual thinness or obesity
Cutaneous findings
Penis or clitoris diameter and length
Size of testes in patients with gynecomastia
Associated endocrine deficiencies or excesses
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1066.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Normal Pubertal Development
Bourguignon JP. The neuroendocrinology of puberty. Growth Gen Horm. 
1995;11:1.
Caprio M, Fabbrini E, Isidori AM, et al. Leptin in reproduction. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab. 2001;12:65.
Conte FA, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL. A diphasic pattern of gonadotropin 
secretion in patients with the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1975;40:670.
Dedes I. Kisspeptins and the control of gonadotrophin secretion. Syst Biol 
Reprod Med. 2012;58(3):121–128. https://doi.org/10.3109/19396368.2011.6
51555. Epub 2012 Feb 29.
Herman-­Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, et al. Secondary sexual 
characteristics and menses in young girls seen in office practice: a study 
from the Pediatric Research in Office Settings network. Pediatrics. 
1997;99:505.
Kaiserman KB, Nakamoto JM, Geffner ME, et al. Minipuberty of infancy and 
adolescent pubertal function in adrenal hypoplasia congenita. J Pediatr. 
1998;133:300.
Kaplowitz PB, Oberfield SE. Reexamination of the age limit for defining 
when puberty is precocious in girls in the United States: implications 
for evaluation and treatment. Drug and therapeutics and executive 
committees of the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society. Pediatrics. 
1999;104:936.
Nakamoto JM. Myths and variations in normal pubertal development. West J 
Med. 2000;172:182.
Nedresky D, Singh G. Physiology, luteinizing hormone. [Updated 2019 Apr 
8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 
2021 Jan­. [Figure, Hypothalamic-­Pituitary-­Gonadal Axis from http://www.
dsdgenetics.org/index.php?id=48.] Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK539692/figure/article-­24535.image.f1/.
Novello L, Speiser PW. Premature adrenarche. Pediatr Ann. 2018 Jan 
1;47(1):e7–e11. https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-­20171214-­04.  PubMed 
PMID: 29323690.
Pyle SI, Waterhouse AM, Greulich WW. A Radiographic Standard of Reference 
for the Growing Hand and Wrist. Prepared for the United States National 
Health Examination Survey. Chicago: Cleveland Press of Case Western 
Reserve University, Year Book Medical Publishers; 1971.
Rosenfield RL, Bachrach LK, Chernausek SD, et al. Current age of onset of 
puberty. Pediatrics. 2000;106:622.
Tanner Scale. https://healthjade.net/tanner-­scale/ Health Jade Team, https://
healthjade.net/tanner-­scale/.
Precocious Puberty
Blanco-­Garcia M, Evain-­Brion D, Roger M, et al. Isolated menses in 
prepubertal girls. Pediatrics. 1985;76:43.
Carel JC, Eugster EA, Rogol A. Consensus statement on the use of 
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analogs in children. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:4.
Clemons RD, Kappy MS, Stuart TE, et al. Long-­term effectiveness of depot 
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analogue in the treatment of children 
with central precocious puberty. Am J Dis Child. 1993;147:653.
Fenton C, Tang M, Poth M. Review of precocious puberty, part I: 
gonadotropin-­dependent precocious puberty. Endocrinololgist. 
2000;10:107.
Feuillan PP, Jones JV, Barnes K, et al. Reproductive axis after discontinuation 
of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog treatment of girls with 
precocious puberty: long term follow-­up comparing girls with 
hypothalamic hamartoma to those with idiopathic precocious puberty. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84:44.
Ibáñez L, Dimartino-­Nardi J, Potau N, et al. Premature adrenarche—normal 
variant or forerunner of adult disease? Endocr Rev. 2000;21:671.
Kosugi S, Van Dop C, Geffner ME, et al. Characterization of heterogeneous 
mutations causing constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone 
receptor in familial male precocious puberty. Hum Mol Genet. 1995;4:183.
Léger J, Reynaud R, Czernichow P. Do all girls with apparent idiopathic 
precocious puberty require gonadotropin-­releasing hormone agonist 
treatment? J Pediatr. 2000;137:819.
Jung H, Carmel P, Schwartz MS, et al. Some hypothalamic hamartomas 
contain transforming growth factor alpha, a puberty-­inducing growth 
factor, but not luteinizing hormone-­releasing hormone neurons. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84:4695.
Merke DP, Cutler Jr GB. Evaluation and management of precocious puberty. 
Arch Dis Child. 1996;75:269.
National Organization for Rare Diseases. Precocious puberty. https://
rarediseases.org/rare-­diseases/precocious-­puberty/.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). Precocious puberty, central, 1; 
CPPB1 https://www.omim.org/entry/176400.
Roberts SA, Kaiser UB. Genetic etiologies of central precocious puberty and 
the role of imprinted genes. Eur J Endocrinol. 2020;183:R107–R117.
Schwindinger WF, Levine MA. McCune-­Albright syndrome. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab. 1993;4:238.
Tang M, Fenton C, Poth M. Review of precocious puberty, part II: 
gonadotropin-­independent precocious puberty. Endocrinololgist. 
2000;10:397.
Delayed or Absent Pubertal Development
Achermann JC, Jameson JL. Advances in the molecular genetics of 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2001;14:3.
Argente J. Diagnosis of late puberty. Horm Res. 1999;51(suppl 3):95.
Brook CGD. Treatment of late puberty. Horm Res. 1999;51(suppl 3):101.
Hagen CP, Aksglaede L, Sorensen K, et al. Serum levels of anti-Mullerian 
hormone as a marker of ovarian function in 926 healthy females from 
birth to adulthood and in 172 Turner syndrome patients. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2010;95:11.
Howard SR. Genes underlying delayed puberty. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 
2018;476:119–128.
Howard SR. The genetic basis of delayed puberty. Front Endocrinol. 
2019;10:423.
Howard SR, Dunkel L. Delayed puberty – phenotypic diversity, molecular 
genetic mechanisms, and recent discoveries. Endocrine Rev. 2019;40:1285–
1317.
Topaloglu AK, Reimann F, Guclu M, et al. TAC3 and TACR3 mutations 
in familial hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism reveal a key role for 
neurokinin B in the central control of reproduction. Nat Genet. 2009;41:3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
