1015
The immune system functions to prevent and impede the local estab­
lishment or systemic dissemination of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and 
protozoa. This highly complex system has to recognize the pathogen, 
initiate inflammation, and generate antibodies and T-­cell responses 
with the goal of clearing the pathogen while retaining immunologic 
memory toward the pathogen. Furthermore, it must accomplish this 
task without excessive inflammation or the development of autoimmu­
nity, both of which can lead to tissue damage. A common symptom of 
the immune response to infection is fever.
The differential diagnosis for patients with recurrent fevers is for­
midable in view of the complexity of the immune system, as well as the 
multitude of causes of fever. Fever can occur with any inflammatory 
stimulus, whether that be infections, autoimmune disorders, malig­
nancy, or due to rare genetic variants that lead to spontaneous inflam­
mation or autoimmunity, known as autoinflammatory disorders or 
immune disregulation disorders, respectively. Fever is a challenging 
issue for providers and causes considerable angst in families. It is help­
ful to have a consistent stepwise approach to a patient with recurrent 
fevers, keeping the differential diagnosis of fevers in mind.
Evaluation of fever should always start with a history and phys­
ical exam to look for an infectious source. Fevers without a clear 
­infectious source should raise the possibility of an autoimmune 
disorder or malignancy as fevers in these disorders can be episodic; 
however, other symptoms are usually present that persist following res­
olution of the fever. Recurrent or persistent rashes, arthritis, weight 
loss, or abdominal pain may initiate a work-­up for autoimmune dis­
eases such as inflammatory bowel disease or juvenile arthritis or could 
represent an immune disregulation disorder. Basic lab testing to look 
for progressive hematologic abnormalities may lead to a work-­up for 
malignancy. Inflammatory markers, including ESR or CRP, can be 
useful between febrile episodes, as normalization of inflammatory 
markers between fever episodes is unusual in ongoing autoimmune 
diseases or malignancies.
Recurrent infections need to be assessed by their severity and loca­
tion, the responsible organisms, and the age of the patient. A young 
child with intermittent viral upper respiratory or gastrointestinal infec­
tions or recurrent ear infections is the norm, and reassurance and fol­
low-­up are all that is necessary with the expectation that these episodes 
will improve and eventually resolve over time. Recurrent bacterial 
infections may initiate a more in-­depth immune work-­up to evaluate 
for a primary immune deficiency, particularly if these are persistent 
or occur in unusual sites or with unusual organisms. Although there 
are no established rules regarding immunologic work-­up of a patient 
with infections, an evaluation should be considered for at least one of 
the following: (1) more than two systemic bacterial infections (sepsis, 
meningitis, osteomyelitis); (2) two or more serious respiratory infec­
tions (pneumonia) or bacterial infections (cellulitis, draining otitis 
media, lymphadenitis) per year; (3) the presence of an infection at 
an unusual site (hepatic or brain abscess); (4) infections with unusual 
pathogens (Aspergillus pneumonia, disseminated candidiasis, or infec­
tion with Serratia marcescens, Nocardia species, or Burkholderia cepa­
cia); (5) infections of unusual severity (pneumonias complicated by 
empyema or abscesses); and (6) recurrent mycobacterial infections or 
invasive infections with atypical mycobacteria. Persistent and recur­
rent fever episodes without infectious sources that don’t resolve over 
time could represent an autoinflammatory disorder, and genetic testing 
could be pursued.
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
History
The history must determine the frequency of fevers, associated symp­
toms, presence of an infection, and whether the patient returns to a 
normal state of health in between these episodes. Resolution of fever 
but persistence of other symptoms or lab abnormalities (e.g., ane­
mia, ESR, CRP) should raise the possibility of autoimmune disease or 
malignancy. Regarding recurrent fevers with infections, the clinician 
must determine (1) the frequency, location, severity, and complica­
tions of the infections; (2) the accuracy of how infections were docu­
mented; (3) the presence or absence of a symptom-­free interval; (4) the 
microbiologic features of any isolate; and (5) the response to antibiotic 
therapy. A single chronic infection may wax and wane with intermit­
tent, inadequate treatment and may manifest as a series of infections. 
Furthermore, a detailed history can elucidate other risk factors for 
recurrent infections. Many nonimmune disorders are characterized by 
an increased susceptibility to infection that must also be considered 
(Table 54.1). Approximately 30% of children with recurrent sinopul­
monary symptoms can be categorized as atopic (genetic predisposi­
tion to develop allergic diseases). These subjects have normal growth 
and development, and episodes of recurrent illness may be afebrile, 
respond poorly to antibiotics, and be accompanied by upper respira­
tory symptoms such as coughing, sneezing, or wheezing. There may be 
a family history of atopic disease, and the patient’s past medical history 
may include episodic wheezing, protracted cough after upper respira­
tory tract infection (URI), hay fever, allergies to foods, or eczema. The 
physical examination of allergic school-­aged children may reveal typi­
cal characteristics including the following: dark circles under the eyes; 
open mouth with dry lips; coated tongue; evidence of nasal obstruc­
tion; transverse nasal crease; boggy, pale nasal mucosa; mucus in the 
pharynx; posterior pharyngeal “cobblestoning”; and postnasal drip.
Malnutrition and specific vitamin deficiencies may alter immune 
cell function. Protein-­losing states due to gastrointestinal (e.g., inflam­
matory bowel disease, protein-­losing enteropathy) or renal disease (e.g., 
nephrotic syndrome) may lead to hypocomplementemia, hypogam­
maglobulinemia, and recurrent infections. Chronic treatment with 
corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants can result in acquired 
Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, 
and Autoinflammatory Disorders
James W. Verbsky and John M. Routes
54
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1016
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 54.1  Secondary Causes of Recurrent Infections
Predisposing Causes
Organism and Type of Infection
Alteration of Mucocutaneous Barriers
Indwelling Catheter
Central venous catheter (Broviac, Hickman)
Staphylococcus aureus; Staphylococcus epidermidis; and Bacteroides, Candida, Pseudomonas species: bacteremia, fungemia
Urinary catheter
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus species, Staphylococcus saprophyticus: pyelonephritis
Tenckhoff catheter (continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis)
S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida species: peritonitis
Cerebrospinal fluid shunts
S. epidermidis, S. aureus, diphtheroid, Bacillus species: meningitis
Aspirated pulmonary foreign body
S. aureus, anaerobes: pneumonia, pulmonary abscess, empyema
Burns
P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis, Candida species: cutaneous lesions, sepsis
Inhalation Therapy: Contaminated 
Solutions
P. aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Legionella species: pneumonia
Surgical Wounds
Abdominal
Gram-­negative bacteria, S. aureus, S. epidermidis, Candida species: peritonitis
Nongastrointestinal
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, streptococci, gram-­negative bacteria: wound abscess, sepsis
Fistula-­Sinus Communications
Neurocutaneous fistula
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, E. coli: meningitis
Neuroenteric fistula
Gram-­negative bacteria: meningitis
Otic, facial sinus–meningeal sinus tract
Pneumococcus: meningitis
Facial sinus fracture (CSF rhinorrhea)
Pneumococcus: meningitis
Intravenous Drug Abuse
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, streptococci: endocarditis, osteomyelitis: hepatitis B, C, D viruses: AIDS
Prosthetic Devices
Cardiac valves
S. epidermidis, streptococci, S. aureus, diphtheroid, Candida species: endocarditis
Pacemaker
S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Candida species: subcutaneous pocket or endocardial infection
Chronic Disease
Malnutrition
Measles; tuberculosis; herpes simplex virus; bacterial, parasitic, and viral diarrhea; gram-­negative bacteria: sepsis, 
pneumonia
Cystic fibrosis
S. aureus, H. influenzae, mucoid P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia; pneumonia
Diabetes mellitus
Urinary tract infections, Mucor, and other fungi: sinus-­orbital infection
Nephrotic syndrome
Pneumococcus, E. coli: peritonitis
Uremia
S. aureus, gram-­negative bacteria, fungi: sepsis, soft tissue infection
Cirrhosis, ascites
Pneumococcus, E. coli: peritonitis
Prolonged broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy
Candida species, Enterococcus species, multidrug-­resistant gram-­negative or gram-­positive bacteria: sepsis
Spinal cord injury
Gram-­negative or gram-­positive bacteria: pneumonia, pyelonephritis, pressure sores, abscesses, osteomyelitis
Sickle cell anemia
Pneumococcus: sepsis, meningitis, osteoarticular infection
Salmonella species, S. aureus: osteomyelitis
Congenital heart disease
S. aureus, Streptococcus viridans group: endocarditis
Urinary tract anomaly
E. coli, S. saprophyticus, Enterococcus species: pyelonephritis
Kartagener syndrome (dysmotile cilia)
H. influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Pneumococcus: pneumonia, sinusitis
Eczema/atopic disease
S. aureus, Streptococcus species, varicella, herpes simplex, molluscum: cutaneous infection, cellulitis
Protein-­losing enteropathy (lymphangiectasia)
Pneumococcus: sepsis, peritonitis
Giardia species: diarrhea
Periodontitis
Fusobacterium species: cellulitis, facial space infection
Splenic Dysfunction (e.g., Sickle 
Cell Anemia/Asplenia)
S. pneumoniae: sepsis, meningitis
H. influenzae type b: sepsis, meningitis
N. meningitidis: sepsis, meningitis
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Babesiosis
Malaria
Group B Streptococcus
Enterococcus
Bacteroides
Salmonella
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1017
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
immunodeficiency with hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphopenia, and 
recurrent infections.
Perinatal History
The clinician should determine if there was exposure to maternal viral 
infection during gestation (HIV, cytomegalovirus [CMV], herpes sim­
plex virus, rubella) or a history of prematurity, blood transfusions, 
respiratory distress syndrome, or other pertinent neonatal illnesses. 
Infants previously placed on ventilators may develop chronic obstruc­
tive lung disease (bronchopulmonary dysplasia), predisposing them 
to recurrent pulmonary infections. Most perinatal HIV infections 
are seen in children whose mother or mother’s partner has engaged 
in high-­risk behavior (i.e., multiple sex partners or use of intravenous 
drugs). Attention should be paid to the time of umbilical cord separa­
tion since infants with a history of delayed umbilical cord separation 
and recurrent episodes of sepsis or pneumonia should be evaluated for 
leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
Anatomic Abnormalities
Recurrent infections in primary immune deficiencies typically affect 
different anatomic locations. Structural or anatomic defects often result 
in recurrent infections that are generally localized to the affected organ 
system. Approximately 10% of children with recurrent infections have 
an underlying chronic disease or a structural defect that predisposes 
them to recurrent infections (see Table 54.1).
Eustachian tube abnormalities or cleft palate results in recurrent or 
chronic otitis media; congenital heart disease results in an increased 
risk of endocarditis; and posterior urethral valves, vesicoureteral 
reflux, or ureteral pelvic junction obstruction results in recurrent uri­
nary tract infections. Recurrent pneumonia may result from congenital 
malformations (trachea-­esophageal fistulas, cystic adenomatoid mal­
formation, or sequestration), from aspiration of a foreign body (peanut, 
small toys) or chronic aspiration (gastroesophageal reflux, swallowing 
disorders, neurologic diseases), and from bronchopulmonary dyspla­
sia. Repeated pneumonias in dependent lobes warrant evaluation for 
recurrent aspiration. Chronic illnesses that result in recurrent pulmo­
nary infections include cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, or 
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency. Recurrent sinus infections can occur due 
to anatomic defects of the sinuses (polyps, stenotic os). Endotracheal 
intubation predisposes the patient to recurrent pulmonary infections 
with nosocomial organisms. Right middle lobe syndrome and seques­
tered lung can appear as recurrent pneumonia in the same anatomic 
location.
Any direct communication to the cerebrospinal fluid that bypasses 
the blood-­brain barrier predisposes patients to a central nervous sys­
tem infection. Basilar skull fractures and dermal sinus tracts or fistulas 
may communicate with the subarachnoid space or neural tissue. Other 
conditions predisposing patients to opportunistic infections of the cen­
tral nervous system include penetrating foreign body, cerebrospinal 
fluid shunts, myelomeningocele, and encephalocele. Local infections 
of the sinuses or of the middle ear may spread to contiguous structures 
to form cerebral abscesses or subdural-­epidural empyema. Intravenous 
drug use, bacterial endocarditis, and heart disease with right-­to-­left 
shunt are associated with an increased risk of central nervous system 
infections.
ASPLENIA
The spleen plays a particularly important role in preventing invasive 
infections, especially during the first year of life before specific immu­
nity to certain bacteria has developed. The spleen is able to bind and 
phagocytose encapsulated bacteria and produces natural antibodies 
against polysaccharides that cross react with the cell walls of bacterial 
pathogens, thereby providing a critical role in preventing sepsis in 
immunologically immature subjects from encapsulated bacteria. The 
spleen is also an important location for the phagocytosis of comple­
ment and antibody opsonized bacteria, and a key location for the pro­
duction of antibodies.
Functional asplenia occurs in children with sickle cell disease, ini­
tially as a result of vascular occlusion by the sickle cells in the splenic 
circulation. Congenital absence of the spleen may occur alone or as 
part of an asplenia syndrome with congenital heart disease. Hetero­
taxy and disorders of left-­right patterning can result in polysplenia in 
which the spleens are not functional. Genetic variants in NKX2 and 
ribosomal protein SA have been found in a small number of patients 
with congenital asplenia. Trauma and surgical splenectomy are also 
important causes of asplenia.
Individuals without spleens (anatomic or functional) are subject to a 
severe form of sepsis that is rapid in onset and can lead to sudden death 
if it is not recognized and treated promptly. Pneumococci are responsi­
ble for more than 50% of such infections; infections with Haemophilus 
influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, group A streptococci, gram-­negative 
enteric bacilli, and meningococci also occur (see Table 54.1).
The diagnosis of anatomic or functional asplenia is suggested by the 
presence of red blood cell inclusions, particularly Howell-­Jolly bodies 
on peripheral blood smear. Failure of uptake of technetium 99–sulfur 
colloid, which is normally taken up by the entire reticuloendothe­
lial system, and lack of erythrocyte pitting are also noted in asplenic 
patients. Lack of a spleen by ultrasonography of the abdomen is sug­
gestive of asplenia, but accessory splenic tissue may still be present. 
Functional tests of splenic tissue are a better indicator of asplenia.
The risk of fulminant infection in patients who have undergone 
splenectomy (from surgery or trauma) or in those with functional 
asplenia or congenital asplenia is highest in the first few years. The risk 
is lower in older children and in adults, probably because they have 
developed opsonizing antibodies through previous exposure. The 
management of functional or anatomic asplenia lies mainly in preven­
tion. When splenectomy becomes necessary, partial protection against 
life-­threatening infections can be obtained by immunizing patients 
with conjugated and polyvalent pneumococcal, H. influenzae type b, 
and meningococcal vaccines. Booster immunization may be needed 
because of waning immunity with time. Prophylactic antibiotics may 
be given continuously in a single daily dose for 1–3 years or up to the 
age of 16 years (some authorities suggest longer periods or even for 
life) after splenectomy. Parents of older asplenic children are advised to 
have their children seen by a physician or to administer the antibiotics 
at the first sign of a febrile illness.
Family History
Specific patterns of inheritance have been determined for a variety 
of immunologic defects resulting in immune deficiency or autoin­
flammatory disorder. Genetic defects of immunity can be inherited 
as X-­linked, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant disorders. 
Monogenic primary immunodeficiencies and autoinflammatory dis­
orders may exhibit reduced penetrance (some people with the genetic 
abnormality do not exhibit a clinical phenotype) and variable expres­
sivity (different signs and symptoms with the same genetic defect). A 
family history of unexplained infant deaths or serious infection should 
be sought, particularly in male infants since a number of important 
immune deficiencies are X-­linked. Evidence of consanguinity should 
also be established as many serious primary immune deficiencies are 
autosomal recessive. Since allergic diseases can appear as recurrent 
infections, a family history of atopy is important. A child who has one 
allergic parent or two allergic parents will develop an atopic disease 
in 25% and 50% of cases, respectively. Some autoinflammatory disor­
ders are more prevalent in subjects from certain geographic regions 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1018
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
(e.g., familial Mediterranean fever), and many have an autosomal 
dominant inheritance pattern, and therefore a family history of fevers 
should be sought.
Environmental History
Respiratory and dermatologic findings are a result of exposure to envi­
ronmental allergens and toxins. Specific bacteriologic and parasitic 
exposures are associated with certain pets (i.e., Salmonella organisms 
and iguanas or turtles; psittacosis and birds; Bartonella organisms in 
kittens). A travel history may suggest exposure to unusual organisms 
that are regionally endemic, such as certain parasites and specific insect 
or animal bites, or to contaminated water. A move to a new house or 
to a new nursery school or exposure to a new babysitter, pet, or house­
keeper may suggest possible allergic and infectious risks.
Physical Examination
The physical examination may provide important clues to the diag­
nosis of a primary immune deficiency or autoinflammatory disorder. 
Longitudinal evaluation of height and weight is crucial in identifying 
infants with failure to thrive or acute weight loss. Some immune defi­
ciencies are associated with skeletal dysplasia or growth deficiency 
in addition to failure to thrive. Chronic upper respiratory infections 
are suggested by scarred tympanic membranes, postnasal drip, and 
cervical adenopathy. Transverse nasal creases, circles under the eyes, 
and posterior pharyngeal “cobblestoning” suggest respiratory allergy. 
Recurrent cough, wheezing, digital clubbing, and chest deformity are 
suggestive of pulmonary disease. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis can be 
a sign of a serious systemic disorder such as immune deficiency, an 
autoinflammatory disorder, autoimmunity, or inflammatory bowel dis­
ease. Auscultation of the apex of the heart in the right side of the thorax 
(dextrocardia) may be accompanied by ciliary motility abnormalities 
or asplenia. Lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, pallor, wasting, 
and recent weight loss are suggestive of systemic disease. Absence of 
lymph tissue (tonsils and lymph nodes) is suggestive of a B-­cell defi­
ciency, while absence of thymic tissue on chest radiograph in an infant 
is suggestive of T-­cell deficiency. Parotid enlargement with lymphade­
nopathy and hepatosplenomegaly is suggestive of HIV infection. Skin 
abnormalities including alopecia, eczema, pyoderma, pustules, livedo, 
and telangiectasia can be important clues to immunodeficiency or 
autoinflammatory disorders. Evidence of hematologic disease, such 
as pallor, petechiae, and jaundice, can be associated with immunode­
ficiencies. Generalized lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly may be 
suggestive of HIV disease, a phagocyte disorder with recurrent infec­
tions, or a lymphoproliferative disorder.
Diagnostic Categories
The information obtained from the history and physical examination is 
usually sufficient to make a tentative classification:
The patient who is probably healthy
The atopic or allergic patient
The patient with a nonimmunologic defect in host defense
The patient with hereditary autoinflammatory or fever syndrome
The patient with a primary immunodeficiency
The patient with an immune disregulation disorder
The Patient Who Is Probably Healthy
Many healthy children have repeated minor infections or have a rela­
tively brief history of repeated infections or a single prolonged illness 
from which recovery has been delayed. Most URIs last <7 days, and 
duration of >14 days is unusual. Most children younger than 1 year who 
have a large family or who attend daycare develop respiratory or gas­
trointestinal infections about 6 times during the first year of life. The 
onset of the recurrent infection may coincide with entry into daycare, 
preschool, or kindergarten. The healthy child has normal growth and 
development before the illness and usually a normal physical examina­
tion finding. When a discrepancy exists between the severity of an illness 
as reported by the parent and the child’s physical appearance, it is often 
prudent to delay a detailed evaluation until more objective findings are 
documented by repeat examinations during acute episodes. Laboratory 
testing might include a CBC, inflammatory markers (i.e., ESR, CRP) to 
exclude rheumatic disorders or occult infections, and measurement of 
serum immunoglobulin levels (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) and vaccine-­specific 
titers as a screen. Cultures and imaging of the affected area may provide 
additional data. With reassurance of the parents, these children recover 
spontaneously. Simple measures, rather than a complex set of labora­
tory studies, are often the only treatment required.
THE PATIENT WITH HEREDITARY INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS
Autoinflammatory syndromes, formerly known as periodic fever 
syndromes, are a heterogeneous and ever-­increasing group of rare 
inflammatory disorders that manifest with recurrent fevers and/or 
inflammatory episodes (Table 54.2). Recurrent fevers or inflammation 
can often be mistaken for recurrent infections. Patients exhibit charac­
teristic physical findings during these episodes, such as fever, various 
rashes, lymphadenopathy, aphthous stomatitis, arthritis, and serositis 
with abdominal, chest, or testicular pain. Not all of the features of a 
particular autoinflammatory syndrome may be present in young chil­
dren, and these features may develop over time. These episodes can be 
periodic or sporadic, but the characteristic features occur with each 
episode (Table 54.3). Laboratory evaluation may show elevated white 
blood cell (WBC) counts and elevated inflammatory markers during 
the episode that typically resolve between episodes. Importantly, 
infectious evaluations are often repeatedly negative, and the patient 
is typically well between febrile episodes. Diagnosis of these disorders 
requires genetic testing; there are large panels of immunologically rele­
vant genes that can be ordered to test for these disorders.
Familial Mediterranean Fever
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is caused by variants in the MEFV 
gene that encodes the protein pyrin (see Table 54.2). Although FMF is 
considered an autosomal recessive disorder, a substantial percentage 
of patients with clinical FMF have only one demonstrable variant in 
MEFV. FMF is characterized by short episodes of fever (i.e., 1–3 days), 
serositis/peritonitis, prominent arthritis, and erythematous rash (Fig. 
54.1). Early in life fever may be the only symptom. More classic features 
typically appear within 3 years. The arthritis is typically monoarticu­
lar, and aspirates of affected joints are sterile with a predominance of 
neutrophils. In some cases, splenomegaly and systemic vasculitis can 
ensue. The most serious long-­term comorbidity with FMF is amyloi­
dosis, which occurs frequently in patients who are not compliant with 
colchicine prophylaxis. Pyrin interacts with the inflammasome, a mac­
romolecular complex involved in the processing of interleukin-­1β (IL-­
1β), and variants that result in FMF result in greater IL-­1 production. 
Daily colchicine prophylaxis prevents many of the long-­term compli­
cations of this disorder.
Pyogenic Arthritis, Pyoderma Gangrenosum, and Acne 
Syndrome
Pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (PAPA) is an 
autosomal dominant inherited syndrome caused by variants in PST­
PIP1 (see Table 54.2), which leads to hyperphosphorylation of PST­
PIP1 and increased interaction with pyrin, leading to increased 
IL-­1β production. PAPA begins in childhood with episodes of sterile 
monoarticular arthritis, and later in life pyoderma gangrenosum–like 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1019
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
TABLE 54.2  Autoinflammatory Disorders
Disease
Genetic Defect/
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Functional Defects
Associated Features
Familial Mediterranean fever
MEFV (leads to gain of 
pyrin function, resulting in 
inappropriate IL-­1β release)
AR, rarely AD
Reduced phosphorylation of mutated 
pyrin by protein kinases, resulting in 
activation of pyrin, inflammasome 
activation, and ASC-­induced IL-­1 
processing and inflammation
Recurrent fever, serositis, and 
inflammation responsive to 
colchicine. Predisposes to vasculitis 
and inflammatory bowel disease
Mevalonate kinase deficiency 
(hyper-­IgD syndrome)
MVK
AR
Affecting cholesterol synthesis and 
defective prenylation of proteins such 
as RhoA, which inhibits pyrin activation
Periodic fever and leukocytosis 
with high IgA and IgD levels, 
lymphadenopathy
Familial cold autoinflammatory 
syndrome
NLRP3; NLRP12
AD
Same as above
Nonpruritic urticaria, arthritis, chills, fever, 
and leukocytosis after cold exposure
Muckle-­Wells syndrome
NLRP3 (leads to constitutive 
activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome)
AD
Defect in cryopyrin, increased IL-­1 
processing by inflammasome
Urticarial-­like rash from birth, aseptic 
meningitis with hearing loss or eye 
involvement, joint abnormalities, 
amyloidosis
Neonatal-­onset multisystem 
inflammatory disease 
(NOMID) or chronic infantile 
neurologic cutaneous and 
articular syndrome (CINCA)
NLRP3 (see above)
AD
Same as above
Similar to above but severe and early 
onset
Deficiency of IL-­1 receptor 
antagonist (DIRA)
LOF variants in IL1RN
AR
Loss of IL-­1 receptor antagonist
Pustular rash, osteopenia, lytic bone 
lesions, and prominent systemic 
inflammation
TNF receptor–associated 
periodic syndrome (TRAPS)
TNFRSF1A
AD
Variants of 55-­kDa TNF receptor leading 
to intracellular receptor retention or 
diminished soluble cytokine receptor 
available to bind TNF
Recurrent fever, serositis, rash, and 
ocular or joint inflammation
Pyogenic sterile arthritis, 
pyoderma gangrenosum, and 
acne (PAPA) syndrome
PSTPIP1, binds pyrin and 
activates inflammasome
AD
Disordered actin reorganization leading 
to compromised physiologic signaling 
during inflammatory response
Destructive arthritis, inflammatory skin 
rash, myositis
Blau syndrome
GOF variants in NOD2 (also 
called CARD15) lead to 
NF-­κB activation
AD
Variants in nucleotide binding site 
of CARD15, possibly disrupting 
interactions with lipopolysaccharides 
and NF-­κB signaling
Uveitis, granulomatous synovitis, 
camptodactyly, rash, and cranial 
neuropathies, 30% develop Crohn 
disease
Majeed syndrome (chronic 
recurrent multifocal 
osteomyelitis and congenital 
dyserythropoietic anemia)
LPIN2 (increased expression 
of the proinflammatory 
genes)
AR
Undefined
Chronic recurrent multifocal 
osteomyelitis, transfusion-­dependent 
anemia, cutaneous inflammatory 
disorders
Deficiency of adenosine 
deaminase 2 (DADA2)
LOF variants in CECR1 (ADA2)
AR
Unclear mechanism of action
Fevers, CNS strokes, vasculitis, rash, 
cytopenias, hypogammaglobulinemia
AFEC (autoinflammation with 
infantile enterocolitis)
GOF variants in NLRC4
AD
Spontaneous activation of the inflamma­
some with IL-­1 and IL-­18 production
Fevers, vomiting, secretory diarrhea, 
duodenitis, splenomegaly, and rash
Acardia
Goutières syndrome
LOF variant in TREX1, a 3’ 
repair exonuclease
AR or AD
Defects lead to accumulation of 
intracellular nucleic acids and an 
interferon response
Leukoencephalopathy with 
calcifications, cerebral atrophy, 
hepatosplenomegaly, anemia
STING-­associated 
vasculopathy of 
infancy (SAVI)
GOF variants in TMEM173 
(STING)
AD
Spontaneous activation of STING 
induces interferon production
Fever; vasculitic rash with infarction on 
fingers, face, ears, nose; pulmonary 
disease
Chronic atypical neutrophilic 
dermatosis with lipodystrophy 
and elevated temperature 
(CANDLE)
LOF variants of PSMB8, 
others
AR
Defective proteasome function leads to 
interferon production
Fevers, purpuric skin rash, neutrophilic 
dermatosis, lipodystrophy, 
developmental delay, basal ganglion 
calcification
A20
LOF variants in TNFAIP3
AD
Haploinsufficiency results in enhanced 
NF-­κB activation
Oral and genital ulcerations, uveitis, 
fevers; mimics familial Behçet disease
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1020
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
ulcerative skin lesions and cystic acne (Fig. 54.2). The episodes of 
arthritis are the most common presentation, start in early childhood, 
and typically affect one to three joints at a time. The joint effusions are 
typically neutrophil-­rich and sterile. Treatment of the arthritis with 
surgical drainage or treatment with intraarticular or systemic steroids 
has shown benefit in resolving arthritis. Several reports demonstrated 
TABLE 54.2  Autoinflammatory Disorders—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect/
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Functional Defects
Associated Features
Otulipenia
LOF variants in FAM105B 
(otulin)
AR
Enhanced NF-­κB activation
Recurrent fevers, joint swelling, painful 
nodular red rash, GI inflammation/
diarrhea, failure to thrive
Autoinflammation with episodic 
fever and lymphadenopathy 
(AIEFL)
LOF variants of RIPK1
AD
Activation of proinflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines such as IL-­6, TNF, 
and IFNγ
Recurrent fever beginning in early infancy, 
lymphadenopathy and occasional 
hepatosplenomegaly, no rash or ulcers
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; GOF, gain of function; IFN, interferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; LOF, loss of function; 
NF-­κB, nuclear factor-­κB; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
TABLE 54.3  Features of Autoinflammatory 
Syndromes That May Narrow Diagnosis
Clinical Features
Autoinflammatory Syndrome
Age of Onset
Birth
NOMID, DIRA, FCAS
Infancy
HIDS, FCAS
Toddler/late childhood
PFAPA syndrome
Onset in adulthood
TRAPS, DITRA
Ethnicity and Geography
Armenians, Turks, Italians, 
Sephardic Jews
FMF
Arabs
FMF, DITRA
Dutch, French, German
HIDS, MWS
United States
FCAS
Triggers
Vaccines
HIDS
Cold exposure
FCAS
Stress, menses
FMF, TRAPS, MWS, DITRA
Minor trauma
MWS, TRAPS, HIDS
Exercise
FMF, TRAPS
Pregnancy
DITRA
Duration of Episode
<24 hr
FCAS, FMF
1–3 days
FMF, MWS, DITRA
3–7 days
HIDS, PFAPA syndrome
>7 days
TRAPS
Constant episode
NOMID, DIRA
Interval Between Episodes
3–6 wk
PFAPA syndrome, HIDS
>6 wk
TRAPS
Unpredictable
All others
DIRA, deficiency of the IL-­1 receptor antagonist; DITRA, deficiency of 
the IL-­36 receptor antagonist; FCAS, familial cold autoinflammatory syn­
drome; FMF, familial Mediterranean fever; HIDS, hyperimmunoglobulin 
D syndrome; MWS, Muckle-­Wells syndrome; NOMID, neonatal-­onset 
multisystem inflammatory disease; PFAPA, periodic fever, aphthous 
stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis; TRAPS, tumor necrosis 
factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome.
Adapted from Hashkes PJ, Toker O. Autoinflammatory syndromes. 
Pediatr Clin N Am. 2012;59:447–470.
From Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:273, Table 7.11.
Fig. 54.1  Familial Mediterranean fever. Erythematous rash on the dor­
sal aspect of the foot and pretibial area of an affected child. (From Paller 
AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:584, Fig. 25-­24.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1021
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
successful treatment with an IL-­1 receptor antagonist (anakinra) or 
other IL-­1 blockers (rilonacept, canakinumab).
Cryopyrin-­Associated Periodic Syndromes
Cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndromes (CAPSs) are a spectrum of 
autoinflammatory disorders that are inherited in an autosomal dom­
inant manner due to variants in the NLRP3 gene (see Table 54.2). 
NLRP3 encodes cryopyrin, a protein that is part of the inflammasome. 
Variants that cause CAPS prevent autoinhibition of the cryopyrin pro­
tein, resulting in spontaneous activation of the inflammasome and 
excessive production of IL-­1β.
CAPS consists of three diseases: familial cold autoinflammatory 
syndrome (FCAS), Muckle-­Wells syndrome (MWS), and neonatal-­
onset multisystem inflammatory disorder (NOMID), which repre­
sent a spectrum of disorders that present with recurrent or continual 
systemic inflammation, rash, fevers, arthritis, neurologic deficits, and 
amyloidosis. FCAS is the mildest form of this disorder that presents 
with fevers, an evanescent rash, headache, conjunctivitis, and joint 
pain after generalized cold exposure. Although the rash can have 
some visual features of urticaria, it is macular without signs of mast 
cell degranulation, and is histologically characterized by a neutrophilic 
infiltrate. MWS presents similarly to FCAS, but cold exposure is not 
necessary for symptoms to occur (Fig. 54.3). Unlike FCAS, chronic 
meningitis occurs with papilledema and sensorineural hearing loss, 
joint pain and swelling is more severe, and untreated, amyloidosis 
develops over time. NOMID is the most severe variant of CAPS. Like 
MWS, all patients with NOMID exhibit a rash at or shortly after birth 
(Fig. 54.4). Neurologic symptoms, such as aseptic meningitis, head­
ache, cerebral atrophy, uveitis, hearing loss, and intellectual disability, 
are common and severe. In NOMID and MWS, chronic inflammation 
of the joints leads to a chronic arthropathy with epiphyseal and patel­
lar overgrowth. FCAS, MWS, and NOMID exhibit laboratory evidence 
of an acute-­phase response with leukocytosis, neutrophilia, anemia, 
thrombocytosis, and elevated ESR and CRP levels.
IL-­1 inhibitors (anakinra, rilonacept, canakinumab) are now the 
treatment of choice for these disorders based on their ability to induce 
rapid and sustained clinical response. Laboratory abnormalities typ­
ically normalize in days, and the rash responds rapidly. Importantly, 
IL-­1 blockade improves long-­term morbidity such as hearing loss, joint 
deformity, and amyloidosis.
Hyperimmunoglobulin D Syndrome
Hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome (HIDS) is an autoinflammatory 
disorder caused by variants in the mevalonate kinase (MVK) gene (see 
Table 54.2). MVK is an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of cho­
lesterol and isoprenoids. Patients with HIDS have low but detectable 
MVK enzyme activity resulting in elevated levels of mevalonic acid 
in the urine, particularly during attacks. Complete absence of MVK 
results in mevalonic aciduria, an inborn error of metabolism, which is 
also associated with fevers. It is unclear how variants in MVK lead to 
an autoinflammatory disease.
The clinical manifestations of HIDS occur at an early age with 
recurrent fevers with lymphadenopathy, abdominal pain, arthralgia 
and arthritis, and painful migratory erythematous macules. These epi­
sodes may last 4–7 days and are often triggered by stress, trauma, or 
vaccination. Serum IgD and IgA levels are usually elevated but may be 
normal. Acute-­phase reactants are elevated during attacks. Although 
high-­dose corticosteroids and tumor necrosis factor-­α (TNF-­α) antag­
onists have been used with variable success, IL-­1β inhibitors appear 
more effective at preventing the inflammatory episodes. Amyloidosis 
may occur but is relatively rare.
Deficiency of the Interleukin-­1 Receptor Antagonist
Deficiency of the IL-­1 receptor antagonist (DIRA) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder due to variants in the IL-­1 receptor antagonist gene 
(IL-­1RN) (see Table 54.2). IL-­1 receptor antagonist (IL-­1RA) is a decoy 
protein that binds to the IL-­1 receptor but does not result in signal­
ing, and the absence of IL-­1RA in patients with DIRA leads to cellular 
hyperresponsiveness to IL-­1β.
The clinical manifestations of DIRA occur within the first 2 weeks 
of life and include pustular rash, osteopenia, lytic bone lesions, and 
prominent systemic inflammation. All patients develop cutaneous 
pustulosis, and biopsies of the skin lesions revealed a neutrophilic 
predominance (Fig. 54.5). Respiratory distress, aphthous ulcers, hep­
atomegaly, and failure to thrive occur, with approximately one-­third 
of infants expiring prior to diagnosis and effective treatment. Bone 
is prominently involved, with osteopenia, multiple osteolytic lesions, 
and rib widening. Laboratory abnormalities reflect an acute-­phase 
response with elevated ESR and CRP, leukocytosis, anemia, and 
thrombocytosis.
Fig. 54.2  Pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne 
(PAPA) syndrome. This 11-­year-­old boy had small inflammatory papules 
of acne, which rapidly became purulent plaques (as shown) and then 
ulcerated to form pyoderma gangrenosum, leaving residual scars. He 
also had arthritis. His disease was brought under control with golim­
umab (tumor necrosis factor inhibitor) and isotretinoin. (From Paller AS, 
Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2016:589, Fig. 25-­29.)
Fig. 54.3  Urticarial rash is the most common skin manifestation seen 
in Muckle-­Wells syndrome. (From Barron K, Kastner DL. Periodic fever 
syndromes and other inherited autoinflammatory diseases. In: Petty 
RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatol­
ogy. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Fig. 39.4.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1022
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Anakinra, a recombinant IL-­1RA, is highly effective in the treatment 
of DIRA. Anakinra essentially replaces the IL-­1RA that patients with 
DIRA cannot synthesize. The longer-­acting anti–IL-­1 agents canaki­
numab and rilonacept also work with the advantage of less frequent 
dosing compared to anakinra but are considerably more expensive.
TNF Receptor–Associated Periodic Syndrome
TNF receptor–associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) is an autoso­
mal dominant disease associated with missense variants in the extra­
cellular domain of the TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) gene (TNFRSF1A) 
(see Table 54.2). The clinical manifestations of TRAPS include recur­
rent and often prolonged fevers, abdominal pain, and arthralgias. A 
migratory rash with underlying fascial inflammation and myalgia 
can be seen, as well as conjunctivitis and periorbital edema (Fig. 
54.6). Increased serum levels of CRP, ESR, leukocytosis, and throm­
bocytosis are evident during and in between attacks. Initial insights 
into the pathophysiology of this disorder came when patients with 
TRAPS exhibited low serum levels of soluble TNFR1, suggesting that 
shedding of TNF receptors acts as a natural antagonist to TNF-­α. In 
support of this, the TNF-­α antagonist etanercept has been shown to 
reduce the severity of symptoms in some cases of TRAPS. However, 
not all patients with TRAPS have low serum TNFR1 levels, and TNF-­
α inhibition is not completely effective. Reports have also shown the 
beneficial effects of IL-­1 inhibition and the anti–IL-­6 receptor anti­
body tocilizumab.
Deficiency of Adenosine Deaminase 2
Deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) is an autosomal reces­
sive disorder due to loss of function of CECR1, which encodes adeno­
sine deaminase 2 (ADA2) (see Table 54.2). The clinical manifestations 
of DADA2 begin in childhood with intermittent fevers, recurrent 
lacunar strokes, organomegaly, hypogammaglobulinemia, and sys­
temic vasculitides. Pure red cell aplasia, immune thrombocytopenia, 
neutropenia, and bone marrow failure have been observed. The lacu­
nar strokes begin before the age of 5 years and typically occur during 
inflammatory episodes. A livedo-­like rash is a prominent feature with 
biopsies showing a predominance of neutrophils and macrophages as 
well as vasculitis in medium-­sized vessels. Some of these patients are 
diagnosed with early-­onset polyarteritis nodosa. Treatment with glu­
cocorticoids, TNF-­α inhibitors, and IL-­1 blockers has been utilized 
with some benefit. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is increas­
ingly the treatment of choice for this disorder.
Interferonopathies
Another group of disorders that result in spontaneous inflamma­
tion are known as interferonopathies (Fig. 54.7 and Table 54.4). 
Interferonopathies are genetic defects that result in the spontaneous 
B
A
Fig. 54.4  Neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory disorder. A, An urticaria-­like rash is usually present at 
birth or during the first months of life. B, The rash is nonpruritic and papular. (Courtesy Dr. Raphaela Gold­
bach-Mansky, NIAID, NIH.)
Fig. 54.5  Deficiency of interleukin-­1 receptor antagonist. This young 
male with failure to thrive and multifocal lytic lesions of bone showed 
numerous plaques of erythematous pustules. (From Paller AS, Mancini 
AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016:587, Fig. 25-­25.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1023
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
STING
TRAP
ADAR1
PSMB8
TREX1
SAMHD1
RNASEH2A
RNASEH2C
RNASEH2B
RIG-I
C1q
Skin involvement
CNS involvement
PSMA3
PSMB4
ISG15
USP18
POLA1
STING
PSMB4
PSMA3
TREX1
SAMHD1
RNASEH2A
RNASEH2B
RNASEH2C
PSMB8
MDA5
ADAR1
TRAP
C1q
MDA5
ISG15
USP18
Lung
inflammation
Lung
infection
Gastrointestinal
involvement
Bilateral
striatal
necrosis
SKIV2L
Lupus
POLA1
Developmental
delay
Malignancy
Glaucoma
Skin
vasculopathy
Spastic
paraparesis
Fig. 54.7  Specific and overlapping features of monogenic type 1 interferonopathies. In the broadest sense, 
central nervous system (CNS) and skin disease are the most common features of the type 1 interferonop­
athies. Discrete neurologic phenotypes associated with variants in AGS-­associated genes include “non­
syndromic” spastic paraparesis (RNASEH2B, ADAR1, and IFIH1) and bilateral striatal necrosis (ADAR1). 
Glaucoma is a common feature of AGS and is also seen in the Singleton-Merten syndrome phenotype asso­
ciated with gain-­of-­function variants in IFIH1 and DDX58 (RIG-­I). Systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus) is 
most frequently associated with variants in ACP5 and C1q. Malignancy has only been reported in the context 
of SAMHD1. Lung inflammation is so far restricted to patients with variants in TMEM173 (STING). The phe­
notypes associated with variants in POLA1 and SKIV2L appear distinct. (From Rodero MP, Crow YJ. Type 1 
interferon-­mediated monogenic autoinflammation: the type I interferonopathies, a conceptual overview. J 
Exp Med. 2016;21:2527–2538 [Fig. 2, p. 2531].)
C
A
B
D
E
Fig. 54.6  Cutaneous findings associated with tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome 
(TRAPS) may consist of macular areas of erythema on the torso (A) or on an extremity (B). C, Sagittal views of 
the proximal thighs of a TRAPS patient demonstrating edematous changes within muscle compartments (black 
arrows), here and extending to the skin (white arrows). D, Peritoneal inflammation can lead to adhesions. E, 
Periorbital edema is commonly observed in TRAPS patients during a flare. (From Barron K, Kastner DL. Periodic 
fever syndromes and other inherited autoinflammatory diseases. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al, eds. 
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Fig. 39.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1024
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
production of type 1 interferons, which leads to inflammation and 
characteristic features. The genetic defects occur in genes that process 
or detect intracellular nucleic acids, a sign of viral infections, resulting 
in the production of type 1 interferon and subsequent systemic inflam­
mation. Since interferons signal through Janus kinases, which results 
in inflammation, targeted therapies with Janus kinase inhibitors have 
shown promise.
STING-­Associated Vasculopathy
STING-­associated vasculopathy of infancy (SAVI) is an autoinflam­
matory disorder that presents with intermittent low-­grade fevers; 
rashes on the cheeks, nose, or digits; myositis; arthritis; and evidence 
of interstitial lung disease (see Table 54.2). The vascular involvement 
can be significant resulting in ulceration of the distal extremities with 
tissue infarcts (Fig. 54.8). Autosomal dominantly inherited variants in 
the signaling molecule STING, which senses altered intracytoplasmic 
double-­stranded DNA levels, lead to its spontaneous activation and 
the production of type 1 interferon. Currently there is no treatment, 
although Janus kinase inhibitors are available based on in vitro studies 
and case reports.
Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic Dermatosis with 
Lipodystrophy and Elevated Temperature
Misfolded or damaged proteins are degraded by the proteasome, and 
defects in the proteasome lead to buildup of dysfunctional or misfolded 
TABLE 54.4  Mutated Gene, Protein Function, Pattern of Inheritance, and Main Symptoms of 
Known Type 1 Interferonopathies
Disease
Gene
Protein Function
Inheritance
Symptoms
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome 
(AGS) type 1
TREX-­1
3’-­5’ DNA exonuclease
AR and AD
Classical AGS
AGS2
RNASEH2B
Components of RNase H2 complex. 
Removes ribonucleotides from 
RNA-­DNA hybrids
AR
Classical AGS
AGS3
RNASEH2C
Classical AGS
AGS4
RNASEH2A
Classical AGS with dysmorphic features
AGS5
SAMHD1
Restricts the availability of cytosolic 
deoxynucleotides
AR
Mild AGS, mouth ulcer, deforming arthropathy, 
cerebral vasculopathy with early-­onset stroke
AGS6
ADAR
Deaminates adenosine to inosine in 
endogenous dsRNA, preventing 
recognition by MDA5 receptor
AR and AD
Classical AGS, bilateral striatal necrosis
AGS7
IFIH1
Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA
AD
Classic or mild AGS, asymptomatic
Retinal vasculopathy with 
cerebral leukodystrophy (RVCL)
TREX-­1
3’-­5’ DNA exonuclease
AD
Adult-­onset loss of vision, stroke, motor impairment, 
cognitive decline, Raynaud, and liver involvement
Spondyloenchondrodysplasia 
(SPENCD)
ACP5
Lysosomal phosphatase activity
AR
Spondyloenchondrodysplasia, immune disregulation, 
and in some cases combined immunodeficiency
STING-­associated vasculopathy 
with onset in infancy (SAVI)
TMEM173
Transduction of cytoplasmic DNA-­
induced signal
AD
Systemic inflammation, cutaneous vasculopathy, 
pulmonary inflammation
Proteasome-­associated 
autoinflammatory 
syndrome (PRAAS)
PSMB8
Part of the proteasome complex
AR
Autoinflammation, lipodystrophy, dermatosis, 
hyperimmunoglobulinemia, joint contractures, 
short stature
ISG15 deficiency
ISG15
Stabilizes USP18, a negative 
regulator of type 1 interferon
AR
Brain calcifications, seizures, mycobacterial 
susceptibility
Singleton-­Merten 
syndrome (SMS)
IFIH1
Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA
AD
Dental dysplasia, aortic calcifications, skeletal 
abnormalities, glaucoma, psoriasis
Atypical SMS
DDX58
Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA
AD
Aortic calcifications, skeletal abnormalities, 
glaucoma, psoriasis
Trichohepatoenteric 
syndrome (THES)
SKIV2L
RNA helicase
AR
Severe intractable diarrhea, hair abnormalities 
(trichorrhexis nodosa), facial dysmorphism, 
immunodeficiency in most cases
From Volpi S, Picco P, Caorsi R, et al. Type 1 interferonopathies in pediatric rheumatology. Pediatr Rheumatol. 2016;14:35: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12969-­016-­0094-­4
Fig. 54.8  Stimulator of interferon genes (STING)-­associated vasculop­
athy with onset in infancy (SAVI) syndrome. These two unrelated boys 
both show the acral telangiectatic vasculopathy of SAVI syndrome. One 
of these boys died at 14 years of age because of his pulmonary disease. 
(From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatol­
ogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:587, Fig. 25-­26.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1025
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
proteins. This buildup occurs during viral infections and is sensed by 
the cell with resultant interferon production. Chronic atypical neutro­
philic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CAN­
DLE) occurs due to genetic defects in the proteasome with resultant 
type 1 interferon production (see Table 54.2). Mild infections, cold, 
or stress affects metabolic demands, which can precipitate episodes of 
inflammation in this disorder. Features include early-­onset recurrent 
fevers; rashes on the fingers, toes, face, and ears; and erythematous 
or violaceous periorbital and perioral edema. Erythematous nodules, 
plaques, and purpuric lesions can occur, and biopsies demonstrate leu­
kocytoclastic vasculitis with fibrinoid necrosis and panniculitis. Labs 
are significant for elevated inflammatory markers, chronic anemia, 
thrombocytosis, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Over time lipodys­
trophy, aseptic meningitis, and synovitis develop. Autosomal recessive 
loss-­of-­function variants in the PSMB8 gene, which codes for the prote­
asome subunit β5i, is the classic defect, but genetic variants in the other 
subunits of the proteasome may also result in CANDLE syndrome.
NF-­κB Related Disorders
Nuclear factor-­κB (NF-­κB) family members are sequestered in the 
cytoplasm bound to inhibitory proteins, and when activated these pro­
teins are degraded via the ubiquitin pathway, allowing for the nuclear 
translocation of NF-­κB and the transcription of many inflammatory 
proteins. De-­ubiquitinating enzymes inhibit this process, and genetic 
variants in two of these proteins, otulin and A20, lead to autoinflam­
matory disorders. Otulipenia, due to homozygous loss-­of-­function 
variants in the FAM105B gene that encode otulin, may present with 
episodes of recurrent fevers, joint swelling, painful nodular red rash, 
gastrointestinal inflammation with diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Biop­
sies of the rash will show a neutrophilic dermatosis and small/medium-­
vessel vasculitis. A20 haploinsufficiency is an autosomal dominantly 
inherited autoinflammatory disorder caused by genetic variants in the 
TNFAIP3 gene (see Table 54.2). Patients present with systemic inflam­
mation, oral and genital ulcers, uveitis, and fevers similar to familial 
Behçet disease. Other autoinflammatory disorders, such as Blau syn­
drome, have also been postulated to lead to NF-­κB activation. Blau 
syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease caused by variants in 
NOD2 that result in spontaneous activation of the NOD2 protein, 
activation of NF-­κB, and production of proinflammatory cytokines. 
Blau syndrome was originally described as a granulomatous disease 
affecting the skin, joints, and uveal tract and should be considered in 
any individual presenting with early-­onset sarcoidosis. Blau syndrome 
presents with a boggy synovitis of large joints, particularly the wrists 
and ankles, and an erythematous papular rash similar to erythema 
nodosum. Biopsy of these lesions demonstrates noncaseating granulo­
mas. Unlike sarcoidosis, respiratory involvement and hilar adenopathy 
are rare, although granulomatous liver disease, cranial neuropathies, 
and large-­vessel vasculitis can occur. Laboratory studies in Blau syn­
drome are typically normal, although elevated ESR and angiotensin-­
converting enzyme levels can be seen, and hypergammaglobulinemia 
can occur. Most patients with Blau syndrome have been treated with 
corticosteroids, although limited reports have shown effectiveness of 
infliximab, thalidomide, and possibly anakinra.
THE IMMUNODEFICIENT PATIENT
Approximately 5–10% of children with recurrent infections have 
an underlying primary immunodeficiency. Frequently, the onset of 
infections occurs between the ages of 6 and 12 months, but delays 
in diagnosis are not uncommon. In addition, certain immune defi­
ciencies such as common variable immunodeficiency disease (CVID) 
can present in adolescence or young adulthood; thus, it is critical to 
consider immune defects in children of any age. Infections in patients 
with primary immune deficiencies often vary in type, location, and 
severity, although sinopulmonary infections are common. Failure 
to thrive may occur and can be a sign of a serious immune defect. 
Patients with primary immune defects often require repeated courses 
of antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics or may have infections with 
unusual organisms or exhibit unexpected complications. Such chil­
dren may respond to antibiotics but become ill when the medications 
are discontinued.
In a patient with recurrent infections and recurrent fevers, it can be 
difficult to pinpoint the cause of the infections. The immune system has 
four primary components:
	1.	 Antibody-­mediated immunity (humoral or B-­cell immunity) is 
mediated by bone marrow–derived B lymphocytes and plasma cells 
(differentiated antibody-­producing cells), which release antibodies 
(immunoglobulins) into secretions, plasma, and interstitial spaces. 
Antibodies work to opsonize and promote phagocytosis of organ­
isms, prevent infection by pathogens, neutralize toxins, and lyse 
pathogens (with the aid of complements).
	2.	 Cell-­mediated immunity (T-­cell immunity) is mediated by 
thymus-­derived T lymphocytes (i.e., CD4 and CD8 T cells) that are 
activated by antigen-­presenting cells (e.g., dendritic cells, macro­
phages) and antigens. Although T cells do not produce immuno­
globulin, CD4 T cells are necessary for optimal B-­cell function. CD4 
T cells also express cytokines that activate phagocytes to efficiently 
clear intracellular pathogens. CD8 T cells lyse virally infected cells.
	3.	 The phagocytic system consists of tissue macrophages and den­
dritic cells, as well as blood-­borne monocytes and neutrophils. In 
response to specific signals, phagocytes ingest and kill invading 
microorganisms. Dendritic cells also serve as antigen-­presenting 
cells for T cells.
	4.	 The complement system acts synergistically with antibodies and 
the remainder of the immune system to help clear microbial infec­
tions both directly (complement-­mediated cytolysis) and indirectly 
(recruitment of phagocytic cells, opsonization of microbes).
The different arms of the immune system are interconnected, and 
thus similar infections may occur as a manifestation of phagocyte, 
humoral, cell-­mediated, or complement disorders that can be inherited 
or acquired (Table 54.5). Alternatively, highly characteristic infections 
can point to a defect in a particular arm of the immune system (Tables 
54.6, 54.7, and 54.8). Most patients with recurrent infections do not 
have an underlying identifiable primary immunodeficiency, but they 
frequently have allergic rhinitis, asthma, or other risks for recurrent 
infections (see Table 54.1). Because of the low probability of identify­
ing a discrete immune defect, the primary physician faces the difficult 
decision about the extent of the evaluation and which patients merit a 
complete evaluation.
Diagnostic Approach to the Patient with Recurrent 
Infections
Patients with recurrent, severe, or unusual infections involving multi­
ple sites or organ systems should be investigated for an immunodefi­
ciency (Fig. 54.9). Initial tests are recommended for patients suspected 
of a primary immune deficiency, although a variety of immune defects 
can occur despite normal screening tests. Thus, it is recommended 
that advanced testing be performed in consultation with a clinical 
immunologist.
A CBC with manual differential should always be obtained in the 
evaluation of any child suspected of immunodeficiency. A neutrophil 
count below 500/mm3 might indicate an associated immune defect, 
severe congenital neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia, idiopathic neutro­
penia, marrow failure, or replacement of marrow by leukemia or a 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1026
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
tumor if other hematopoietic cell lines are affected (Table 54.9). Anal­
ysis of the peripheral blood smear is important as this can detect neu­
trophil abnormalities (e.g., abnormal granules in Chédiak-­Higashi) or 
evidence of asplenia (i.e., Howell-­Jolly bodies).
Serum immunoglobulin levels (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) are essential to 
the work-­up of suspected primary immunodeficiency. Antibody levels 
vary with age, with normal adult values of IgG at birth from transpla­
cental transfer of maternal IgG, a physiologic nadir occurring between 
3 and 6 months of age, and a gradual increase to adult values over sev­
eral years. IgA and IgM are low at birth and levels increase gradually 
over several years, with IgA taking the longest to reach normal adult 
values. When IgG levels are low, albumin levels should be measured 
because increased loss of proteins, as in protein-­losing enteropathy 
or nephrotic syndrome, can result in hypogammaglobulinemia. High 
immunoglobulin levels suggest intact B-­cell immunity and can be 
found in diseases with recurrent infections, such as chronic granulo­
matous disease (CGD), immotile cilia syndrome, cystic fibrosis, HIV 
infection, autoimmune diseases (lupus), and other disorders leading 
to chronic inflammation. Elevated IgE levels can be found in a num­
ber of immune deficiencies such as hyper-­IgE syndrome but more 
likely represent atopic disease. Undiagnosed asthma is frequently a 
cause of prolonged or frequent URIs, which masquerades as a primary 
immunodeficiency.
Specific antibody titers after childhood vaccination (tetanus, 
diphtheria, H. influenzae type b, or Streptococcus pneumoniae) reflect 
the capacity of the immune system to synthesize specific antibodies 
and to develop memory B cells. If titers are low, immunization with 
a specific vaccine and obtaining titers 4–6 weeks later should be per­
formed to confirm a response to the immunization. Poor response to 
bacterial polysaccharide antigens is often found before 24 months of 
age; even in older individuals the antibody response to polysaccharide 
vaccines is typically less robust and less long-­lived than protein anti­
gens. The development of protein-­conjugate polysaccharide vaccines 
to S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae has dramatically reduced invasive 
TABLE 54.5  Cause and Mechanism of Recurrent Infection in Immunodeficiency States
Disorder
Pathogen
Deficiency
Primary Immunodeficiencies
Humoral immunodeficiency 
syndromes (predominantly 
B-­cell defects)
Bacterial pathogens, enteroviruses, Giardia lamblia
Reduced phagocytic efficiency, failure of lysis and 
agglutination of bacteria, inadequate neutralization of 
virus and bacterial toxins
Cellular immunodeficiency 
syndromes (predominantly 
T-­cell defects)
CMV, VZV, warts, Strongyloides stercoralis; Mycobacterium, 
Listeria, Nocardia; Cryptococcus, Candida species; Pneumocystis 
carinii
Absence of or impaired delayed hypersensitivity 
response; absence of T-­cell cooperation for B-­cell 
synthesis of antibodies to T-­cell–specific antigens; 
absence of T-­cell cytokines that activate mononuclear 
phagocytes, failure of T-­cell clearance of viruses
Complement Deficiencies
C1, C2, C3, C4, and factor B
Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphyloco­ccus 
aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella species
Defective chemotaxis and opsonization of microbes
C5–C8 and properdin deficiencies
Neisseria meningitidis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Defective membrane attack mechanism
Phagocyte Defects
Neutropenia (ANC < 500/mm3)
Pyogenic bacteria or fungi, Pseudomonas species, Staphylococcus 
aureus
Decreased neutrophil numbers
Chronic granulomatous disease
Catalase-­positive organisms, e.g., S. aureus, Serratia species, 
Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia species, Candida species, 
Aspergillus species
Impaired neutrophil bactericidal activity secondary to 
impaired production of hydrogen peroxide
Secondary Immunodeficiencies
AIDS
CMV, VZV, adenovirus, HBV, Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba histolytica, 
Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare, 
Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Cryptococcus 
neoformans, Pneumocystis jirovecii; Campylobacter, 
Candida, Isospora, Aspergillus, Nocardia, Strongyloides, and 
Cryptosporidium species
CD4 lymphopenia with reduced TH1 response
Cancer
VZV, HSV, Escherichia coli; Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Listeria, 
Cryptococcus, Pneumocystis, and Mycobacterium species
Neutropenia, lymphopenia, impaired cellular immunity
Immunosuppression
HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV, hepatitis virus, Pseudomonas species, E. coli; 
Klebsiella, Acinetobacter, Serratia, Candida, Aspergillus, Mucor, and 
Cryptococcus species
Dependent on agent used, leads often to impaired 
cellular immunity and neutropenia, lymphopenia
Transplantation
CMV, HSV, VZV, hepatitis virus, S. aureus; Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, 
Candida, Aspergillus, Nocardia, and Pneumocystis species; EBV
Related to use of immunosuppressive agents
Malnutrition
Measles, HSV, VZV, Mycobacterium species
Impaired T-­cell function, reduction in complement activity
ANC, absolute neutrophil count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; VZV, varicella-­
zoster virus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1027
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
TABLE 54.6  Characteristic Pathogens Affecting Immunocompromised Patients
I. Humoral Defects
	A.	 Antibody Deficiency (B-­Cell Defects)
	
1.	 Bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus (sepsis, sinopulmonary infection)
Haemophilus influenzae (sepsis, meningitis, arthritis, sinopulmonary 
infection)
Streptococcus pneumoniae (sepsis, meningitis, arthritis)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (sepsis, pneumonia)
Mycoplasma species (arthritis, pneumonia)
Salmonella species (enteritis)
Campylobacter species (enteritis)
	
2.	 Viruses
Enterovirus, including polio vaccine (encephalitis, paralysis, myositis, 
arthritis)
Rotavirus (enteritis)
	
3.	 Protozoa
Giardia lamblia (enteritis)
	B.	 Complement Deficiencies
	
1.	 C1, C2, C3, C4, factor B
Streptococcus pyogenes
S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, H. influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, 
Klebsiella species (sepsis, meningitis, arthritis)
	
2.	 C5–C8, properdin deficiency
N. meningitidis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae (meningitis, sepsis, arthritis)
II. Combined B-­ and T-­Cell Defects (Congenital, AIDS, 
Immunosuppression Malignancies)
	A.	 Bacteria
Listeria monocytogenes (sepsis, meningitis)
Salmonella (sepsis)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (pneumonia, disseminated disease)
Atypical mycobacteria (Mycobacterium avium, Mycobacterium 
intracellulare) (sepsis, pneumonia, disseminated disease)
Nocardia species (pneumonia, CNS infection)
Legionella species (pneumonia)
	B.	 Fungi
Cryptococcus neoformans (sepsis, meningitis)
Histoplasma capsulatum (pneumonia, disseminated disease)
Coccidioides immitis (pneumonia, meningitis)
	C.	 Viruses
Varicella-­zoster (cutaneous and CNS infection, pneumonia, hepatitis)
Cytomegalovirus (bone marrow infection, pneumonia, retinitis, 
esophagitis, colitis, CNS infection)
Herpes simplex (CNS infection, pneumonia, esophagitis, hepatitis, 
disseminated disease)
Epstein-­Barr virus (lymphoma)
Measles (pneumonia, encephalitis)
Polyomavirus BK (hemorrhagic cystitis, ureteric stenosis, renal insufficiency)
Polyomavirus JC (progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy)
Papilloma viruses
	D.	 Protozoa
Pneumocystis carinii (pneumonia, rare extrapulmonary spread)
Toxoplasma gondii (CNS infection, myocarditis)
Cryptosporidium species (enteritis)
	E.	 Helminths
Strongyloides stercoralis (enteritis, pneumonia, sepsis, meningitis)
III. Neutropenia (Severe Chronic Neutropenia, 
Aplastic Anemia, Myelosuppression, Myelophthisis 
Myelosuppressive Agents, Bone Marrow Transplantation)
	A.	 Bacteria
Escherichia coli (sepsis, pneumonia, pyelonephritis)
Klebsiella pneumoniae (sepsis, pneumonia)
P. aeruginosa (sepsis, pneumonia, cutaneous lesions)
Mixed anaerobic and aerobic enteric bacteria (typhlitis, perianal abscess)
S. aureus (sepsis, cellulitis, soft tissue infection)
Staphylococcus epidermidis (line infection)
Corynebacterium JK strain (sepsis)
α-­Hemolytic streptococci (sepsis)
	B.	 Fungi
Candida species (sepsis, pneumonia, ophthalmitis, liver and spleen 
abscesses)
Aspergillus species (sepsis, pneumonia, sinusitis, CNS infection, 
cutaneous lesions)
Mucor (pneumonia, sinusitis, CNS infection)
Fusarium species (sepsis, cutaneous lesions, pneumonia)
Alternaria species (sepsis, cutaneous lesions)
IV. Phagocytic Dysfunction
	A.	 Chronic Granulomatous Disease
Bacteria (soft tissue, lymphadenitis, pneumonia, osteomyelitis)
Catalase-­positive organisms (e.g., S. aureus, Serratia marcescens, 
Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia species)
Fungi (pneumonia, liver infection, soft tissue), Candida species, 
Aspergillus species
	B.	 Other Phagocyte Defects (Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency 
Hyperimmunoglobulin E, Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome, Specific Granule 
Deficiency, Rac-­2 Deficiency)
Bacteria (soft tissue, pneumonia, lymphadenitis)
Pseudomonas species, S. aureus, E. coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter species
Fungus (pneumonia)
Candida infection if diabetic
CNS, central nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1028
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
infections with these organisms in early childhood by improving the 
response to vaccination. Antibody responses to the S. pneumoniae 
serotypes found in the 23-­valent polysaccharide vaccine, but not in 
the conjugate vaccine, can be used to test antibody responses to poly­
saccharide antigens.
Complement assays include the CH50 test, which measures the 
presence of proteins in the classical pathway of complement (C1, C2, 
C3, C4), and the AH50 test, which tests the proteins of the alterna­
tive pathway of complement (C3, factor B, properdin). In patients with 
deficiencies in complement protein, the CH50 levels or AH50 levels are 
generally zero, whereas they are low but not absent in disorders leading 
to complement consumption (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). If 
both the CH50 and AH50 levels are abnormal, a defect in the common 
TABLE 54.7  Clinical Aids to the Diagnosis 
of Immunodeficiency
Suggestive of B-­Cell Defect (Humoral Immunodeficiency)
Recurrent bacterial infections of the upper and lower respiratory tracts
Recurrent skin infections, meningitis, osteomyelitis secondary to 
encapsulated bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus 
influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, Neisseria meningitidis)
Severe Giardia lamblia infections
Paralysis after vaccination with live attenuated poliovirus
Reduced levels of immunoglobulins
Suggestive of T-­Cell Defect (Combined Immunodeficiency)
Systemic illness after vaccination with any live virus or bacille Calmette-­
Guérin (BCG)
Unusual life-­threatening complication after infection with benign viruses 
(giant cell pneumonia with measles; varicella pneumonia)
Chronic oral candidiasis after 6 mo of age
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Graft versus host disease after blood transfusion
Reduced lymphocyte counts for age
Low level of immunoglobulins
Absence of lymph nodes and tonsils
Small thymus
Chronic diarrhea
Failure to thrive
Recurrent infections with opportunistic organisms
Generalized, recurrent, recalcitrant warts
Suggestive of Macrophage Dysfunction
Disseminated atypical mycobacterial infection, recurrent Salmonella 
infection
Fatal infection after BCG vaccination
Congenital Syndromes with Immunodeficiency
Ataxia-­telangiectasia: ataxia, telangiectasia
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome: hypofunction of one or more endocrine 
organs, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia: short-­limbed dwarfism, sparse hair, neutropenia
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome: thrombocytopenia, male gender, eczema
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome: oculocutaneous albinism, nystagmus, recurrent 
bacterial infections, peripheral neuropathies
DiGeorge syndrome (22q deletion syndrome): unusual facies, heart defect, 
hypocalcemia
CHARGE syndrome: coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded 
growth, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies/deafness
Short-­limb skeletal dysplasia with combined immune deficiency: metaphyseal 
dysplasia, ADA deficiency, or Omenn syndrome
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia with growth hormone deficiency: 
hypogammaglobulinemia, growth hormone deficiency
Kabuki syndrome: long palpebral fissures, prominent eyelashes, congenital 
heart disease
Timothy syndrome: prolonged QT, congenital heart disease, developmental 
delay
PTEN tumor hamartoma syndrome: multiple hamartomas, cancer
Suggestive of Asplenia
Heterotaxia, complex congenital heart disease, Howell-­Jolly bodies on blood 
smear, sickle cell anemia
ADA, adenosine deaminase.
TABLE 54.8  Sentinel Infections and Related 
Genes
Infections
Recognized Gene Defects and 
Well-­Characterized Syndromes
Viruses
Herpes simplex 
encephalitis
TBK1, TLR3, TRAF3, TRIF, UNC93B
Cutaneous herpes 
simplex
Severe T-­cell defects, DOCK8, GATA2, WAS
EBV—chronic
CD21, CD27, CORO1A, ITK, MAGT1, PRKCD, 
CXCR4
EBV—HLH
AP3B1, LYST1, PRF1, RAB27A, SH2D1A, STX11, 
UNC13D, XIAP
CMV
Severe T-­cell defects, Good syndrome, DOCK8, 
GATA2, STIM1, WAS
Papilloma virus
Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia, ATM, CD40L, EVER1, 
EVER2, DOCK8, GATA2, IKBKG, MST1, RORH, 
STK4, CXCR4
Fungi
Candida
AIRE, CARD9, IL17F, IL17RA, STAT1
Aspergillus
Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia, CYBA, CYBB, 
DOCK8, GATA2, ITGB2, NCF1, NCF2, NCF4, 
STAT3
Bacteria
Pseudomonas
Congenital neutropenia, IRAK4, ITGB2, 
MYD88, BTK  (neutropenia), CD40LG 
(neutropenia)
Salmonella
CYBB, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IL12B, IL12RB1
Serratia
CYBA, CYBB, NCF1, NCF2, NCF4
Neisseria
C5, C6, C7, C8A, C8B, C8G, C9, CFD, CFH, CFI, 
CFP
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
C1QA, C1QB, C1QC, C4A + C4B, C2, C3, IRAK4, 
MYD88
Mycobacteria
Mycobacteria
CYBA, CYBB, GATA2, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IKBKG, 
IL12, IL12RB1, IRF8, NCF1, NCF2, NCF4, STAT1, 
TYK2
HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
From Sullivan KE, Stiehm ER, eds. Stiehm’s Immune Deficiencies. 2nd 
ed. London: Elsevier; 2020, Table 1.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1029
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
pathway is likely (C5–C9). Specialized laboratories can measure the 
presence or function of specific complement proteins.
If the aforementioned studies are normal but a primary immune 
deficiency is still suspected, advanced studies can be performed. One 
such advanced study is flow cytometry to enumerate the percentage 
and absolute numbers of T cells, B cells and markers of B-­cell matu­
ration, and natural killer (NK)-­cell subsets. Flow cytometry can also 
test for the presence of surface proteins that are necessary for normal 
immunity, such as major histocompatibility complex molecules or 
adhesion molecules. Functional T-­cell tests include T-­cell proliferation 
assays in response to mitogens (phytohemagglutinin or concanavalin 
A) or antigens (tetanus toxoid or Candida). These in vitro assays assess 
the capacity of T cells to proliferate in response to a nonspecific stim­
ulus (mitogens) or antigen-­specific memory T cells (antigens). T-­cell 
proliferation in response to specific antigens requires a prior expo­
sure to that unique antigen. Delayed-­type hypersensitivity skin tests 
to protein antigens such as tetanus, diphtheria, Candida, or mumps 
demonstrate the presence and function of both antigen-­specific T cells 
and antigen-­presenting cells. If delayed-­type hypersensitivity skin test 
results are negative, one may consider a booster vaccination and retest­
ing 4 weeks later.
Tests for neutrophil function include the dihydrorhodamine 123 
(DHR) or nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) test. The DHR assay is the most 
commonly used and preferred test for the diagnosis of CGD. In the 
DHR test, oxygen radicals generated by the enzyme nicotinamide ade­
nine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase in activated neutro­
phils generate H2O2, which oxidizes DHR, resulting in the emission of 
light that is detected by flow cytometry. In all forms of CGD, NADPH 
If normal, consult with clinical 
immunologist, consider the 
following 
• History and physical exam 
• CBC with differential counts 
• Cultures/Imaging 
• IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE levels 
• Diphtheria, tetanus titers 
• Pneumococcus, Haemophilus titers 
• CH50, AH50 
Suspect phagocyte 
defect 
Suspect humoral defect 
Suspect combined 
defect 
• Dihydrorhodamine for 
  CGD 
• Flow cytometry for T 
  cells (CD4, CD8), B 
  cells, NK cells 
• Flow cytometry for T 
  cells (CD4, CD8), B 
  cells, NK cells 
• Flow cytometry for 
  LAD1 (CD11/CD18) or 
  LAD2 (CD15) 
• Enumerate 
  percentage of naïve, 
  memory, and switched 
  memory B cells 
• Enumerate 
  percentage of 
  memory vs naïve T 
  cells (CD45 isoform 
  expression) 
• Consider neutrophil 
  chemotaxis assays 
• Functional B cell 
  studies 
• T cell mitogen studies 
• IL-12 receptor/IFN
  receptor expression 
  and function 
Fig. 54.9  Initial work-­up and follow-­up studies of patients with suspected immune deficiency. Consultation 
with a clinical immunologist is recommended to guide advanced testing and interpret results. CGD, chronic 
granulomatous disease; Ig, immunoglobulin; LAD, leukocyte adhesion defect; NK, natural killer; IL, interleu­
kin; IFN, interferon.
TABLE 54.9  Neutropenia-­Associated 
Immune Deficiencies
Phenotype
Gene Defect
Severe congenital neutropenia
HAX1
ELANE
G6PC3
WAS
VPS45
Moderate neutropenia
GSPT1
PNP
CXCR4
Dyskeratosis congenital genes
VPS13B
SBDS
TAZ
RMRP
LAMTOR2
Intermittent neutropenia
BTK
CD40L
Hemophagocytic disorders
LYST
RAB27A
AP3B1
SH2D1A
XIAP
From Sullivan KE, Stiehm ER, eds. Stiehm’s Immune Deficiencies. 2nd 
ed. London: Elsevier; 2020, Table 1.7.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1030
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
oxidase in neutrophils is either poorly functional or nonfunctional. 
Therefore, neutrophils that are activated in patients with CGD cannot 
generate oxygen radicals and therefore they have an abnormal DHR 
test (no increase in light emitted from activated neutrophils).
Genetic testing to ascertain or confirm the diagnosis of a pri­
mary immunodeficiency is often essential to make the diagnosis of 
a primary immunodeficiency. Defining a genetic cause of a primary 
immunodeficiency is important in deciding on the optimal course 
of treatment, determining the natural history and prognosis of the 
disease, genetic counseling, and prenatal diagnosis. Genetic pan­
els, which include genes known to be implicated in specific types 
of immunodeficiencies such as phagocytic defects, humoral defi­
ciencies, or severe combined immunodeficiency, are frequently per­
formed. More extensive genetic testing, such as exome sequencing, 
may be used in particularly complicated cases or when genetic panels 
fail to yield a diagnosis.
HUMORAL IMMUNE DISORDERS
Immune disorders that result in impaired immunoglobulin production 
can result in recurrent infections, typically of the sinopulmonary tract 
(pneumonia, sinusitis, otitis media), although more disseminated infec­
tions can occur (meningitis, sepsis, cellulitis) (Table 54.10). These indi­
viduals do not typically have infections with opportunistic pathogens 
such as Cryptosporidium, Pneumocystis, or fungi that are characteristic 
of combined immune deficiencies (T-­cell-­ or cell-­mediated defects).
X-­Linked Agammaglobulinemia
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA; Bruton agammaglobulinemia) 
is caused by variants in the gene that encodes Bruton tyrosine kinase 
(BTK) and accounts for approximately 85% of all inherited forms of 
agammaglobulinemias (see Table 54.10). BTK is a cytoplasmic tyrosine 
kinase that is essential for pre–B-­cell differentiation into mature B cells. 
TABLE 54.10  Humoral Immune Deficiencies
Disease
Genetic Defect/Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Serum IgG
Associated Features
Severe Reduction in All Serum Immunoglobulin Isotypes with Profoundly Decreased or Absent B Cells
BTK deficiency
BTK, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase 
activated by cross-­linking of the BCR
XL
All isotypes decreased in majority 
of patients; some patients have 
detectable immunoglobulins
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
μ Heavy chain 
deficiency
IGHM; essential component of the 
pre-­BCR
AR
All isotypes decreased
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
λ5 Deficiency
IGLL1; part of the surrogate light chain in 
the pre-­BCR
AR
All isotypes decreased
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
Igα deficiency
CD79A; part of the pre-­BCR and BCR
AR
All isotypes decreased
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
Igβ deficiency
CD79B; part of the pre-­BCR and BCR
AR
All isotypes decreased
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
BLNK deficiency
BLNK; a scaffold protein that binds to 
BTK
AR
All isotypes decreased
Severe bacterial and enteroviral 
infections
PI3 kinase 
deficiency
PIK3R1; a kinase involved in signal 
transduction in multiple cell types
AR
All isotypes low
Severe bacterial infections
Severe Reduction in at Least Two Serum Immunoglobulin Isotypes with Normal or Low Number of B Cells
Common variable 
immunodeficiency 
disorders
Unknown
Variable
Low IgG and IgA and/or IgM
Clinical phenotypes vary: Most have 
recurrent infections, some have 
polyclonal lymphoproliferation, 
autoimmune cytopenias, and/or 
multisystemic granulomatous disease
ICOS deficiency
ICOS; a costimulatory molecule expressed 
on T cells
AR
Low IgG and IgA and/or IgM
Recurrent infections; autoimmunity, 
gastroenteritis, granuloma in some
CD19 deficiency
CD19; transmembrane protein that 
amplifies signal through BCR
AR
Low IgG and IgA and/or IgM
Recurrent infections; may have 
glomerulonephritis
CD81 deficiency
CD81; transmembrane protein that 
amplifies signal through BCR
AR
Low IgG, low or normal IgA and IgM Recurrent infections; may have 
glomerulonephritis
CD20 deficiency
CD20; a B-­cell surface receptor involved 
in B-­cell development and plasma cell 
differentiation
AR
Low IgG, normal or elevated IgM 
and IgA
Recurrent infections
CD21 deficiency
CD21; also known as complement 
receptor 2 and forms part of the CD19 
complex
AR
Low IgG; impaired 
antipneumococcal response
Recurrent infections
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1031
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
Affected children exhibit severe reductions in serum immunoglobu­
lins and a serious risk for recurrent and sometimes life-­threatening 
infections. Expression of the BTK gene also occurs in myeloid cells and 
appears to be essential in preventing apoptosis in neutrophils due to 
cellular stress early in life. This biological function of BTK may account 
for the neutropenia associated with this condition, which typically 
occurs with serious infection at the time of initial presentation.
Although some affected children are asymptomatic until the age of 2 
years, most show symptoms between 6 and 9 months of age when mater­
nal transplacental acquired antibodies disappear. Affected individuals 
develop recurrent infections (recurrent otitis media, sinusitis, pneumo­
nia, meningitis) with pyogenic bacteria, such as pneumococci, staphylo­
cocci, streptococci, and Haemophilus species. They also have an unusual 
susceptibility to infection by enteroviruses, which can lead to chronic 
diarrhea, hepatitis, pneumonitis, and persistent meningo-­encephalitis. 
Most live attenuated viral or bacterial vaccines are contraindicated in 
patients with XLA. The live attenuated polio vaccine is particularly prob­
lematic and has caused paralysis in some XLA patients. XLA patients 
have marked hypoplasia of lymphoid tissue (adenoids, tonsils, lymph 
nodes) with absence of germinal centers and rare plasma cells. The diag­
nosis should be considered if the serum IgG, IgM, and IgA levels are <5% 
of age-­adjusted control values in a patient with normal T-­cell function. 
In most patients, the number of B cells in the peripheral blood is severely 
reduced or absent. Treatment includes aggressive antibiotic manage­
ment of infections and replacement immunoglobulin therapy, although 
chronic pulmonary and gastrointestinal diseases may still occur.
A variety of genetic defects involved in B-­cell development also lead 
to agammaglobulinemia, including μ heavy chain, λ5, Igα, Igβ, PI3KR1, 
and BLNK (see Table 54.10). These are inherited in an autosomal reces­
sive manner and exhibit similar clinical and laboratory phenotype.
Common Variable Immunodeficiency
CVID is a heterogeneous immunodeficiency characterized by 
hypogammaglobulinemia developing after an initial period of normal 
immune function, most commonly in the second and third decades of 
life (see Table 54.10). The etiology of CVID in the majority of cases is 
unknown, although a minority of patients have variants in the genes 
encoding for ICOS (“inducible costimulator” on activated T cells), 
TACI (transmembrane activator and calcium-­modulating cyclophilin 
ligand interactor), CD19, CD21, CD81, or BAFF-­R (see Table 54.10).
Patients with CVID are susceptible to frequent respiratory tract 
infections due to pneumoniae, H. influenzae type b, and Mycoplasma. 
Bronchiectasis due to recurrent pyogenic lung infections is a frequent 
complication. Gastrointestinal infections with Giardia, Campylobacter, 
Salmonella, Helicobacter, and enteroviruses are common. Bacterial 
overgrowth in the gut may lead to diarrhea, steatorrhea, malabsorp­
tion, and protein-­losing enteropathy. Patients exhibit normal-­sized or 
enlarged tonsils and lymph nodes and frequently have splenomegaly.
In addition to the infectious complications of CVID, noninfectious 
complications of CVID are common and the most common cause of 
death. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and autoimmune thrombocy­
topenia occur frequently. Multisystemic granulomatous disease occurs 
in approximately 20–30% of patients, with noncaseating granulomas 
occurring most frequently in the lung, liver, spleen, and skin. When the 
granulomatous inflammation affects the lungs, it causes an interstitial 
lung disease known as granulomatous and lymphocytic interstitial 
lung disease (GLILD). GLILD is frequently misdiagnosed as sarcoid­
osis and may lead to significant pulmonary fibrosis causing respiratory 
failure. Enteropathy is another serious complication of CVID and can 
be confused with celiac disease and lead to chronic diarrhea, protein 
loss, and poor nutrition. Patients with CVID are also at increased risk 
for inflammatory bowel disease. Nodular regenerative hyperplasia of 
the liver is the most common liver disease in CVID, is characterized 
initially by an increased alkaline phosphatase and relatively normal 
alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST), and 
is frequently complicated by clinically significant portal hypertension 
early in the course of the disease. Patients with CVID are at high risk 
to develop B-­cell lymphomas, which are Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) neg­
ative. The etiology of these noninfectious complications of CVID is 
unknown. GLILD, gastrointestinal tract disease, in particular enterop­
athy, liver disease, and B-­cell lymphomas are independent risk factors 
for early mortality in CVID.
TABLE 54.10  Humoral Immune Deficiencies—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect/Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Serum IgG
Associated Features
Severe Reduction in at Least Two Serum Immunoglobulin Isotypes with Normal or Low Number of B Cells—cont’d
TACI deficiency
TNFRSF13B (TACI); a TNF receptor family 
member found on B cells and is a 
receptor for BAFF and APRIL
AD or AR or 
complex
Low IgG and IgA and/or IgM
Variable clinical expression
BAFF receptor 
deficiency
TNFRSF13C (BAFF-­R); a TNF receptor 
family member found on B cells and is a 
receptor for BAFF
AR
Low IgG and IgM
Variable clinical expression
AID deficiency
AICDA gene
AR
IgG and IgA decreased; IgM normal 
or increased
Bacterial infections, enlarged lymph 
nodes, and germinal centers
UNG deficiency
UNG
AR
IgG and IgA decreased; IgM normal 
or increased
Bacterial infections, enlarged lymph 
nodes, and germinal centers
Selective IgA 
deficiency
Unknown
Variable
IgA decreased/absent
Usually asymptomatic; may have 
recurrent infections with poor 
antibody responses to carbohydrate 
antigens; may have allergies or 
autoimmune disease; a very few 
cases progress to CVID, and others 
coexist with CVID in the family
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BCR, B-­cell receptor; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency disease; Ig, immunoglobulin; 
TNF, tumor necrosis factor; XL, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1032
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
The diagnosis of CVID requires that age-­adjusted serum IgG lev­
els be <2 standard deviations (SD) below normal values together with 
low serum IgA levels (mg/dL) and/or low serum IgM levels. Specific 
antibody production following immunization with polysaccharide 
antigens (e.g., unconjugated pneumococcal vaccine) is low or absent, 
and responses to protein antigens (e.g., tetanus and diphtheria) may be 
impaired. T-­cell numbers and function are highly variable, and B-­cell 
numbers are usually normal but may be low. It is important to exclude 
XLA, X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease, or hyper-­IgM syndrome as 
well as other causes of hypogammaglobulinemia, such as hypogam­
maglobulinemia associated with thymoma, hypogammaglobulinemia 
secondary to protein-­losing enteropathy or other protein-­losing states, 
or hypogammaglobulinemia secondary to medications (rituximab, 
systemic corticosteroids), before making the diagnosis of CVID.
Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy
The fetus is capable of producing IgM or IgG by the 20th week of ges­
tation when adequately stimulated (intrauterine infection), but under 
normal conditions neonatal levels of IgG are a reflection of prior 
maternal immunity via transplacental passage of maternal IgG. Signif­
icant antibody production does not normally begin until the second or 
third month of life; elevated IgA and IgM in a newborn can be a sign 
of an intrauterine or perinatal infection. Because maternal antibodies 
have a half-­life of approximately 30 days, the term infant may develop 
a variable physiologic hypogammaglobulinemia between the ages of 4 
and 9 months. In transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy, the 
immunoglobulin nadir at 6 months of age is accentuated, with immu­
noglobulin levels <200 mg/dL. Immunoglobulin levels remain dimin­
ished throughout the first year of life and usually increase to normal, 
age-­appropriate levels, generally by 2–4 years of age. If the hypogam­
maglobulinemia is profound in extent or duration, recurrent viral and 
pyogenic infections can occur. The diagnosis is supported by normal 
levels of both B and T cells and normal antibody responses to protein 
antigens such as diphtheria and tetanus toxoids. The transient nature 
of this disorder cannot be confirmed, however, until immunoglobulin 
levels return to normal ranges. Most patients do not require immune 
globulin replacement therapy.
Immunoglobulin A Deficiency
Selective IgA deficiency is defined as serum IgA levels <10 mg/dL 
with normal levels of other immunoglobulins. The diagnosis cannot 
be confirmed until the patient is at least 4 years of age when IgA levels 
should reach adult levels. Selective IgA deficiency is the most common 
immune disorder, occurring in approximately 1 in 500 individuals. 
Most patients with selective IgA deficiency are asymptomatic. In oth­
ers, it is associated with recurrent sinopulmonary infections, food 
allergy, autoimmune disease, or celiac disease. IgA deficiency rarely 
occurs in families and can exhibit either autosomal recessive or autoso­
mal dominant inheritance with variable penetrance. Antibody replace­
ment therapy is not indicated for IgA deficiency. In patients with IgA 
deficiency and increased infections, other reasons for recurrent infec­
tion should be sought (atopic disease). Blood products often contain 
IgA, and IgA-­deficient patients may develop antibodies against IgA. 
Therefore, IgA-­deficient patients may be prone to anaphylactic reac­
tions upon administration of blood products containing IgA; this is a 
relatively rare complication of IgA deficiency.
Specific Antibody Deficiency
Specific antibody deficiency syndrome is characterized by recurrent 
sinopulmonary infections with normal immunoglobulin levels and 
normal lymphocyte numbers and subsets, but a decreased ability to 
make specific antibodies in response to polysaccharide vaccines, such 
as to the 23-­valent pneumococcal vaccine. Children younger than 2 
years of age may not respond well to polysaccharide vaccines, so inter­
preting these results must include consideration of the age of the child. 
The pathogenesis of this disorder is unknown. Lack of specific anti­
body titers to polysaccharide vaccines and recurrent sinopulmonary 
infections with encapsulated bacteria may necessitate the use of pro­
phylactic antibiotics or uncommonly replacement antibody therapy. 
Specific antibody deficiency many times resolves as the child becomes 
older.
Hyperimmunoglobulin M Syndrome
Hyperimmunoglobulin M (hyper-­IgM) syndrome results from a fail­
ure of B cells to undergo class switching from IgM to IgA, IgG, or 
IgE. The failure to efficiently class switch can result in recurrent infec­
tions. Hyper-­IgM syndrome was first described as a result of defects in 
CD40 ligand or CD40, although these disorders are actually combined 
immunodeficiency disorders and are discussed later. Deficiencies 
in activation-­induced cytidine deaminase (AID) and uracil DNA-­
glycosylase (UNG), two enzymes involved in class switch recombina­
tion, can result in hyper-­IgM syndrome without cell-­mediated defects 
(see Table 54.10). Quantitative immunoglobulins in AID and UNG 
deficiency demonstrate a low IgG and IgA and a normal or elevated 
IgM. The clinical manifestations are similar to other significant anti­
body deficiencies.
COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
T cells are required to activate macrophages and to optimally activate B 
lymphocytes, and thus disorders of T lymphocytes result in defects in 
both cell-­mediated and humoral immunity and are termed combined 
immune deficiencies. Patients with combined defects in T-­ and B-­cell 
function have infections with the usual community-­acquired patho­
gens as well as opportunistic or unusual pathogens, and infections may 
be more severe or in unusual anatomic sites compared to normal indi­
viduals (see Tables 54.5, 54.6, and 54.7). In many cases they may have 
other associated problems such as autoimmune problems, malignan­
cies, or failure to thrive.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a primary immunode­
ficiency caused by variants in one of several genes whose function is 
essential for the normal development of T cells (Table 54.11). In all 
forms of SCID there are profound abnormalities in T cells and subse­
quently B-­cell function is abnormal. Clinical manifestations of SCID 
generally begin within the first 4 months of life with the waning of 
maternal antibody and include failure to thrive; severe bacterial, viral, 
or fungal infections; and intractable diarrhea. Infections with oppor­
tunistic pathogens such as Pneumocystis jiroveci and Cryptosporidium 
are common. Infections with Candida frequently involve the mucous 
membranes (mouth, esophagus, vagina), face, and diaper area, which 
are difficult to treat. Chronic viral infections including pneumonitis 
caused by adenovirus or CMV, disseminated varicella, and measles 
infections occur. Chronic infection following immunization with live 
viral vaccines (measles, mumps, rubella, varicella, rotavirus) are fre­
quent. Fatal, disseminated mycobacterial infection following bacille 
Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) vaccination is frequently seen in parts of the 
world that use the BCG vaccine.
Patients with SCID may have skin disease similar to eczema due to 
graft versus host disease (GVHD) from engraftment of maternal lym­
phocytes or Omenn syndrome. Omenn syndrome, a variant form of 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1033
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
SCID, is characterized by erythroderma and desquamation, lymphade­
nopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, marked eosinophilia, elevated serum 
IgE, and impaired T-­cell function. Omenn syndrome is caused by 
hypomorphic variants that preserve limited function in SCID-­causing 
genes, usually RAG1, RAG2, or Artemis (DCLRE1C). Patients with 
Omenn syndrome have T cells in the periphery, but these T cells are 
typically expanded oligoclonal Th2 cells that secrete high levels of IL-­4 
and IL-­5, which lead to the clinical phenotype. Omenn syndrome is 
fatal unless corrected by bone marrow transplantation. Patients with 
SCID are extremely susceptible to fatal GVHD from T lymphocytes in 
blood transfusions, and these patients should always receive irradiated 
blood products. Fatal CMV infections may also develop in patients 
with SCID receiving blood products from CMV-­positive donors. 
Therefore, all blood products in these patients should be from CMV-­
negative donors.
Patients with SCID exhibit severe deficits in immunoglobulin syn­
thesis and the responses to specific antigens are impaired. B cells may 
be absent or increased, but a profound decrease in naive T cells is always 
present. The number of T cells in the peripheral blood is generally fewer 
than 10% of normal (<200 cells/mm3), and T cells show decreased pro­
liferative responses to mitogens, decreased cytotoxicity, and decreased 
immunoregulatory activity. SCID is uniformly fatal without definitive 
treatment, which is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or 
in some cases gene therapy. Newborn screening for SCID using the 
T-­cell receptor excision circle (TREC) assay occurs in all of the United 
States and in an increasing number of countries. TRECs are formed 
during DNA recombination of the T-­cell receptor, are biomarkers of 
naive T cells, and can be enumerated on the dried blood spots obtained 
for routine newborn screening tests. The TREC assay is highly sensi­
tive at detecting SCID in newborns before life-­threatening infectious 
TABLE 54.11  Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID)
Disease
Genetic Defect/
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Circulating 
T Cells
Circulating 
B Cells
Serum Ig
Associated Features
γc Deficiency
IL-­2RG: defect in γ chain of receptors 
for IL-­2, -­4, -­7, -­9, -­15, -­21
XL
Markedly 
decreased
Normal or 
increased
Decreased
Markedly decreased NK cells
JAK3 deficiency
JAK3: defect in Janus-­activating 
kinase 3
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal or 
increased
Decreased
Markedly decreased NK cells
IL7Rα deficiency
IL7RA: defect in IL-­7 receptor α chain
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal or 
increased
Decreased
Normal NK cells
CD45 deficiency
PTPRC: defect in CD45
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal
Decreased
Normal γ/δ T cells
CD3δ deficiency
CD3D: defect in CD3δ chain of T-­cell 
antigen receptor complex
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal
Decreased
Normal NK cells, no γ/δ T cells
CD3ε deficiency
CD3E: defect in CD3ε chain of T-­cell 
antigen receptor complex
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal
Decreased
Normal NK cells, no γ/δ T cells
CD3ζ deficiency
CD3Z: defect in CD3ζ chain of T-­cell 
antigen receptor complex
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Normal
Decreased
Normal NK cells, no γ/δ T cells
SCID Characterized by Lack of T and B Cells (DNA Recombination Defects)
RAG 1 deficiency
RAG1: defective VDJ recombination; 
defect of recombinase-­activating 
gene (RAG) 1
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Markedly 
decreased
Decreased
RAG 2 deficiency
RAG2: defective VDJ recombination; 
defect of recombinase-­activating 
gene (RAG) 2
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Markedly 
decreased
Decreased
DCLRE1C 
(Artemis) 
deficiency
ARTEMIS: defective VDJ 
recombination; defect in Artemis 
DNA recombinase repair protein
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Markedly 
decreased
Decreased
Radiation sensitivity
DNA PKcs 
deficiency
PKRDC: defective VDJ recombination; 
defect in DNA PKcs recombinase 
repair protein
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Markedly 
decreased
Decreased
Radiation sensitivity, 
microcephaly, and 
developmental defects
Reticular 
dysgenesis, AK2 
deficiency
AK2: defective maturation of lymphoid 
and myeloid cells (stem cell defect)
AR
Markedly 
decreased
Decreased or 
normal
Decreased
Granulocytopenia and deafness
Adenosine 
deaminase 
(ADA1) 
deficiency
ADA1: defective ADA activity
AR
Absent from birth 
or progressive
Decreased or 
normal
Decreased
Decreased NK cells, often with 
costochondral junction defects, 
neurologic features; partial 
ADA activity may result in 
delayed or milder presentation
AR, autosomal recessive; Ig, immunoglobulin; NK, natural killer cell; XL, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1034
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
complications occur. Early detection and treatment of newborns with 
SCID using the TREC assay improves long-­term survival to >90%.
X-­linked recessive SCID, which is caused by variants in the com­
mon gamma chain of the IL-­2 receptor gene (IL2RG), is the most com­
mon form of SCID (see Table 54.11). The IL2RG protein is shared by 
several interleukin receptors (IL-­2, IL-­4, IL-­7, IL-­9, IL-­15, and IL-­21). 
The lack of T and NK cells is due to defective signaling through the IL-­7 
and IL-­15 receptors, respectively. IL-­21 is required for efficient B-­cell 
function. Female carriers can be identified because lymphocytes and 
NK cells exhibit nonrandom inactivation of the X chromosome.
Autosomal recessive SCID is less common than X-­linked SCID and 
is caused by many different genetic defects that can be broken down 
based on the cell types that are lacking. A lack of T cells but not B cells is 
seen in genetic defects in T-­cell signaling proteins including JAK3, IL7R, 
and CD3 subunits (see Table 54.11). A lack of T and B cells is seen in 
defects in genes that affect DNA recombination, which is required to 
generate T-­ and B-­cell receptors, including RAG1, RAG2, and DCLRE1C 
(artemis) (see Table 54.11). Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, 
an autosomal recessive trait, results in an inability to catalyze the con­
version of adenosine and deoxyadenosine to inosine and deoxyinosine, 
respectively. Deficiency of ADA results in the accumulation of deoxyade­
nosine and deoxyadenosine triphosphate, which is toxic to lymphocytes, 
resulting in loss of T, B, and NK cells. Regardless of the genetic cause of 
SCID, all patients have extremely low numbers of naive T cells and all 
exhibit the typical clinical features in terms of susceptibility to infection, 
failure to thrive, and 100% mortality without definitive treatment.
COMBINED IMMUNE DEFICIENCIES
Combined immunodeficiencies are genetic defects that result in defec­
tive T-­cell function with or without intrinsic B-­cell abnormalities 
(Table 54.12). Because T-­cell function is abnormal, B-­cell function is 
also compromised leading to a combined immunodeficiency, albeit less 
severe than SCID.
TABLE 54.12  Combined Immune Deficiencies
Disease
Genetic Defect/ 
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Circulating 
T Cells
Circulating 
B Cells
Serum Ig
Associated Features
CD40L deficiency
CD40LG (also called TNFSF5 
or CD154)
XL
Normal
B-­cell numbers 
may be normal 
or increased
IgG and IgA 
decreased; 
IgM normal or 
increased
Bacterial and opportunistic 
infections, neutropenia, 
autoimmune disease
CD40 deficiency
CD40 (also called TNFRSF5)
AR
Normal
B-­cell numbers 
may be normal 
or increased
IgG and IgA 
decreased; 
IgM normal or 
increased
Bacterial and opportunistic 
infections, neutropenia, 
autoimmune disease
Purine nucleoside 
phosphorylase (PNP) 
deficiency
PNP, absent PNP, and T-­cell 
and neurologic defects 
from elevated toxic 
metabolites, especially 
dGTP
AR
Progressive 
decrease
Normal
Normal or 
decreased
Autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia, neurologic 
impairment
ZAP70 deficiency
ZAP70 intracellular signaling 
kinase, acts downstream 
of TCR
AR
Decreased CD8, 
normal CD4 
cells
Normal
Normal
Autoimmunity in some cases
MHC class I deficiency
TAP1, TAP2, or TAPBP 
(tapasin) genes giving 
MHC class I deficiency
AR
Decreased CD8, 
normal CD4
Normal
Normal
Vasculitis; pyoderma 
gangrenosum
MHC class II 
deficiency
MHC class II proteins (CIITA, 
RFX5, RFXAP, RFXANK 
genes)
AR
Normal number, 
decreased CD4 
cells
Normal
Normal or 
decreased
Failure to thrive, diarrhea, 
respiratory tract infections, 
liver/biliary tract disease
AD 
hyperimmunoglobulin 
E syndrome (HIES) 
(Job syndrome)
Dominant negative 
heterozygous variants in 
STAT3
AD; often de 
novo defect
Normal Th-­17 
and T follicular 
helper cells 
decreased
Normal; 
switched and 
nonswitched 
memory B cells 
are reduced; 
BAFF level 
increased
Elevated IgE; 
specific antibody 
production 
decreased
Distinctive facial features 
(broad nasal bridge), eczema, 
osteoporosis, and fractures; 
scoliosis, delay of shedding 
primary teeth, hyperextensible 
joints, bacterial infections 
(skin and pulmonary 
abscesses, pneumatoceles) 
due to Staphylococcus 
aureus, candidiasis, aneurysm 
formation
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1035
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
Hyper-­IgM syndrome is characterized by normal or increased 
concentrations of IgM and IgD but decreased levels or absence of 
IgG, IgA, and IgE (see Table 54.12). The most common form of these 
disorders is X-­linked hyper-­IgM syndrome, which is due to a variant 
in the gene encoding the T-­cell surface protein CD40 ligand (CD40L). 
A rarer, autosomal recessive form of this disorder is caused by vari­
ants in the CD40 gene, which is expressed on the surface of B cells 
and antigen-­presenting cells (see Table 54.12). The CD40/CD40L 
pathway is essential for B-­cell isotype switching, which allows a B 
cell to maintain antigen specificity while altering immunoglobulin 
function. Isotype class switching requires specific cytokines and the 
interaction between CD40 ligand on CD4 T cells and CD40 on B 
cells. All patients with hyper-­IgM syndrome due to genetic defects 
in CD40L or CD40 have increased susceptibility to sinopulmonary 
infections with pyogenic bacteria. These individuals are also suscep­
tible to opportunistic infections including P. jiroveci (carinii) and 
Cryptosporidium parvum. Signaling via CD40 on B cells accounts 
for the defects in antibody production and class switching, while 
defective CD40 signaling in phagocytes and antigen-­presenting cells 
accounts for the susceptibility to opportunistic pathogens. In addi­
tion, as many as 50% of patients with CD40L deficiency will exhibit 
neutropenia.
Signal transduction via CD40 activates several signaling molecules 
and transcription factors, including NF-­κB, and two enzymes, AID and 
UNG, which are also required for class switching. Damaging variants 
in AID or UNG cause a failure of immunoglobulin isotype switching 
without opportunistic infections since these proteins function only in 
isotype class switching and not cell-­mediated immunity.
The hyper-­IgM phenotype is seen in a number of primary immune 
deficiencies including an X-­linked immunodeficiency associated with 
ectodermal dysplasia resulting from defects in the gene encoding the 
NF-­κB essential modulator (NEMO). NF-­κB signaling is important 
for function of both innate and adaptive immune systems. Therefore, 
patients with defects in NEMO have a combined immunodeficiency 
and are susceptible to a wide spectrum of viruses and bacteria, in par­
ticular pyogenic bacteria (e.g., S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae) and atyp­
ical mycobacteria.
Gain-­of-­function variants in the catalytic domain of PI3 kinase 
(PIK3CD) can also lead to elevated IgM levels, and initial patients 
with this disease were misdiagnosed as having hyper-­IgM syndrome. 
PIK3CD is expressed in B cells and T cells, and therefore gain-­of-­
function variants in PIK3CD lead to the constitutive activation of PI3 
kinase, resulting in impaired T-­cell and B-­cell function. These patients 
present with recurrent sinopulmonary infections and have an increased 
susceptibility to infection with herpes viruses. Autoimmunity, lymph­
oproliferation (including an increased incidence of EBV-­induced 
lymphoproliferative disease and B-­cell lymphomas), and structural 
lung disease (bronchiectasis) commonly occur.
Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase Deficiency
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) is an enzyme that follows 
adenosine deaminase in the purine salvage pathway and catalyzes the 
conversion of inosine and guanosine to hypoxanthine and guanine, 
respectively (see Table 54.12). PNP deficiency, which is inherited as 
an autosomal recessive disorder, leads to the intracellular buildup of 
deoxyguanosine triphosphate (deoxy-­GTP), which is toxic to rapidly 
TABLE 54.12  Combined Immune Deficiencies—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect/ 
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Circulating 
T Cells
Circulating 
B Cells
Serum Ig
Associated Features
DOCK8 deficiency
DOCK8—regulator of 
intracellular actin 
reorganization
AR
Decreased 
impaired 
T-­lymphocyte 
proliferation
Decreased, low 
CD27+ memory 
B cells
Low IgM, 
increased IgE
Low NK cells with impaired 
function, hypereosinophilia, 
recurrent infections; severe 
atopy, extensive cutaneous 
viral and bacterial 
(Staphylococcus) infections, 
susceptibility to cancer
Omenn syndrome
RAG1, RAG2, artemis, IL7RA, 
RMRP, ADA, LIG4, IL2RG, 
AK2, or associated with 
DiGeorge syndrome; some 
cases have no defined 
gene variant
Variable
Present; restricted 
T-­cell repertoire, 
and impaired 
function
Normal or 
decreased
Decreased, except 
increased IgE
Erythroderma, eosinophilia, 
adenopathies, 
hepatosplenomegaly
ITK deficiency
ITK encoding IL-­2-­inducible 
T-­cell kinase required for 
TCR-­mediated activation
AR
Progressive 
decrease
Normal
Normal or 
decreased
EBV-­associated B-­cell 
lymphoproliferation, 
lymphoma, normal or 
decreased IgG
Activated PI3K-­δ
PIK3CD
AD; gain of 
function
High IgM, low 
IgA or IgG. 
Reduced IgG2 
and impaired 
antibody to 
pneumococci and 
Haemophilus
Respiratory infections, 
bronchiectasis; 
autoimmunity; chronic 
EBV and EBV-­induced 
lymphoproliferative disease
CMV infection
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CMV, cytomegalovirus; dGTP, deoxyguanosine triphosphate; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; Ig, immu­
noglobulin; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK, natural killer; TCR, T-­cell receptor; XL, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1036
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
dividing cells. Although PNP is ubiquitously expressed, PNP defi­
ciency affects T cells and not B cells and leads to T-­cell lymphopenia 
with preserved numbers of B cells. Although serum immunoglobulins 
are usually normal, specific antibody production is impaired. A low 
serum uric acid level is suggestive of PNP deficiency. Patients with PNP 
deficiency are predisposed to infection with common and opportunis­
tic pathogens. Autoimmunity and neurologic manifestations are also 
common. The only curative treatment for PNP deficiency is HSCT.
Hyperimmunoglobulin E Syndrome
Classic hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome (HIES), also known as Job 
syndrome, is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by variants in 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), an import­
ant signaling molecule required for the signaling of several cytokines 
such as IL-­6 and IL-­10 (see Table 54.12). Classic HIES is characterized 
by markedly elevated levels of serum IgE, early-­onset severe eczema­
tous dermatitis, recurrent bacterial infections (skin, respiratory tract, 
bone), and chronic candidiasis (thrush, onychomycosis). Other associ­
ated features include coarse facial features, manifested by a broad nasal 
bridge, prominent nose, dental abnormalities, and irregular propor­
tional cheeks and jaw. The eczematous rash is typically papular and 
pruritic, involving the face and extensor surfaces of arms and legs, and 
may start at birth or soon thereafter. The skin abscesses typically due to 
S. aureus are remarkable for their absence of surrounding erythema or 
warmth, leading to the term cold abscesses. By 5 years of age, all patients 
have had a history of recurrent skin abscesses and recurrent pneumo­
nias with pneumatoceles, along with chronic otitis media and sinusitis. 
Patients may also develop septic arthritis, cellulitis, or osteomyelitis. 
Fungal infections with Candida albicans and Aspergillus species occur. 
Serum IgE levels typically exceed 2,500 IU/mL. Usually, patients with 
HIES have normal concentrations of IgG, IgA, and IgM, and frequently 
have eosinophilia. The clinical manifestations of DOCK8 deficiency 
display considerable overlap with classic HIES, with high IgE levels, 
eczema, and recurrent infections (see Table 54.12). However, patients 
with DOCK8 deficiency typically lack pneumato­celes and bone and 
tooth abnormalities. The optimal treatment of classic HIES is largely 
supportive and includes antimicrobial therapy and, in selected patients, 
replacement antibody. In contrast, HSCT is curative for DOCK8 
deficiency.
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES WITH SYNDROMIC 
FEATURES
Several genetic defects that affect the immune system also affect other 
organ systems and thus represent a clinical syndrome (Tables 54.7 
and 54.13). A careful history and exam can lead a clinician to the 
diagnosis. Most of these conditions present with combined T-­ and 
B-­cell defects.
Wiskott-­Aldrich Syndrome
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-­linked recessive disorder 
caused by variant in the gene that encodes the WAS protein, or WASP. 
WASP controls the assembly of actin filaments and intracellular ves­
icle transport in lymphocytes and megakaryocytes. WAS is char­
acterized by abnormalities in lymphocyte, platelet, and phagocyte 
function (see Table 54.13). Classic WAS is characterized by the triad 
of recurrent infections involving encapsulated bacteria and opportu­
nistic pathogens, hemorrhage secondary to thrombocytopenia and 
platelet dysfunction, and atopic dermatitis. Variants in the WAS gene 
can also cause X-­linked neutropenia and X-­linked thrombocytope­
nia. The clinical manifestations of WAS begin in early infancy with 
pneumonia, otitis media, meningitis, and bleeding. Patients are sus­
ceptible to recurrent and severe infections with encapsulated bacteria 
and viruses (herpes simplex virus, varicella, EBV, CMV). Fungal and 
pneumocystis infections may occur as well. Autoimmunity is com­
mon and includes cytopenias, vasculitis, arthritis, and inflammatory 
bowel disease. Patients are also susceptible to malignancy, in partic­
ular lymphoreticular malignancies. In classic WAS there is thrombo­
cytopenia with abnormally small platelets. Deficiency of this protein 
results in elevated levels of IgE and IgA, decreased IgG and/or IgM, 
poor responses to polysaccharide antigens, and waning T-­cell func­
tion. One-­third of patients with WAS die as a result of hemorrhage, 
and two-­thirds die as a result of recurrent infection caused by bacte­
ria, CMV, P. jiroveci, or herpes simplex virus. In classic WAS, HSCT is 
the treatment of choice and long-­term survival is excellent in patients 
with appropriately human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­matched donors.
Ataxia-­Telangiectasia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder charac­
terized by neurologic dysfunction, endocrine abnormalities, oculocu­
taneous telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, and radiation sensitivity 
with a high rate of malignancy (see Table 54.13). The defective gene is 
the AT mutated gene (ATM) that encodes for a phosphatidylinositol 
3-­kinase involved in sensing DNA damage and DNA repair. Cerebel­
lar ataxia is usually the first clinical manifestation, occurring when 
the child begins to walk. The patient’s neurologic status often wors­
ens, and choreoathetosis and oculomotor abnormalities develop. Tel­
angiectasias first appear in the bulbar conjunctivae between 2 and 5 
years of age and later spread to areas of trauma. Endocrine abnormal­
ities, such as insulin-­resistant diabetes mellitus and hypogonadism, 
are common. There is a 15% risk of malignancy, with non-­Hodgkin 
lymphoma being the most common. Patients with AT are extremely 
sensitive to ionizing radiation, and radiographic studies should be 
avoided if possible. Radiation sensitivity accounts for the high inci­
dence of chromosomal translocations involving chromosomes 7 and 
14 at the site of T-­cell receptor genes and immunoglobulin heavy-­
chain genes.
The degree of immunodeficiency in AT is quite variable and may 
include abnormalities in T cells and B cells. Respiratory tract disease 
is an important cause of morbidity and mortality and includes sin­
opulmonary infection with encapsulated organisms, interstitial lung 
disease, and lung disease associated with neuromuscular deficits 
including recurrent aspiration. Opportunistic respiratory tract infec­
tions are uncommon. There is no curative therapy for AT, although 
antimicrobial prophylaxis and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
replacement are used to prevent infections.
DiGeorge Syndrome (22q Deletion Syndrome) and Other 
Thymic Defects
22q Deletion syndrome is a disorder caused in the majority of cases by 
microdeletion at chromosome 22q11.2, although a deletion at a second 
locus at chromosome 10p13 results in a similar clinical picture. 22q 
Deletion syndrome, also known as velocardiofacial syndrome, is char­
acterized by a constellation of clinical features that include dysmor­
phic facies, hypoparathyroidism, congenital heart defects, and T-­cell 
lymphopenia (see Table 54.13). The clinical anomalies are caused by 
maldevelopment of structures derived from the first through the sixth 
branchial pouches during embryogenesis, resulting in variable hypo­
plasia of the thymus, parathyroid glands, face, ears, aortic arch, and 
heart. Congenital heart defects include truncus arteriosus, ventricular 
septal defect, interrupted aortic arch, and tetralogy of Fallot. Hypocal­
cemia with tetany is often the initial problem in the first and second 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1037
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
months after birth. Facial abnormalities include microstomia, hyper­
telorism, and low-­set ears.
The degree of immunodeficiency is highly variable and related to 
the extent of residual thymic function. In complete DiGeorge syndrome, 
which occurs in <1% of patients, severe T-­cell deficiency leads to a dis­
order resembling SCID with failure to thrive, and recurrent infections 
with opportunistic organisms (P. jiroveci, viruses, and fungi). In contrast, 
many other patients with 22q deletion syndrome exhibit relatively nor­
mal immune function or relatively minor immunodeficiency. Autoim­
munity, including autoimmune cytopenias, is common. The total T-­cell 
count may vary from severely depressed to normal. No correlation has 
been shown between the severity of congenital defects and the severity 
of immunodeficiency, and immune function often improves with age.
The diagnosis is established by chromosomal microarray or flu­
orescent in situ hybridization to detect the usual deleted region in 
chromosome 22q11.2. Approximately 10% of patients have hypogam­
maglobulinemia with a minority requiring antibody replacement 
therapy. Importantly, due to intrinsic defects in the thymus, patients 
with 22q deletion syndrome cannot be treated with HSCT, although 
transfer of mature T cells during transplant may confer some immune 
function.
CHARGE syndrome (coloboma, heart anomaly, choanal atresia, 
retardation of growth, genital and ear anomalies) can be rarely seen 
with features of DiGeorge syndrome when thymic aplasia is present. 
Variants in CHD7 are the most common known cause of CHARGE 
syndrome, although variants in SEMA3E are found in a minority of 
patients (see Table 54.13). The degree of immunodeficiency is related to 
the extent of thymic hypoplasia and T-­cell numbers and can be highly 
variable. Similar to DiGeorge syndrome, some variants of CHD7 are a 
cause of SCID with a profound T-­cell lymphopenia.
TABLE 54.13  Combined Immune Deficiencies with Syndromic Features
Disease
Genetic Defect/ 
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Circulating 
T Cells
Circulating 
B Cells
Serum Ig
Associated Features
Wiskott-­Aldrich 
Syndrome 
(WAS)
WAS; cytoskeletal and 
immunologic synapse 
defect affecting 
hematopoietic stem 
cell derivatives
XL
Progressive 
decrease, 
abnormal 
lymphocyte 
responses to 
anti-­CD3
Normal
Decreased IgM: 
antibody to 
polysaccharides 
particularly 
decreased; often 
increased IgA and 
IgE
Thrombocytopenia with small platelets; 
eczema; lymphoma; autoimmune 
disease; IgA nephropathy; 
bacterial and viral infections. XL 
thrombocytopenia is a mild form of 
WAS, and XL neutropenia is caused 
by missense variants in the GTPase 
binding domain of WAS protein
Ataxia-­
telangiectasia
ATM; disorder of cell 
cycle checkpoint; and 
DNA double-­stranded 
break repair
AR
Progressive 
decrease
Normal
Often decreased 
IgA, IgE, and 
IgG subclasses; 
increased IgM 
monomers; 
antibodies variably 
decreased
Ataxia; telangiectasia; pulmonary 
infections; lymphoreticular and 
other malignancies; increased 
α-­fetoprotein and increased 
radiosensitivity
Cartilage-­hair 
hypoplasia
RMRP (RNase MRP RNA) 
involved in processing 
of mitochondrial RNA 
and cell cycle control
AR
Varies from severely 
decreased 
(SCID) to normal; 
impaired 
lymphocyte 
proliferation
Normal
Normal or reduced; 
antibodies variably 
decreased
Short-­limbed dwarfism with 
metaphyseal dysostosis, sparse hair, 
bone marrow failure, autoimmunity, 
susceptibility to lymphoma and other 
cancers, impaired spermatogenesis, 
neuronal dysplasia of the intestine
CHARGE 
syndrome
Variable defects of the 
thymus and associated 
T-­cell abnormalities 
often due to deletions 
or variants in CHD7, 
SEMA3E, or as-­yet-­
unknown genes
De novo defect 
(majority) or 
AD
Decreased or 
normal; some 
have <1,500 CD3 
T cells/μL
Normal
Normal or decreased
Coloboma, heart anomaly, choanal 
atresia, retardation, genital and ear 
anomalies
22q Deletion 
syndrome 
(includes 
DiGeorge 
anomaly)
Contiguous gene defect 
in 90% affecting 
thymic development; 
may also be due to 
heterozygous variant 
in TBX1 (chromosome 
22q11.2 deletion or 
TBX1 haploinsufficient 
syndrome)
AD; often de 
novo
Decreased or 
normal; 5% have 
<1,500 CD3 T 
cells/μL
Normal
Normal or decreased
Hypoparathyroidism, conotruncal 
malformation; abnormal facies; 
large deletion (3 Mb) in 22q11.2 (or 
rarely a deletion in 10p)
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; Ig, immunoglobulin; XL, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1038
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Cartilage-­Hair Hypoplasia
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recessive disease 
caused by variants in the ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA-­processing 
(RMRP) gene. CHH is characterized by metaphyseal dysostosis, 
sparse and thin hair, and variable immunodeficiency (see Table 54.13). 
Lymphocyte counts over time become low in all patients due to low 
numbers of T cells. Proliferative responses to mitogens are gener­
ally depressed, and immune function may deteriorate with time. The 
immunodeficiency can range from mild to severe, but in many affected 
patients it is relatively mild. Patients benefit most from replacement 
immunoglobulin. Patients may have moderate to severe neutropenia, 
making them susceptible to both viral and bacterial infections.
COMPLEMENT SYSTEM DEFICIENCIES
The complement system consists of plasma and membrane proteins 
that function in the innate immune response as well as facilitating 
adaptive immunity. Complement proteins can kill pathogens with or 
without antibodies, opsonize pathogens to facilitate their uptake by 
phagocytes, or mediate inflammation. The complement system can 
be activated through three pathways—the classical, alternative, or lec­
tin pathways—that involve the sequential activation of complement 
factors resulting in an amplified response. Disorders of the comple­
ment system predispose to recurrent infection, autoimmunity, and 
angioedema (Table 54.14 and Fig. 54.10).
TABLE 54.14  Complement Defects
Disease
Genetic Defect/Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Functional Defect
Associated Features
C1q deficiency
C1QA, C1QB, C1QC: classical 
complement pathway components
AR
Absent CH50 hemolytic activity; defective 
activation of the classical pathway, 
diminished clearance of apoptotic cells
SLE, infections with encapsulated 
organisms
C1r deficiency
C1R: classical complement 
pathway component
AR
Absent CH50 hemolytic activity; defective 
activation of the classical pathway
SLE, infections with encapsulated 
organisms
C1s deficiency
C1S: classical complement 
pathway component
AR
Absent CH50 hemolytic activity; defective 
activation of the classical pathway
SLE, infections with encapsulated 
organisms
C4 deficiency
C4A, C4B: classical complement 
pathway components
AR
Absent CH50 hemolytic activity; defective 
activation of the classical pathway, 
defective humoral immune response to 
carbohydrate antigens in some patients
SLE, infections with encapsulated 
organisms
C2 deficiency
C2: classical complement pathway 
component
AR
Absent CH50 hemolytic activity; defective 
activation of the classical pathway
SLE, infections with encapsulated 
organisms, atherosclerosis
C3 deficiency
C3: central complement component
AR, gain-­of-­
function AD
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective opsonization, defective humoral 
immune response
Infections; glomerulonephritis, aHUS 
with gain-­of-­function variants
C5 deficiency
C5: terminal complement 
component
AR
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective bactericidal activity
Neisserial infections
C6 deficiency
C6: terminal complement 
component
AR
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective bactericidal activity
Neisserial infections
C7 deficiency
C7: terminal complement 
component
AR
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective bactericidal activity
Neisserial infections
C8 α–γ deficiency
C8A, C8G: terminal complement 
components
AR
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective bactericidal activity
Neisserial infections
C8b deficiency
C8B: terminal complement 
component
AR
Absent CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
defective bactericidal activity
Neisserial infections
C9 deficiency
C9: terminal complement 
component
AR
Reduced CH50 and AH50 hemolytic activity; 
deficient bactericidal activity
Mild susceptibility to neisserial 
infections
C1 inhibitor 
deficiency
C1NH: regulation of kinins and 
complement activation
AD
Spontaneous activation of the complement 
pathway with consumption of C4/C2; 
spontaneous activation of the contact 
system with generation of bradykinin from 
high-­molecular-­weight kininogen
Hereditary angioedema
Factor B
CFB: activation of the alternative 
pathway
AD
Gain-­of-­function variant with increased 
spontaneous AH50
aHUS
Factor D deficiency
CFD: regulation of the alternative 
complement pathway
AR
Absent AH50 hemolytic activity
Neisserial infections
Properdin deficiency
CFP: regulation of the alternative 
complement pathway
XL
Absent AH50 hemolytic activity
Neisserial infections
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1039
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
The three pathways for complement activation are initiated by 
different mechanisms. The classical pathway is activated by antigen-­
antibody complexes. The alternative pathway may be activated by C3b 
generated through the classical pathway or by spontaneous hydroly­
sis of C3 on microbial surfaces. The lectin pathway is initiated by the 
interaction of mannose-­binding lectin with microbial carbohydrate. 
Activation of the classical pathway by an antigen-­antibody complex is 
initiated by the binding of C1q to the Fc portion of an antibody mole­
cule in the immune complex. C1r autoactivates and cleaves C1s, which 
cleaves C4 and then C2, forming the C3 convertase C4b2b. C4b2b is 
activated by the lectin pathway when mannose-­binding protein binds 
to sugar residues on the surface of pathogens, and mannose-­binding 
protein–associated proteases (MASPs) cleave C4 and C2. The alterna­
tive pathway is always active at a low level and is amplified when active 
C3 binds to a surface that lacks regulatory proteins. C3b generated 
from C3 binds to factor B, which is cleaved by factor D to form the 
alternative pathway C3 convertase C3bBb. Properdin binds to and sta­
bilizes the C3 convertase. The C3 convertase can cleave C3, resulting 
in further C3b deposition and activation of the alternative pathway, 
which acts as an amplification loop by generating more C3b, or it can 
form the C5 convertase, which initiates the formation of a membrane 
attack complex (MAC). The MAC is a complex of C5b, C6, C7, C8, and 
several C9 molecules that is common to all three pathways. The MAC 
generates pores in the cell membrane, leading to lysis of the cells.
C3a and C5a, produced by cleavage of C3 and C5, respectively, 
release histamine from mast cells and basophils, leading to increased 
vascular permeability and smooth muscle contraction. In addition, 
C5a has chemotactic activity, attracting phagocytes to the site of com­
plement activation, and it can cause degranulation of phagocytic cells. 
C3b acts as an opsonin when attached to the surface of a pathogen by 
binding to phagocytes.
The complement system is under tight regulation because it has 
potent inflammatory activity and the potential to cause significant 
damage to host cells, and therefore there are a number of complement 
regulatory proteins. C1 inhibitor regulates the cascade by blocking 
active sites on C1r, C1s, and the MASP. Factor I destabilizes C3 con­
vertase complexes and degrades the active fragments. Other inhibitors 
include membrane proteins, such as decay accelerating factor (DAF), 
CR1, membrane cofactor protein (MCP), and plasma proteins such as 
C4 binding protein. Formation of the MAC can be blocked by cell sur­
face CD59. Deficiency of any of these regulatory proteins can result 
in an inflammatory response, tissue damage, or excessive complement 
consumption. Deficiency in the expression of CD59 results in paroxys­
mal hemoglobinuria. Deficiencies in the complement regulatory pro­
teins (factor H, factor I, and MCP) result in atypical hemolytic uremic 
syndrome and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II, and 
have been linked to age-­related macular degeneration (see Table 54.14).
Although protein deficiencies or abnormalities have been identified 
for components in the classical complement pathway, the severity and 
the type of infection vary because of the considerable overlap between 
the two pathways (see Table 54.14). Disorders of complement proteins 
can result from inherited deficiency or can be secondary to increased 
consumption. Deficiencies of early components of the classical path­
way (C1, C2, or C4) are not usually associated with severe infections, 
although patients with C2 deficiency may present with recurrent respi­
ratory tract infections with encapsulated bacteria. Patients with C1, 
C2, or C4 deficiency are susceptible to autoimmune diseases, especially 
systemic lupus erythematosus. The exact mechanism of this suscepti­
bility is not known but is thought to arise from the role of these early 
TABLE 54.14  Complement Defects—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect/Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Functional Defect
Associated Features
Factor I deficiency
CFI: regulation of the alternative 
complement pathway
AR
Spontaneous activation of the alternative 
complement pathway with consumption of 
C3
Infections, neisserial infections, 
aHUS, preeclampsia, 
membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
Factor H deficiency
CFH: regulation of the alternative 
complement pathway
AR
Spontaneous activation of the alternative 
complement pathway with consumption of 
C3
Infections, neisserial infections, 
aHUS, preeclampsia, 
membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
MASP1 deficiency
MASP1: cleaves C2 and activates 
MASP2
AR
Deficient activation of the lectin activation 
pathway, cell migration
Infections, candida infections
AD, autosomal dominant; aHUS, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; AR, autosomal recessive; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; XL, X-­linked.
Recurrent pyogenic infections
Autoimmune disease
Disseminated neisserial infections*
Family history
CH50 normal
AH50 normal
Suspect no
deficiency or
MBL, MASP
deficiency
Suspect factor
B, D, or P
deficiency
Suspect C1q,
r, s, C2, or C4
deficiency
Suspect C3,
C5, C6, C7, C8,
factor H or I
deficiency†
AH50 normal
CH50 <5%
AH50 <5%
AH50 <5%
Inherited complement deficiency
Fig. 54.10  Flow chart for the evaluation of inherited complement defi­
ciencies using hemolytic screening assays for the classical (CH50) 
and alternative (AH50) pathways. For each assay, the entire activation 
pathway, including the membrane attack complex, is required for lysis. 
MASP, MBL-­associated serine protease; MBL, mannose-­binding lectin. 
*Gonococcal and meningococcal. † C9 deficiency may have up to 30% 
normal CH50 with low AH50. (From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2020:1152, Fig. 160.1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1040
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
components of complement in clearing immune complexes. Defi­
ciency of C3, the major opsonin, due to a genetic defect or secondary 
to excessive consumption or protein loss (e.g., nephrotic syndrome, 
systemic lupus erythematosus) predisposes patients to infections, espe­
cially with encapsulated organisms. Deficiency of one of the terminal 
components that compose the MAC or properdin predisposes patients 
to invasive infections (e.g., meningitis, septicemia) with Neisseria 
meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Complement deficiency may 
be found in 40% of patients presenting with recurrent neisserial infec­
tions, particularly with meningococcal disease caused by uncommon 
serogroups (see Table 54.14).
C1 inhibitor deficiency causes hereditary angioedema, an auto­
somal dominant disorder that results in disregulation of the clas­
sical complement pathway. After minor trauma, affected patients 
develop local angioedema without urticaria, pain, or erythema. The 
angioedema may be severe and untreated leads to significant morbidity 
and mortality. Angioedema involving the larynx or upper airways can 
be life-­threatening, and involvement of the bowel leads to abdominal 
pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. Lack of inhibition of plasma kallikrein by 
C1 inhibitor and disregulated production of bradykinin is the cause of 
the angioedema. Treatment of hereditary angioedema includes admin­
istration of C1 inhibitor, administration of a pharmacologic inhibitor 
of plasma kallikrein (ecallantide), or administration of a bradykinin 
β2-­antagonist (icatibant).
Diagnosis of Complement Deficiencies
The CH50 test is a widely available test of classical complement path­
way function based on an antibody-­dependent hemolytic assay. The 
CH50 test depends on the function of all nine complement proteins, 
C1 through C9. The AH50 test, which activates the alternative path­
way, depends on the alternative pathway components and C5–C9. An 
abnormal CH50 but not AH50 is consistent with defects in C1, C2, 
or C4. Alternatively, an abnormal AH50 but normal CH50 indicates 
a defect in properdin or factor B. Abnormal results of both tests indi­
cate a deficiency in a terminal component common to both pathways 
(C3, C5–C9). If the CH50 or AH50 levels are abnormal, individual 
components can be analyzed in specialized laboratories. In heredi­
tary angioedema, C4 levels are generally low, but C3 levels are nor­
mal. Determination of C1 inhibitor levels and/or function is needed 
to definitively diagnose hereditary angioedema. Low C3 and C4 levels 
are seen when the classical pathway is activated (e.g., systemic lupus 
erythematosus), whereas activation of the alternative pathway charac­
teristically results in low C3 levels and normal C4 levels.
Specific treatment of complement deficiencies with component 
replacement is not available. Frequent courses of antibiotics or pro­
phylactic antibiotics have been utilized. Immunization of patients and 
close contacts with pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines may 
be useful, but infections may still occur in immunized complement-­
deficient patients. Replacement of complement proteins by plasma 
transfusion has been used in some patients with C2 deficiency, factor 
H deficiency, or factor I deficiency. MCP deficiency presenting with 
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome is treated with renal transplanta­
tion since it is a membrane protein.
PHAGOCYTIC DISORDERS
Neutrophils are important in protecting the skin, mucous membranes, 
and the lining of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. They form 
the first line of defense against microbial invasion. During the critical 
first 2–4 hours after tissue invasion by pathogenic organisms, the arrival 
of phagocytic cells at the site of infection is crucial for the containment 
of the infection, limiting the size of the local lesion, and preventing 
dissemination. Monocytes/macrophages are also important in cell-­
mediated immunity, and in response to T-­cell cytokines (interferon-­γ 
[IFNγ]), these cells become effective killers of intracellular pathogens.
Neutrophils develop in the bone marrow from hematopoietic stem 
cells, and upon leaving the bone marrow mature neutrophils are found 
in the circulation or roll along the endothelium (known as the margi­
nating pool). Adhesion molecules are necessary for neutrophils to roll 
and adhere to vascular endothelium and extravasate from the blood 
into sites of infection, where they phagocytose and kill pathogens, 
especially those coated by complement or antibodies. Chemotactic 
factors, including the complement fragment C5a, IL-­8, leukotriene 
B4, and bacterial formylated peptides (fMLP), mobilize neutrophils to 
enter tissues and sites of infections. Once in tissues these cells ingest 
the offending organisms (phagocytosis) and activate biochemical path­
ways important in intracellular microbial killing (degranulation and 
oxidative metabolism). The respiratory burst consists of the de novo 
synthesis of highly toxic and often unstable derivatives of molecular 
oxygen. Degranulation is the process by which lysosomal granules, 
containing preformed polypeptide antibiotics and proteases, fuse with 
the phagocytic vacuoles containing the ingested microbes.
Patients with neutrophil disorders are susceptible to a variety of 
bacterial infections and certain fungi. Infections associated with neu­
trophil disorders include infections of mucosal surfaces (e.g., respira­
tory tract infections, rectal and vaginal infections, gingivostomatitis), 
abscesses in the skin and viscera, lymphadenitis, poor wound healing, 
delayed umbilical cord separation, or absence of pus.
Disorders of Neutrophil Numbers
Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <1,500/
mm3 for children 1 year of age or older, although African American 
children can have lower neutrophil numbers. The susceptibility to 
infection is minimally increased until the ANC is <1,000/mm3. Most 
patients do well with an ANC >500/mm3. At these levels, localized 
infections are more common than generalized bacteremia. Serious 
bacterial infections are more common with an ANC <200/mm3. Neu­
tropenia may be congenital and caused by variants in several genes 
(Tables 54.9 and 54.15) or acquired (e.g., autoimmune neutropenia, 
drug reactions, marrow replacement with cancer cells).
Inherited Forms of Neutropenia
Severe congenital neutropenia (Kostmann syndrome) is an auto­
somal recessive disorder caused by variants in the HCLS-­associated 
protein X-­1 (HAX1) gene and is characterized by severe persistent neu­
tropenia (ANC <500 cells/mm3) and recurrent bacterial infections (see 
Table 54.15). Affected patients often have increased plasma concentra­
tions of granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) as well as cir­
culating eosinophils and monocytes. In severe congenital neutropenia, 
the neutrophil counts increase in response to exogenous G-­CSF despite 
the elevated level of G-­CSF at baseline.
Autosomal dominant inherited variants in the elastase 2 gene 
(ELA2) are the most common cause of cyclic neutropenia, although 
the disorder may present as persistent neutropenia as well. In the cyclic 
form of neutropenia, there are periodic episodes of profound neutrope­
nia (ANCs <200 cells/mm3), generally lasting 3–6 days and occurring 
in 21-­day cycles (see Table 54.15). During the episodes of neutropenia, 
individuals develop aphthous ulcers, gingivitis, stomatitis, and celluli­
tis. Death from overwhelming infection with Clostridium perfringens 
occurs in about 10% of patients.
Severe congenital neutropenia, which may be either persistent or 
cyclic, is also seen in Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, an autosomal 
recessive syndrome of pancreatic insufficiency accompanying bone 
marrow dysfunction. Metaphyseal dysostosis and dwarfism may occur. 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1041
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
TABLE 54.15  Phagocyte Disorders
Disease
Genetic Defect/
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Affected Cells
Affected Function
Associated Features
Severe congenital 
neutropenia 1 
(ELANE deficiency)
ELANE: misfolded protein 
response, increased apoptosis
AD
N
Myeloid differentiation
Susceptibility to MDS/leukemia
SCN2a (GFI1 
deficiency)
GFI1: loss of repression of 
ELANE
AD
N
Myeloid differentiation
B/T lymphopenia
SCN3 (Kostmann 
disease)
HAX1: control of apoptosis
AR
N
Myeloid differentiation
Cognitive and neurologic defects in 
patients with defects in both HAX1 
isoforms, susceptibility to MDS/
leukemia
SCN4 (G6PC3 
deficiency)
G6PC3: abolished enzymatic 
activity of glucose-­6-­
phosphatase, aberrant 
glycosylation, and enhanced 
apoptosis of N and F
AR
N + F
Myeloid differentiation, 
chemotaxis, O− 
production
Structural heart defects, urogenital 
abnormalities, inner ear deafness, 
and venous angiectasias of trunks 
and limbs
SCN5
VPS45: controls vesicular 
trafficking
AR
N + FM
Myeloid differentiation, 
migration
Extramedullary hematopoiesis, bone 
marrow fibrosis, nephromegaly
Cyclic neutropenia
ELANE: misfolded protein 
response
AD
N
Differentiation
Oscillations of other leukocytes and 
platelets
X-­linked neutropenia/ 
myelodysplasia
WAS: regulator of actin 
cytoskeleton (loss of 
autoinhibition)
XL, gain of 
function
N + M
Mitosis
Monocytopenia
Leukocyte adhesion 
deficiency type 1 
(LAD1)
ITGB2: adhesion protein (CD18)
AR
N + M + L + NK
Adherence, chemotaxis, 
endocytosis, T/NK 
cytotoxicity
Delayed cord separation, skin ulcers, 
periodontitis, leukocytosis
Leukocyte adhesion 
deficiency type 2 
(LAD2)
SLC35C1 GDP-­fucose transporter
AR
N + M
Rolling, chemotaxis
Mild LAD type 1 features plus hh-­blood 
group plus mental and growth 
retardation
Leukocyte adhesion 
deficiency type 3 
(LAD3)
KINDLIN3: Rap1-­activation of 
β1–3 integrins
AR
N + M + L + NK
Adherence, chemotaxis
LAD type 1 plus bleeding tendency
Rac 2 deficiency
RAC2: regulation of actin 
cytoskeleton
AD
N
Adherence, chemotaxis, 
O− production
Poor wound healing, leukocytosis
X-­linked chronic 
granulomatous 
disease (CGD)
CYBB: electron transport protein 
(gp91phox)
XL
N + M
Severe NADPH oxidase 
activity with decreased 
superoxide production, 
impaired pathogen 
killing by phagocytic 
cells.
Recurrent bacterial infection, 
susceptibility to fungal infection, 
inflammatory gut manifestations; 
McLeod phenotype in patients 
with deletions extending into the 
contiguous Kell locus
Autosomal recessive 
CGD – p22 phox 
deficiency
CYBA: electron transport protein 
(p22phox)
AR
N + M
Same as X-­CGD
Recurrent bacterial infection, 
susceptibility to fungal infection, and 
inflammatory gut manifestations
Autosomal recessive 
CGD – p47 phox 
deficiency
NCF1: adapter protein (p47phox)
AR
N + M
Same as X-­CGD
Recurrent bacterial infection, 
susceptibility to fungal infection, and 
inflammatory gut manifestations
Autosomal recessive 
CGD – p67 phox 
deficiency
NCF2: activating protein 
(p67phox)
AR
N + M
Same as X-­CGD
Recurrent bacterial infection, 
susceptibility to fungal infection, and 
inflammatory gut manifestations
Autosomal recessive 
CGD – p40 phox 
deficiency
NCF4: activating protein 
(p40phox)
AR
N + M
Killing (faulty O− 
production)
Inflammatory gut manifestations only
IL-­12 and IL-­23 
receptor β1 chain 
deficiency
IL-­12RB1: IL-­12 and IL-­23 
receptor β1 chain
AR
L + NK
IFN-­γ secretion
Susceptibility to Mycobacteria and 
Salmonella
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1042
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
A gain-­of-­function variant in the WAS protein has also been associated 
with an X-­linked form of severe congenital neutropenia. Severe con­
genital neutropenia may be associated with SCID in reticular dysgen­
esis, a disorder of hematopoietic stem cells affecting all bone marrow 
lineages due to variants in the AK2 gene.
The mainstay of treatment of all congenital neutropenias is recombi­
nant human granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (rhG-­CSF). Approxi­
mately 10% of patients with the diagnosis of severe congenital neutropenia 
and Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome develop myelodysplasia/acute 
myelogenous leukemia. No cases of malignant transformations have been 
observed in patients with either cyclic or idiopathic neutropenia.
Acquired Neutropenia
Isoimmune neutropenia occurs in neonates as the result of transpla­
cental transfer of maternal antibodies to fetal neutrophil antigens. The 
mother produces antibodies to specific neutrophil antigens on the sur­
face of fetal leukocytes that are inherited from the father and are not 
present on maternal cells. Isoimmune neonatal neutropenia, similar to 
isoimmune anemia and thrombocytopenia, is a transient process that 
resolves as maternal antibodies wane. Cutaneous infections are com­
mon, and sepsis is rare. Early treatment of infection while the infant is 
neutropenic is the major goal of therapy. Intravenous immune globulin 
may decrease the duration of neutropenia. Autoimmune neutropenia 
usually develops in children 5–24 months of age. Neutrophil autoan­
tibodies may be IgG, IgM, IgA, or a combination of these. Usually, the 
condition spontaneously resolves in 6 months to 4 years. Although 
intravenous immune globulin and corticosteroids have been used, 
most patients respond to G-­CSF.
Disorders of Neutrophil Adhesion and Chemotaxis
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 (LAD-­1) is an autosomal reces­
sive inherited disorder resulting from variants in the gene encoding 
the β2 integrin CD18. CD18 is the common β-­subunit of lympho­
cyte function-­associated antigen-­1 (LFA-­1) (CD11a/CD18), Mac-­1 
(CD11b/CD18), and P150,95 (CD11c/CD18), proteins that are 
expressed on lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, and neutrophils, 
respectively. Diminished or absent surface expression of these proteins 
accounts for a profound impairment of neutrophil and monocyte cell 
migration and phagocytosis. The severity of the immunodeficiency is 
dependent on the level of expression of CD18. Infants affected with 
this disorder may present in early infancy with failure of separation of 
the umbilical cord (often 2 months after birth) with attendant ompha­
litis and sepsis (see Table 54.11). Cutaneous, respiratory, gingival, and 
mucosal infections are common, and sepsis may lead to death in early 
childhood. Due to a failure of neutrophils to adhere normally to vas­
cular endothelium (marginate), ANCs are usually >20,000/mm3 even 
when patients are not infected. The diagnosis of LAD-­1 can be made 
measuring the amount of LFA-­1 on the surface of lymphocytes by flow 
cytometry. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is curative.
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2 (LAD-­2) is an autosomal 
recessive congenital disorder of glycosylation (type iic) caused by vari­
ants in the SLC35C1 gene. The SLC35C1 gene encodes a GDP-­fucose 
transporter, and variant in this gene results in the absence of sialylated 
Lewis X blood group on the surface of neutrophils and other leukocytes, 
resulting in failure to roll and subsequently adhere to vascular endothe­
lium. Patients with LAD-­2 manifest with growth retardation, dysmorphic 
features, and neurologic deficits in addition to the increased suscep­
tibility to infection. LAD-­3 is a rare disorder caused by defects in the 
KINDLIN-­3 protein resulting in defective neutrophil adhesion as well 
as platelet defects. Patients with LAD-­3 present similarly to those with 
LAD-­1 with recurrent severe infections as well as a bleeding disorder.
Depressed neutrophil chemotaxis has been observed in a wide 
variety of clinical conditions (see Table 54.15). In addition to LAD-­1 
and LAD-­2, defective migration of neutrophils has been described in 
hyper-­IgE syndrome due to STAT3 variants and with variants in the 
RAC2 gene (see Table 54.15). RAC2 is the predominant GTPase in 
human neutrophils, and it is integral to the function of the actin cyto­
skeleton. Deficiency in RAC2 is associated with decreased neutrophil 
chemotaxis, superoxide generation, and decreased degranulation in 
response to formylated peptides.
Disorders of Neutrophil Function
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a disorder of phagocytes 
due to variants in any one of the subunits of the enzyme NADPH 
oxidase (see Table 54.15). NADPH oxidase consists of five subunits 
(gp91phox, p22phox, p47phox, p67phox, and cytochrome B-­245/Eros) and is 
responsible for the generation of the respiratory burst, which involves 
the catalytic conversion of molecular oxygen to superoxide (O2–) that 
is essential for the killing of a variety of bacterial and fungal pathogens 
by neutrophils and macrophages. Variants in the gene encoding the 
gp91phox protein are inherited in an X-­linked manner and account for 
approximately 65% of CGD. All other forms of CGD are inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner.
Although the clinical manifestations are variable, several clinical 
features suggest the diagnosis of CGD. The onset of clinical signs and 
symptoms may occur from early infancy to young adulthood, and the 
attack rate and severity of infections are dependent on the amount 
of residual oxidase activity generated by NADPH oxidase in affected 
TABLE 54.15  Phagocyte Disorders—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect/
Presumed 
Pathogenesis
Inheritance
Affected Cells
Affected Function
Associated Features
IL-­12p40 deficiency
IL-­12B: subunit p40 of IL-­12/IL-­23 AR
M
IFNγ secretion
Susceptibility to Mycobacteria and 
Salmonella
IFNγ receptor 1 
deficiency
IFNGR1: IFNγR ligand binding 
chain
AR, AD
M + L
IFNγ binding and 
signaling
Susceptibility to Mycobacteria and 
Salmonella
IFNγ receptor 2 
deficiency
IFNGR2: IFNγR accessory chain
AR
M + L
IFNγ signaling
Susceptibility to Mycobacteria and 
Salmonella
STAT1 deficiency 
(AD form)
STAT1 (loss of function)
AD
M + L
IFNγ signaling
Susceptibility to Mycobacteria
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; B/T, B and T cells; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; L, lymphocyte; M, monocyte/macrophage; 
MDS, myelodysplasia syndrome; N, neutrophil; NK, natural killer cell; XL, X-­linked.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1043
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
individuals. Affected patients may have recurrent lymphadenitis, bac­
terial hepatic abscesses, or osteomyelitis. Infections also occur in the 
lungs, middle ear, gastrointestinal tract, skin, and urinary tract. Patients 
characteristically exhibit lymphadenopathy, hypergammaglobulinemia, 
hepatosplenomegaly, dermatitis, failure to thrive, anemia, chronic diar­
rhea, and abscesses. Granulomas are prominent and may obstruct the 
pylorus or ureters or lead to inflammatory bowel disease. The most 
common pathogen is S. aureus, and infection with S. marcescens, B. 
cepacia, Aspergillus sp., C. albicans, or Salmonella sp. can occur. The 
diagnosis of CGD is made by either the DHR test or the NBT dye test.
The treatment of CGD is rapidly evolving. CGD is traditionally 
treated with prophylactic trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, itracon­
azole, long-­term continuous IFNγ therapy, and prompt treatment of 
acute infections. Steroids and antibiotics are used to treat granulo­
matous complications of the gastrointestinal, urinary, and respiratory 
tracts. Definitive treatment of CGD by HSCT in properly HLA-­matched 
patients has achieved excellent outcomes (>90% survival) even for 
patients at high risk for transplant-­associated morbidity and mortality.
DISORDERS OF MACROPHAGE FUNCTION
The IFNγ/IL-­12 axis is crucial to host defense against intracellular 
pathogens, including mycobacteria, Listeria, and Salmonella species. 
Dendritic cells and macrophages produce IL-­12 in response to bacte­
rial pathogens that in turn stimulate the secretion of IFNγ by T cells 
and NK cells. IFNγ binds to receptors on macrophages, stimulating the 
production of TNF-­α and inducible nitric oxide synthetase, promoting 
antigen presentation, and augmenting the respiratory burst and bacte­
ricidal activities of macrophages.
The classic members of this group of disorders involve variants 
in the IFNγ receptor, the IL-­12 receptor, or IL-­12. The IFNγ receptor 
contains two chains: IFNγ receptor 1 (IFNγ-­R1), which binds ligand, 
and IFNγ receptor 2 (IFNγ-­R2), which is necessary for ligand-­induced 
signaling. Complete absence of IFNγ-­R1 or IFNγ-­R2 is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner and causes the most severe disease, mani­
festing early in infancy often with disseminated atypical mycobacterial 
infection, recurrent Salmonella infection, or fatal infection after BCG 
vaccination. Partial IFNγ-­R1 or IFNγ-­R2 defects typically have milder 
disease and present often in early childhood, but nonetheless with 
increased susceptibility to nontuberculous mycobacterial disease. 
Patients with partial IFNγ-­R1 deficiency are especially prone to osteo­
myelitis due to atypical mycobacteria. Variants leading to a deficiency 
in the production of the p40 subunit of IL-­12 or in the expression of 
the IL-­12Rβ1 receptor are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
These patients have an increased susceptibility to serious infection with 
environmental mycobacteria, BCG, and Salmonella sp. Unexpectedly, 
these patients are also susceptible to skin and, rarely, invasive infec­
tions with C. albicans. Variants in STAT1, which mediates the signal 
transduction following the binding of IFNγ with the IFNγ receptor, 
also causes susceptibility to mycobacterial infections and is inherited in 
an autosomal recessive pattern. In addition, these patients are suscep­
tible to a variety of viral pathogens since STAT1 is required for signal 
transduction of IFNα/β in addition to IFNγ.
IMMUNE DISREGULATION SYNDROMES
Immune disregulation disorders are genetic defects in the regulation 
of the adaptive immune system (T and B cells) resulting in early-­onset 
inflammatory bowel disease, eczema, autoimmune cytopenias, and 
other autoimmune or inflammatory complications. Abnormalities of 
immune regulation are frequently important components of the clin­
ical manifestations in patients with primary immune deficiencies, 
which have been described previously in this chapter. Unlike autoin­
flammatory disorders, these disorders are not episodic and are asso­
ciated with autoimmune manifestations. Additionally, the clinical 
phenotype includes varying degrees of susceptibility to infection.
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is caused by variants 
in the gene encoding perforin or genes encoding other proteins 
involved in the cytotoxic function of NK cells and CD8 cells, such as 
Munc13-­4, syntaxin11, and syntaxin11 binding protein (Table 54.16). 
TABLE 54.16  Disorders of Immune Regulation
Disease
Genetic Defect
Inheritance
Affected cells
Functional Defect
Associated Features
Perforin deficiency 
(FHL2)
PRF1; perforin induces 
pores in target cell 
membrane
AR
CTL and NK cells
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, normal 
degranulation
Fever, hepatosplenomegaly 
(HSMG), hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), 
cytopenias
UNC13D/Munc13-­4 
deficiency (FHL3)
UNC13D; required to prime 
vesicles for fusion
AR
CTL and NK cells
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, abnormal 
degranulation
Fever, HSMG, HLH, cytopenias
Syntaxin 11 
deficiency (FHL4)
STX11, required for 
secretory vesicle fusion 
with the cell membrane
AR
CTL and NK cells
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, abnormal 
degranulation
Fever, HSMG, HLH, cytopenias
STXBP2/Munc18-­2 
deficiency (FHL5)
STXBP2, required for 
secretory vesicle fusion 
with the cell membrane
AR
CTL and NK cells
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, abnormal 
degranulation
Fever, HSMG, HLH, cytopenias
Chédiak-­Higashi 
syndrome
LYST, impaired lysosomal 
trafficking
AR
CTL and NK cells, 
others
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, abnormal 
degranulation
Partial albinism, recurrent 
infections, fever, HSMG, HLH, 
giant lysosomes, neutropenia, 
cytopenias, bleeding tendency, 
progressive neurologic dysfunction
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1044
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
TABLE 54.16  Disorders of Immune Regulation—cont’d
Disease
Genetic Defect
Inheritance
Affected cells
Functional Defect
Associated Features
Griscelli syndrome, 
type 2
RAB27A encoding a 
GTPase that promotes 
docking of secretory 
vesicles to the cell 
membrane
AR
CTL and NK cells, 
others
Decreased to absent NK and 
CTL cytotoxicity, abnormal 
degranulation
Partial albinism, fever, HSMG, HLH, 
cytopenias
SH2D1A deficiency 
(XLP1)
SH2D1A encoding 
an adaptor protein 
regulating intracellular 
signaling
XL
CTL and NK cells, 
others
Partially defective NK-­cell and 
CTL cytotoxic activity
Clinical and immunologic features 
triggered by EBV infection: 
HLH, lymphoproliferation, 
aplastic anemia, lymphoma, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, absent 
iNK T cells
XIAP deficiency (XLP2)
XIAP encoding an inhibitor 
of apoptosis
XL
Many
Increased T-­cell susceptibility 
to apoptosis to CD95 and 
enhanced activation-­induced 
cell death (AICD)
EBV infection, splenomegaly, 
lymphoproliferation, HLH, colitis, 
IBD, hepatitis, low iNK T cells
IPEX, immune 
disregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy, X-­linked
FOXP3, encoding a T-­cell 
transcription factor
XL
T-­regulatory cells
Lack of (and/or impaired 
function of) CD4+ CD25+ 
FOXP3+ regulatory T cells 
(Tregs)
Autoimmune enteropathy, 
early-­onset diabetes, 
thyroiditis, hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, eczema, 
elevated IgE, IgA
CD25 deficiency
IL2RA, encoding IL-­2Rα 
chain
AR
T cells, T-­regulatory 
cells
No CD4+ C25+ cells with 
impaired function of Tregs, 
absent in vitro proliferative 
responses
Lymphoproliferation, autoimmunity; 
impaired T-­cell proliferation
STAT5b deficiency
STAT5B, signal transducer, 
and transcription factor, 
essential for normal 
signaling from IL-­2 and 
IL-­15, key growth factors 
for T and NK cells
AR
Many
Impaired development and 
function of γδ T cells, Tregs, 
and NK cells, low T-­cell 
proliferation
Growth hormone–insensitive 
dwarfism, dysmorphic features, 
eczema, lymphocytic interstitial 
pneumonitis, autoimmunity
LRBA deficiency
LRBA (lipopolysaccharide-­
responsive beigelike 
anchor protein)
AR
T cells, T-­regulatory 
cells
Decreased CTLA4 cell surface 
expression
Recurrent infections, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, 
inflammatory bowel disease, 
autoimmunity; EBV infections
CTLA4
Variants or deletions in 
CLTA4
AD
T cells, T-­regulatory 
cells
Decreased CTLA4 cell surface 
expression
Recurrent infections, 
autoimmune cytopenias, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, lung 
disease, brain inflammation
APECED (APS-­1), 
autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy 
with candidiasis 
and ectodermal 
dystrophy
AIRE, encoding a 
transcription regulator 
needed to establish 
thymic self-­tolerance
AR
T cells, T-­regulatory 
cells
AIRE/1 serves as checkpoint 
in the thymus for negative 
selection of autoreactive T 
cells and for generation of 
Tregs
Autoimmunity: hypoparathyroidism, 
hypothyroidism, adrenal 
insufficiency, diabetes, 
gonadal dysfunction, and other 
endocrine abnormalities; chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, dental 
enamel hypoplasia, alopecia areata, 
enteropathy, pernicious anemia
ALPS-­FAS
TNFRSF6, encoding 
CD95/Fas cell surface 
apoptosis receptor
AR
Apoptosis defect FAS 
mediated, increased CD4− 
CD8− TCRα/β double-­
negative (DN) T cells
Splenomegaly, adenopathies, 
autoimmune cytopenias, 
increased lymphoma risk, IgG and 
IgA normal or increased, elevated 
FasL and IL-­10, vitamin B12
ALPS-­FASLG
TNFSF6, Fas ligand for 
CD95 apoptosis
AR
Lymphocytes
Apoptosis defect FAS 
mediated, increased DN T 
cells
Splenomegaly, adenopathies, 
autoimmune cytopenias, SLE; 
soluble FasL is not elevated
ALPS–caspase 10
CASP10, intracellular 
apoptosis pathway
AD
Lymphocytes
Defective lymphocyte 
apoptosis, increased DN T 
cells
Adenopathies, splenomegaly, 
autoimmunity
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1045
CHAPTER 54  Recurrent Fever, Immune Deficiency, and Autoinflammatory Disorders
Disease
Genetic Defect
Inheritance
Affected cells
Functional Defect
Associated Features
ALPS–caspase 8
CASP8, intracellular 
apoptosis, and activation 
pathways
AR
Lymphocytes
Defective lymphocyte apoptosis 
and activation, increased DN 
T cells
Adenopathies, splenomegaly, 
bacterial and viral infections, 
hypogammaglobulinemia
FADD deficiency
FADD encoding an adaptor 
molecule interacting 
with FAS, and promoting 
apoptosis
AR
Lymphocytes
Defective lymphocyte 
apoptosis, increased DN T 
cells
Functional hyposplenism, bacterial 
and viral infections, recurrent 
episodes of encephalopathy and 
liver dysfunction
Early-­onset 
inflammatory bowel 
disease
Variants in IL-­10 (results 
in increase of many 
proinflammatory 
cytokines)
AR
Monocyte/
macrophage, 
activated T cells
IL-­10 deficiency leads to 
increase of TNFγ and other 
proinflammatory cytokines
Enterocolitis, enteric fistulas, 
perianal abscesses, chronic 
folliculitis
Early-­onset 
inflammatory bowel 
disease
IL-­10RA (see above)
AR
Monocyte/
macrophage, 
activated T cells
Variants in IL-­10 receptor alpha 
leads to increase of TNFγ 
and other proinflammatory 
cytokines
Enterocolitis, enteric fistulas, 
perianal abscesses, chronic 
folliculitis
Early-­onset 
inflammatory bowel 
disease
IL-­10RB (see above)
AR
Monocyte/
macrophage, 
activated T cells
Variants in IL-­10 receptor beta 
leads to increase of TNFα 
and other proinflammatory 
cytokines
Enterocolitis, enteric fistulas, 
perianal abscesses, chronic 
folliculitis
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; Ig, 
immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; iNK, invariant natural killer; NK, natural killer cell; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TCR, T-­cell receptor; TNF, 
tumor necrosis factor; XL, X-­linked.
TABLE 54.16  Disorders of Immune Regulation—cont’d
HLH is a life-­threatening disorder of infants and is characterized by 
high fever, rash, hyperferritinemia, coagulopathy, and hematologic 
cytopenias. HLH is typically triggered in response to viral infections, 
in particular EBV and CMV. The various molecular defects that 
underlie HLH all result in ineffective clearance of viral infections by 
NK cells and CD8 T cells, resulting in prolonged antigen exposure 
and protracted activation of CD8 T cells and NK cells. CD8 T cells 
and NK cells produce large amounts of IFNγ that activate macro­
phages, resulting in phagocytosis of bone marrow elements and 
end-­organ damage. This disorder is fatal if not treated aggressively 
with combined immunosuppressive medications and chemotherapy. 
HSCT is the only curative treatment.
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome (CHS), an abnormality of secondary 
granules, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a variant in the 
LYST gene, which encodes a cytoplasmic protein thought to be involved 
in organellar protein trafficking resulting in fusion of the primary and 
secondary granules in neutrophils. Despite normal ingestion of particles 
and normal production of superoxide, neutrophils and macrophages 
in patients with CHS have delayed killing of microorganisms. Large 
azurophilic lysosomal granules are present in all granule-­bearing cells 
including neutrophils and melanocytes. A smear of peripheral blood 
can demonstrate these giant granules in neutrophils, which are virtually 
pathognomonic of CHS when other features are present.
Recurrent infections affect the skin, respiratory tract, and mucous 
membranes and are caused by both gram-­positive and gram-­negative 
bacteria as well as by fungi. S. aureus is the most common organism. 
Despite normal platelet counts, patients with CHS have prolonged 
bleeding times due to a platelet storage pool abnormality. Patients usu­
ally have partial oculocutaneous albinism. Most patients progress to 
an accelerated phase associated with EBV infection and characterized 
by a lymphoproliferative syndrome with generalized lymphohistio­
cytic infiltrates, fever, jaundice, hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and 
pancytopenia (see Table 54.16). Neuropathy, which can be sensory or 
motor, and ataxia may be present.
X-­Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease Type 1 and Type 2
X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease type 1 (XLP-­1) is caused by a 
variant in the gene called SH2D1A, which encodes for an adapter pro­
tein involved in signal transduction of T cells and NK cells. XLP-­2 is 
a similar disorder caused by variants in XIAP. XLP-­1 is characterized 
by fulminant infection with EBV with immunodisregulation and/
or lymphoma. Boys with this disease may be relatively normal until 
infected with EBV, which is acutely fatal in 80% of patients and due to 
the development of HLH. Boys who survive the initial EBV infection 
develop hypogammaglobulinemia and are at high risk for developing 
aplastic anemia and B-­cell lymphomas. XLP-­2 presents similarly with 
HLH following EBV infection but can also present with early-­onset 
colitis. Definitive therapy of both forms of XLP is HSCT.
Immune Disregulation, Polyendocrinopathy, 
Enteropathy, X-­Linked and Related Disorders
The maintenance of peripheral tolerance is critically dependent on 
T-­regulatory cells, CD4+ T cells that prevent autoimmunity and exces­
sive immune responses. These cells are generated in the thymus to 
self-­antigens, express the transcription factor Foxp3, and constitutively 
express high levels of the IL-­2 receptor (CD25). T-­regulatory cells 
express numerous immunosuppressive molecules including cytotoxic 
T-­lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4), which inhibits T-­cell activation, and 
IL-­10 and transforming growth factor-­β (TGF-­β).
Immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked 
(IPEX) is caused by variants in the FOXP3 gene, an X-­linked transcrip­
tion factor essential for the production and function of T-­regulatory cells 
(see Table 54.16). In males with a null variant in FOXP3, the clinical 
manifestations begin at birth or soon thereafter, and consist of inflamma­
tory gastrointestinal tract disease, failure to thrive, autoimmune diabetes 
mellitus, thyroiditis, Addison disease, severe food allergies, eczema, and 
autoimmune cytopenias. Hypomorphic variants in Foxp3 that encode a 
protein with residual functional activity lead to a later onset and milder 
clinical phenotype, but allergic disease and failure to thrive are common. 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1046
SECTION 10  Infectious Diseases/Immune/Inflammation
Patients with this disorder are aggressively immunosuppressed to be sta­
bilized, but bone marrow transplantation is the only curative therapy.
CD25 Deficiency
CD25 (α chain of the high-­affinity IL-­2 receptor) deficiency is an auto­
somal recessive disorder due to variants in the IL2RA gene (see Table 
54.16). T-­regulatory cells constitutively express CD25 and respond to 
IL-­2 generated by T cells during an immune response for their immu­
noregulatory functions. CD25 deficiency results in a syndrome sim­
ilar to IPEX with severe enteropathy, diabetes mellitus, autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia, eczema, and lymphoproliferation. Importantly, 
patients with CD25 deficiency exhibit several unique features not seen 
in IPEX, namely chronic herpetic viral infections (e.g., CMV, EBV) and 
an increased susceptibility to infections.
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 
Protein 5B Deficiency
STAT5b deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder due to variants in 
the STAT5b gene, one of two STAT5 proteins involved in IL-­2 signaling 
(see Table 54.16). Similar to CD25 deficiency, STAT5b deficiency results 
in T-­regulatory cell dysfunction leading to a syndrome of immune defi­
ciency with autoimmunity. These infants also suffer from autoimmune 
diseases such as autoimmune thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia, 
eczema, and arthritis. Unlike IPEX or CD25 deficiency, growth failure 
occurs in STAT5b since this signaling protein is required for growth 
hormone signaling. Additionally, patients with STAT5b deficiency also 
develop pulmonary disease that pathologically resembles interstitial 
lymphocytic pneumonia, although whether this represents an autoim­
mune phenomenon or a response to infectious episodes is unclear.
Cytotoxic T-­Lymphocyte Antigen 4 Deficiency
CTLA4 deficiency is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder due 
to variants of the gene encoding for the CTLA4 protein (see Table 
54.16). Not all patients who have damaging variants in CTLA4 develop 
a clinical phenotype (i.e., reduced penetrance), and the onset of the 
disease and clinical manifestations are variable (variable expressivity). 
The clinical manifestations of CTLA4 deficiency may occur in early 
childhood or adulthood. The most common clinical manifestations 
include enteropathy; granulomatous and lymphocytic lung infiltration; 
lymphocytic infiltration of the bone marrow, brain, kidney, or liver; 
respiratory tract infections; splenomegaly; lymphadenopathy; and 
immune cytopenias. Patients frequently have hypogammaglobulin­
emia, which explains their propensity to infection, and may appear to 
have CVID at presentation. Autoimmune thyroiditis and psoriasis also 
occur. Treatment of CTLA4 deficiency includes the use of replacement 
immunoglobulin therapy for patients with hypogammaglobulinemia 
and recombinant CTLA4 for the autoimmune manifestations.
A phenotypically similar disorder is caused by variants in the 
lipopolysaccharide-­responsive vesicle trafficking, beach and anchor 
containing (LRBA) gene, which regulates the expression of CTLA4 on 
the surface of T cells. CTLA4 is essential for the function of T-­regula­
tory cells, which explains the common autoimmune and autoinflam­
matory features of both LRBA deficiency and CTLA4 deficiency. HSCT 
is increasingly being performed with good outcomes if performed 
early, prior to end-­organ damage.
Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy–Candidiasis–
Ectodermal Dystrophy
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy 
(APECED) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by variants in 
the gene encoding the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene (see Table 
54.16). AIRE is a transcription factor that is essential for expression 
of peripheral tissue antigens in the thymus, allowing for deletion of 
self-­reactive T cells in the thymus (i.e., negative selection) and for the 
production of T-­regulatory cells with the correct antigen specificity. 
The clinical manifestation of APECED includes chronic or recurrent 
Candida infections of the mucous membranes, skin, and nails; auto­
immune hypoparathyroidism; and Addison disease. Other autoim­
mune disorders, such as vitiligo, thyroiditis, and pernicious anemia, 
may occur. The insidious and variable onset of the endocrinopathies 
requires the need for frequent evaluation for autoimmune endocrine 
disorders. The propensity to develop fungal infections is explained by 
autoantibodies to certain immune cytokines, such as IL-­17, that are 
critical to the defense of fungal infections.
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferation Syndrome
Autoimmune lymphoproliferation syndrome (ALPS) is a group of 
disorders most commonly caused by variants in the FAS gene or less 
commonly the FAS ligand (FASL) gene (see Table 54.16). Other genetic 
causes of ALPS have been described. FAS is a protein that is involved 
in the normal apoptotic pathway of lymphocytes, and defective apop­
tosis due to defects in FAS or FASL underlies the autoimmune mani­
festations of this disorder. The clinical manifestations of ALPS include 
lymphoproliferation (i.e., splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy) and 
autoimmune manifestations, particularly autoimmune thrombocyto­
penia and autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and an increased suscepti­
bility to lymphoma. Autoimmune manifestations are usually responsive 
to immunosuppressive medication.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Fevers and recurrent benign infections are common, especially in 
large families or in daycare settings, in which children may manifest 
6–10 URIs or gastroenteritis episodes a year. These infections usually 
last <1 week. The child continues to grow and develop normally and 
their activities are not restricted. Screening tests to evaluate immune 
function are typically normal. Red flags to consider disorders of the 
immune system include absent lymphoid tissue, failure to thrive, 
digital clubbing, chronic diarrhea, prolonged infections, infections 
with unusual organisms, repeated serious infections, bronchiectasis, 
eczematous dermatitis, a family history of early childhood deaths (pre­
sumably from infection), and other diseases associated with increased 
risks for infection (sickle cell anemia, malignancy, asplenia). In these 
cases, immunologic work-­up, genetic testing, and consultation with a 
clinical immunologist can lead to a diagnosis and definitive treatment.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1046.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Overview, History, Exam, and Diagnostic Approach
Bonilla FA, Khan DA, Ballas ZK, et al. Practice parameter for the diagnosis 
and management of primary immunodeficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2015;136:1186–1205.
Buckley RH. Primary immunodeficiency diseases due to defects in 
lymphocytes. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1313.
Picard C, Al-­Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Primary immunodeficiency 
diseases: an update on the classification from the International 
Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee for primary 
immunodeficiency, 2015. J Clin Immunol. 2015;35:696–726.
Puck JM. Primary immunodeficiency diseases. J Am Med Assoc. 
1997;278:1835.
Sullivan KE, Stiehm ER, eds. Stiehm’s Immune Deficiencies. London: Academic 
Press; 2014.
Complement System Deficiency
Colten HR, Rosen FS. Complement deficiencies. Annu Rev Immunol. 
1992;10:809.
Frank MM. Complement disorders and hereditary angioedema. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2010;125(2 suppl 2):S262–S271.
Ratnoff WD. Inherited deficiencies of complement in rheumatic diseases. 
Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 1996;22:75.
Phagocyte Disorders
Borregaard N, Boxer LA. Disorders of neutrophil function. In: Kaushansky K, 
Lichtman M, Beutler E, et al., eds. Williams Hematology. 8th ed. New York: 
McGraw-­Hill; 2010:951.
Boztug K, Klein C. Genetics and pathophysiology of severe congenital 
neutropenia syndromes unrelated to neutrophil elastase. Hematol Oncol 
Clin North Am. 2013;27(1):43–60.
Bustamante J, Boisson-­Dupuis S, Abel L, et al. Mendelian susceptibility to 
mycobacterial disease: genetic, immunological, and clinical features of inborn 
errors of IFN-­gamma immunity. Semin Immunol. 2014;26(6):454–470.
Dale DC, Person RE, Bolyard AA, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding 
neutrophil elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Blood. 
2000;96:2317.
Gately MK, Renzetti LM, Magram J, et al. The interleukin-­12/interleukin-­ 
12-­receptor system: role in normal and pathologic immune responses. 
Annu Rev Immunol. 1998;16:495.
Harris ES, Weyrich AS, Zimmerman GA. Lessons from rare maladies: 
leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndromes. Curr Opin Hematol. 
2013;20(1):16–25.
Kuhns DB, Alvord WG, Heller T, et al. Residual NADPH oxidase and survival 
in chronic granulomatous disease. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(27):2600–2610.
Lekstrom-­Himes JA, Gallin JI. Immunodeficiency diseases caused by defects in 
phagocytes. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1703.
Winkelstein JA, Marino MP, Johnston Jr RB, et al. Chronic granulomatous 
disease. Report on a national registry of 368 patients. Medicine (Baltim). 
2000;79:155.
Asplenia
Bolze A, Mahlaoui N, Byun M, et al. Ribosomal protein SA haploinsufficiency 
in humans with isolated congenital asplenia. Science. 2013;340(6135):
976–978.
Koss M, Bolze A, Brendolan A, et al. Congenital asplenia in mice and humans 
with mutations in a Pbx/Nkx2-­5/p15 module. Dev Cell. 2012;22(5):
913–926.
Price VE, Blanchette VS, Ford-­Jones EL. The prevention and management of 
infections in children with asplenia or hyposplenia. Infect Dis Clin North 
Am. 2007;21(3):697–710.
Spelman D. Prevention of overwhelming sepsis in asplenic patients: could do 
better. Lancet. 2001;357:2002.
Humoral Immune Defects
Angulo I, Vadas O, Garcon F, et al. Phosphoinositide 3-­kinase delta gene 
mutation predisposes to respiratory infection and airway damage. Science. 
2013;342(6160):866–871.
Bates CA, Ellison MC, Lynch DA, et al. Granulomatous-­lymphocytic lung 
disease shortens survival in common variable immunodeficiency. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2004;114:415–421.
Conley ME, Dobbs AK, Farmer DM, et al. Primary B cell immunodeficiencies: 
comparisons and contrasts. Annu Rev Immunol. 2009;27:199–227.
Lucas CL, Kuehn HS, Zhao F, et al. Dominant-­activating germline mutations 
in the gene encoding the PI(3)K catalytic subunit p110delta result in T cell 
senescence and human immunodeficiency. Nat Immunol. 2014;15(1):88–97.
Resnick ES, Moshier EL, Godbold JH, et al. Morbidity and mortality 
in common variable immune deficiency over 4 decades. Blood. 
2012;119(7):1650–1657.
Yel L. Selective IgA deficiency. J Clin Immunol. 2010;30(1):10–16.
Yong PF, Thaventhiran JE, Grimbacher B. “A rose is a rose is a rose,” but CVID 
is Not CVID common variable immune deficiency (CVID): what do we 
know in 2011? Adv Immunol. 2011;111:47–107.
Combined Immune Deficiencies
Fischer A, Hacein-­Bey Abina S, Touzot F, et al. Gene therapy for primary 
immunodeficiencies. Clin Genet. 2015;88:507–515.
Gennery AR, Slatter MA, Rice J, et al. Mutations in CHD7 in patients with 
CHARGE syndrome cause T-­B + natural killer cell + severe combined 
immune deficiency and may cause Omenn-­like syndrome. Clin Exp 
Immunol. 2008;153(1):75–80.
Kavadas FD, Giliani S, Gu Y, et al. Variability of clinical and laboratory 
features among patients with ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA processing 
endoribonuclease gene mutations. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122:
1178–1184.
Leung DYM, Geha RS. Clinical and immunologic aspects of the 
hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 
1988;2:81.
Pai SY, Logan BR, Griffith LM, et al. Transplantation outcomes for severe 
combined immunodeficiency, 2000-­2009. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(5):434–446.
Routes JM, Grossman WJ, Verbsky J, et al. Statewide newborn screening for 
severe T-­cell lymphopenia. J Am Med Assoc. 2009;302(22):2465–2470.
Shearer WT, Dunn E, Notarangelo LD, et al. Establishing diagnostic criteria 
for severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID), leaky SCID, 
and Omenn syndrome: the Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment 
Consortium experience. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;133(4):1092–1098.
Autoinflammatory and Immune Disregulation Disorders
Filipovich AH, Chandrakasan S. Pathogenesis of hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2015;29(5):895–902.
Kuehn HS, Ouyang W, Lo B, et al. Immune dysregulation in human 
subjects with heterozygous germline mutations in CTLA4. Science. 
2014;345(6204):1623–1627.
Lo B, Zhang K, Lu W, et al. Patients with LRBA deficiency show CTLA4 
loss and immune dysregulation responsive to abatacept therapy. Science. 
2015;349(6246):436–440.
Oliveira JB, Bleesing JJ, Dianzani U, et al. Revised diagnostic criteria 
and classification for the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
(ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International Workshop. Blood. 
2010;116(14):e35–e40.
Park H, Bourla AB, Kastner DL, et al. Lighting the fires within: the cell biology 
of autoinflammatory diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012;12(8):570–580.
Schubert D, Bode C, Kenefeck R, et al. Autosomal dominant immune 
dysregulation syndrome in humans with CTLA4 mutations. Nat Med. 
2014;20(12):1410–1416.
Verbsky JW, Chatila TA. Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy, X-­linked (IPEX) and IPEX-­related disorders: an evolving web 
of heritable autoimmune diseases. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013;25(6):708–714.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
