619
RHABDOMYOLYSIS
Rhabdomyolysis is an acute muscle injury resulting in myocyte cell 
death with subsequent release of toxic intracellular compounds pro­
ducing muscle and systemic symptoms. This differs from hyperCKe­
mia, in which there is elevated creatine kinase in the serum secondary 
to dysfunction of the myocyte sarcolemma. These diagnoses represent 
a broad category of disease processes with a large differential diagnosis. 
The difficulty lies in differentiating between the two processes given 
that the treatment of the former may include hospital admission while 
the latter often only requires supportive care.
Diagnosis
The surrogate biomarker for rhabdomyolysis, creatine kinase (CK), is 
a poor substitute because it is not possible to differentiate, based upon 
this value, between rhabdomyolysis and hyperCKemia. The generally 
accepted definition of rhabdomyolysis includes an elevation of CK 
either >1,000 IU/L or greater than five times the upper limit of normal 
in a clinical context of acute muscle weakness, myalgia, and muscle 
swelling (Fig. 36.1).
There are exceptions; focal rhabdomyolysis may result in lower 
CK levels with the same underlying pathologic processes. Addition­
ally, levels above the limit of 1,000 I/U can be found in patients with 
acute denervating diseases, in patients with hyperCKemia from intense 
exercise, and in patients with non-­muscle-­related diseases. A diagnosis 
of rhabdomyolysis should not be considered in patients without acute 
clinical symptoms and acute CK changes from the baseline value. Lev­
els over 5,000 I/U are rarely found in acute or chronic non-­muscle-­
related diseases.
In addition to muscle damage and pain, toxins released into the 
circulation from the myocyte damage can lead to systemic problems 
including cardiac arrythmias, encephalopathy, and, most commonly, 
acute kidney injury.
HyperCKemia
HyperCKemia is diagnosed when the serum elevation of CK is beyond 
the upper limits for age, gender, race, and muscle mass but in the 
absence of associated symptoms. Given the sensitive CK fluctuations 
with exercise, the assessment of hyperCKemia needs to be taken into 
consideration with the patient’s hydration status, previous activity, and 
timing from any possible inciting event. CK typically begins to increase 
24 hours after the onset of a muscle injury or stress, peaks at around 
24–36 hours, and, in a monophasic illness, starts to decline. The nor­
mal half-­life of CK, in a patient without renal failure, is between 24 and 
48 hours (Fig. 36.2).
Careful consideration of laboratory norms for CK is essential in 
interpreting elevated levels during an acute event because normal val­
ues correlate to overall muscle bulk, race, and gender. Additionally, 
frequent exercise in athletes can lead to persistently elevated CK (350–
500 IU/L) during training. Obtaining a baseline CK level after a period 
of rest is required. There is no risk of renal damage in hyperCKemia 
given that there is no myoglobin released into the circulation.
Myoglobinuria
Myoglobinuria is the presence of elevated myoglobin levels in the 
urine. Myoglobin is a chemical compound that carries oxygen in the 
myocyte. Upon damage to the cell membrane, it can be released into 
the blood at higher levels than typically seen. When levels are >0.5–1.5 
mg/L, it saturates the serum haptoglobin and α2-­immunoglobulin and 
the excess is filtered by the glomerulus. Myoglobin sequesters fluid, 
leading to hypovolemia and renal vasoconstriction. It can release the 
free iron, which may damage the renal tubules, or it may react directly 
with the lipid membrane of the kidney, resulting in damage to the prox­
imal tubules.
While there are direct laboratory detection methods, the time to 
obtain results is not rapid enough to use this value to direct treatment; 
urine heme when not in the presence of red blood cells is frequently 
used as a surrogate marker to indicate myoglobinuria in the appropri­
ate acute setting and when clinically suspected. In this situation, the 
urine red blood cell (RBC) count should be checked to determine if the 
heme +++ results in myoglobin or hematuria. Measuring myoglobin 
levels remains a valuable differentiator between rhabdomyolysis and 
hyperCKemia. Normal urine myoglobin levels are <10 mg/dL (and 100 
mg/dL in blood); elevated levels indicate rhabdomyolysis.
The typical red-­ or tea-­colored urine described in rhabdomyoly­
sis is not always noted and requires a urine myoglobin concentration 
>100 mg/dL. In a patient who has been fluid resuscitated, the urinary 
dilution can mask both the visible and laboratory detection of myo­
globinuria. It is important to collect samples during the acute phase 
of presentation or when fluids are weaned because the urine can then 
become positive.
Myositis
Myositis is an inflammatory process in the muscle not related to under­
lying chronic apoptotic muscle disease. In patients with myositis, there 
is an underlying immune or rheumatologic process resulting in inflam­
matory cells causing muscle damage, which involves the myocyte 
membrane. This is in contrast with primary (genetic) muscle diseases 
in which there can be signs of inflammation secondary to the apoptotic 
process of cell death. In some cases, such as dysferlinopathies, these can 
be mistaken for an inflammatory myopathy on the biopsy. However, 
in isolated myositis, there is not the same release of other biomarkers 
from the myocytes into the serum as seen in acute rhabdomyolysis. 
Additionally, other than infectious myositis, most of these disease pro­
cesses are subacute to chronic in nature with only rare presentations as 
acute rhabdomyolysis.
Rhabdomyolysis
Matthew M. Harmelink
36
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
620
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Clinical Presentation
History
The first part of the history of a patient with possible rhabdomyolysis 
is the history of the acute episode, while the second part is to evaluate 
for an underlying etiology. The acute history will help differentiate the 
potential for rhabdomyolysis from other causes of pain and weakness 
(Table 36.1); once diagnosed, the etiology of the rhabdomyolysis needs 
to be evaluated.
A child with rhabdomyolysis may present with a variety of symp­
toms. Most patients present with muscle pain. The remaining 20% do 
not present with overt signs of muscle disease. Dark urine (myoglo­
binuria) may be reported in ∼5% of patients; an even smaller number 
develop acute renal failure.
Patients with focal muscle swelling may develop a compartment 
syndrome resulting in local neurovascular features and may develop 
more systemic disease such as acute kidney injury or encephalopathy 
with associated seizures, somnolence, and/or other cognitive changes. 
Cardiac arrythmias may also be present.
Given the half-­life and timing of the typical peak for both myo­
globin and CK, the timing of the disease onset is important. Patients 
presenting early in their course may not have an elevation of their CK, 
whereas patients who have milder symptoms or do not present during 
the acute episode may have normal or near-­normal lab results. Symp­
toms of previous episodes for which the patient did not seek clinical 
care can suggest an underlying etiology; any signs of possible muscle 
disease including features of muscle dysfunction (weakness, cramps, 
pain) at baseline as well as during different types of activity (anaerobic 
vs aerobic and concentric vs eccentric exercise) as well as family history 
and inciting events or risk factors can be helpful in differentiating these 
diseases (Fig. 36.3).
Because of the phenotypic variation between some of the underly­
ing genetic disorders that can predispose a patient to rhabdomyolysis, 
evaluation for diagnostic or subtle symptoms should be considered 
(Table 36.2; see Fig. 36.3).
Physical Examination
The physical examination must assess and track the degree of muscle 
injury, evaluate for signs of an underlying etiology, and diagnose sec­
ondary complications of rhabdomyolysis. An in-­depth neuromuscular 
exam is warranted with objective tracking of manual muscle testing 
(MMT)-­scored muscle strength (Table 36.3). This helps localize the 
injury but also assesses for pain-­limited features as compared to true 
muscle weakness. Sequential tracking of muscle symptoms helps deter­
mine the disease progression and should be a guiding tool for treat­
ment and hospital discharge.
Acutely in rhabdomyolysis, muscle weakness should not be used 
to determine an etiologic diagnosis because the ability to differenti­
ate between baseline weakness and current symptoms can be difficult; 
historical features are often more helpful. Examples of functional ques­
tions to ask can be the ability to go up and down stairs (which have dif­
ferent predominant muscle groups), the ability to be active in sporting 
activities, and any previous history of muscle cramping, aches, or signs 
of myalgias. Atrophy or pseudohypertrophy, which suggests a chronic 
process, can be helpful during the acute phase to evaluate for underly­
ing causes.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Patients are typically diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis based upon 
serum CK, which is used as a marker for muscle breakdown (see Fig. 
36.1). However, very focal rhabdomyolysis can result in CK levels that 
are not as elevated.
A two-­tiered acute approach for patients with possible rhabdomy­
olysis is recommended given that most pediatric patients have either 
exertional or infectious etiologies (Tables 36.4 and 36.5). This allows a 
thoughtful approach to the patient in which etiologic studies may not 
change management. There is no strong evidence for biochemical or 
gene sequencing in a patient with a first episode of rhabdomyolysis and 
no family history of muscle disease.
Muscle Biopsy
While histopathology can be diagnostic of a known (often genetic or 
immunologic) etiology, the yield of a biopsy during an acute episode 
is very low. This is because the acutely damaged muscle has a similar 
end-­stage appearance due to the diffuse injury, which often masks the 
more subtle features of the underlying cause. In almost all cases, a mus­
cle biopsy, if needed, should be deferred for at least 3 months after the 
resolution of the last acute episode to ensure the highest yield.
The muscles selected should be those known to be affected, ideally 
with a manual muscle strength score between 3–4+ out of 5, and not 
those with diffuse atrophy. The most common muscle studies are the 
hamstring muscles, or the vastus lateralis, followed occasionally by the 
biceps and gastrocnemius. Genetic testing and biochemical analysis are 
frequently pursued prior to obtaining a muscle sample because they are 
less invasive and less expensive.
Hours
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Level
Creatine kinase
Myoglobin
Fig. 36.2  Timing of myoglobin and creatine kinase elevations.
Clinical suspicion of
rhabdomyolysis
>1000
<1000
Urine Heme +++
Urine myoglobin
>10 mg/dL
OR
Serum myoglobin
>100 mg/dL
Pain
Weakness
Myalgia
Muscle swelling
Diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis
Urine myoglobin
>10 mg/dL
Elevated
serum CK*
Fig. 36.1  Simplified diagnostic algorithm for rhabdomyolysis. *Some defi­
nitions of rhabdomyolysis include CK >5x the normal range for the lab.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
621
CHAPTER 36  Rhabdomyolysis
TABLE 36.1  Differential Causes of Acute Muscle Weakness and Pain
Disease
Typical Weakness Pattern
Pain Pattern
Other Symptoms
Rhabdomyolysis
Diffuse or muscles used with exertion, 
often larger muscles are preferred
Same as muscle pain
Dark or red urine
Elevated CK
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Ascending weakness
Neuropathic pain (typically distal)
May have areflexia, autonomic 
symptoms
Myasthenia gravis
Proximal weakness with/without ocular 
or bulbar symptoms, often fatigable
No pain
Pupillary-­sparing fatigable weakness
Botulism
Descending weakness that involves 
pupils
No pain
Often GI symptoms
Myalgia
In area of pain
Often muscle or joint pains, large 
muscles preferred
Often in association with other disease, 
CK is often normal
Psychogenic
May have non-­neurologic pattern of 
weakness, weakness that varies 
based upon how it is examined, give-­
way weakness
Pain and weakness are not always 
congruent in a physiologic distribution
May have other features of a 
psychogenic illness
Normal CK during an acute episode is 
not rhabdomyolysis
Nonrheumatologic connective 
tissue disease (e.g., Ehlers-­Danlos 
syndrome)
Often no overt weakness
Pain is often after activity but more joint 
related than muscle
Normal CK during an acute episode
May have a history of fatigue with 
endurance activity but normal strength
CK, creatine kinase; GI, gastrointestinal.
Recurrent Rhabdomyolysis
Trigger
No
trigger
ANO5
COIII(MTCO3)
PYGM
PFKM
ENO3
PGAM2
PGK1
PGM1
PHKA1
PHKB
Aerobic/
anaerobic.
Symptoms
onset within
minutes
Prolonged
exercise
Febrile
illness
High fat
intake
Irregular
diet
Fasting
Heat
Cold
ACADVL
CPT2
ETFA
ETFB
ETFDH
COI(MTCO1)
COIII(MTCO3)
HADHA
(strenuous
exercise)
HADHB
(strenuous
exercise)
COII(MTCO2)
DYS
DYSF
FKRP
MTCYB
ISCU
RYR1
ALDOA
ACADVL
RYR1
LPIN1
SIL1
TSEN54
ALDOA
ACADVL
CPT2
ETFA
ETFB
ETFDH
COIII(MTCO3)
DGUOK
RYR1
ACADVL
CPT2
ETFA
ETFB
ETFDH
LPIN1
ETFA
ETFB
ETFDH
CPT2
RYR1
ACADVL
CPT2
Muscle
biopsy,
genetic test
Serum CK,
muscle biopsy,
forearm
exercise test,
12MWT (PYGM
− second wind),
cycle test
(PYGM −
second wind),
FBC
Acyl-
carnitine, skin
biopsy,
fasting urine
organic acids,
muscle
biopsy
Acyl-carnitine, muscle biopsy,
genetic test
Acyl-
carnitine,
skin
biopsy,
genetic
test, brain
MRI
(TSEN54)
Acyl-carnitine,
skin biopsy,
fasting urine
organic acids,
muscle biopsy,
genetic test
Acyl-carnitine, skin
biopsy, muscle
biopsy, genetic test
Acyl-carnitine,
skin biopsy
Acyl-
carnitine,
skin
biopsy,
muscle
biopsy,
genetic
test
Acyl-
carnitine,
skin
biopsy
Acyl-
carnitine,
skin biopsy,
fasting
urine
organic
acids,
genetic test
Acyl-
carnitine,
skin
biopsy
Exertion
Exercise (nonspecific)
Temperature
Infection
General
anesthesia,
drugs,
alcohol
Emotional
stress
Diet
PGM1
CPT2
POLG1
RYR1
DYS
FKTN
LPIN1
CPT2
CPT2
Fasting
urine
organic
acids
Fig. 36.3  Examples of different triggers of rhabdomyolysis. The identification of triggers may help in guiding 
genetic testing and may also aid in the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance identified on next-­
generation sequencing in patients presenting with RM. 12MWT, 12-­minute walk test; CK, creatine kinase; 
FBC, full blood count. (From Scalco RS, Gardiner AR, Pitceathly RDS, et al. Rhabdomyolysis: a genetic per­
spective. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015;10:51, Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 36.2  Genetic Disorders Associated with Rhabdomyolysis
Gene
OMIM
Cytogenetic 
Location
Inheritance
Disorder
Muscle Structure and Function
ATP2A1
601003
16p11.2
AR
Brody myopathy
DMD
300376
Xp21.2
XLR
Dystrophin-­associated muscular dystrophy: Becker type
AMPD1
600467
1p13.2
AR
Myopathy due to myoadenylate deaminase deficiency
SCN4A
168300
17q23.3
AD
Paramyotonia congenita
ISCU
255125
12q23.3
AR
Myopathy with lactic acidosis
CAV3
123320
3p25.3
AD
Familial hyperCKemia
CASQ1
114250
1q23.2
AD
Myopathy, vacuolar, with CASQ1 aggregates
Mitochondria/Energy Metabolism
HADHA HADHB
600467
2p23.3
AR
Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency (MTPD)
MCKAT
602199
Not known
AR
Mitochondrial medium-­chain 3-­ketoacyl-­coenzyme A thiolase (MCKAT) deficiency
CPT2
600467
1p32.3
AR
CPT II deficiency, myopathic, stress induced
ACADVL
600467
17p13.1
AR
VLCAD deficiency
PYGM
600467
11q13.1
AR
McArdle disease, or glycogen storage disease type V (GSD5)
PGAM2
261670
7p13
AR
Glycogen storage disease type X
LDHA
612933
11p15.1
AR
Glycogen storage disease type XI
ALDOA
611881
16p11.2
AR
Glycogen storage disease type XII
SLC25A20
212138
3p21.31
AR
Carnitine-­acylcarnitine translocase deficiency
POLG
600467
15q26.1
AD
Autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (adPEO) with mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) deletions-­1 (PEOA1) is caused by variants in the nuclear-­encoded DNA 
polymerase-­gamma gene
DGUOK
617070
2p13.1
AR
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia with mitochondrial DNA deletions, autosomal 
recessive 4
MRM2
600467
7p22.3
AR
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 17
ATP5F1D
618120
19p13.3
AR
Mitochondrial complex V (ATP synthase) deficiency
FDX2
600467
19p13.2
AR
Mitochondrial myopathy with or without optic atrophy and reversible 
leukoencephalopathy (MEOAL)
MRPS14
618378
1q25.1
AR
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 38
TSFM
600467
12q14.1
AR
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency-­3 (COXPD3) 
Metabolic
SLC25A42
600467
19p13.11
AR
Metabolic crises with variable encephalomyopathic features and neurologic regression 
(MECREN)
PGK1 
600467
Xq21.1
XLR
Phosphoglycerate kinase-­1 deficiency
Other
CACNA1S MHS4 
MHS6 MHS3 
MHS2 RYR1
600467 601887 
610888 
154276 
154275 
145600
1q32.1 3q13.1 5p 
7q21 17q11.2 
19q13.2
AD
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (multiple types including King-­Denborough 
syndrome)
CACNA1S
188580
1q32.1
AD
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis associated with malignant hyperthermia allele
CTDP1
600467
18q23
AR
Congenital cataracts, facial dysmorphism, and neuropathy
PGM1
600467
1p31.3
AR
Congenital disorder of glycosylation, type It (CDG1T)
XK
300842
Xp21.1
XL
McLeod syndrome with or without chronic granulomatous disease
CYP2C8 
601129
10q23.33
Risk allele
Statin-­induced rhabdomyolysis cytochrome P450-­drug metabolism, altered, CYP2C8-­related
TRAPPC2L
618331
16q24.3
AR
Progressive encephalopathy with episodic rhabdomyolysis (PEERB)
TANGO2
616878
22q11.21
AR
Metabolic encephalomyopathic crises, recurrent, with rhabdomyolysis, cardiac 
arrhythmias, and neurodegeneration (MECRCN)
SLC16A1
245340
1p13.2
AD
Erythrocyte lactate transporter defect
QARS1
615760
3p21.31
AR
Microcephaly, progressive, seizures, and cerebral and cerebellar atrophy (MSCCA)
LPIN1
268200
2p25.1
AR
Myoglobinuria, acute recurrent, autosomal recessive
HRAS
218040
11p15.5
AD
Costello syndrome/congenital myopathy with excess of muscle spindles
SIL1
248800
5q31.2
AR
Marinesco-­Sjögren syndrome
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CPT II, carnitine palmitoyl transferase II; VLCAD, very long-­chain 
acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
623
CHAPTER 36  Rhabdomyolysis
Treatment
During an acute episode of rhabdomyolysis, the mainstay of treatment 
is use of sufficient fluids to help diurese the serum electrolytes, chemi­
cals, and toxins. In theory, by ensuring excretion of these chemicals, the 
nonmuscle complications can be avoided. In adults, the recommenda­
tions are to give a fluid bolus followed by starting the patient on 1.5–2 
times greater than maintenance fluids. No evidence-­based guidelines 
exist for children; some recommend the titrating of fluids to maintain a 
urine output 3–4 times normal, or 3–4 mL/kg/hour in a child. Another 
method is to titrate the fluids to maintain a physiologic creatine kinase 
half-­life, which, in theory, would ensure an appropriate urine output. 
This method addresses the patient’s physiology (Fig. 36.4).
Before discharge the patient must demonstrate appropriate oral 
intake with continued CK clearance and no myoglobin in the urine. 
Patients must also have improved and tolerable symptoms but are not 
expected to have fully resolved their pain or mild weakness. Nonethe­
less, with underlying myocyte injury, mild pain, weakness, and some 
limited endurance are expected to last for weeks to months after reso­
lution of the acute event.
Renal Injury Risk
A serious complication of rhabdomyolysis is the potential risk for 
renal injury. Fortunately, the risk remains relatively low (∼5–10% in 
children). While some evidence suggests that patients with rhabdomy­
olysis and a CK <5,000 IU/dL are at lower risk of renal involvement, 
this may reflect patients with hyperCKemia and not rhabdomyolysis. 
In one study, no patients with initial urinary heme (myoglobin) dip­
stick results of <2+ developed acute renal failure, compared with ∼18% 
of patients with urinary heme (myoglobin) dipstick results of ≥2+. The 
TABLE 36.3  Manual Muscle Testing Grading
Kendall and Kendall
AMA Impairment Rating Guide
Grade 0
No muscle contraction
No muscle contraction
Grade 1
Muscle contraction palpable or seen, but no motion
Muscle contraction palpable or seen, but no motion
Grade 2
Motion of the part with gravity reduced
Motion of the part with gravity reduced
Grade 3
Muscle can hold the part in test position against the resistance of 
gravity but cannot hold if even slight pressure is added
Muscle can hold the part in the test position against gravity alone
Grade 4
Muscle holds test position against some pressure but breaks 
away
Patient can move the part through the full active range of motion against some 
resistance
Grade 5
Muscle holds test position against full pressure
Patient can move the part through the full active range of motion against full 
resistance
AMA, American Medical Association.
Adapted from Conable KM, Rosner AL. A narrative review of manual muscle testing and implications for muscle testing research. J Chiropr Med. 
2011;10(3):157–165.
TABLE 36.4  Initial Studies for During 
Active Episode of Presumed Rhabdomyolysis
First Tier
Second Tier
CBC
Infectious evaluation
CMP
ECG if indicated by electrolytes
CK
Metabolic studies (described in text) if suspected 
disease on initial presentation
UA, micro and macro
Urine drug screen
CK, creatine kinase; CMP, comprehensive metabolic panel.
TABLE 36.5  Infectious Causes of 
Rhabdomyolysis
Viruses
Influenza A or B
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
HIV: acute retroviral syndrome
Human herpesvirus 6
Respiratory syncytial virus
Coxsackieviruses
Enterovirus
Adenovirus
Echovirus
Cytomegalovirus
Herpes simplex virus
Varicella-­zoster virus
West Nile virus
Dengue virus
Bacteria
Group A β-­hemolytic streptococci
Legionella species
Salmonella
Salmonella species
Francisella species
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Enterococcus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Neisseria meningitidis
Haemophilus influenzae
Coxiella burnetii
Leptospira species
Mycoplasma species
Escherichia coli
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Other
Malaria
Fungal infections
Anaplasmosis
Trichinosis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
624
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
degree of elevation of the CK does not accurately correlate with the risk 
of rhabdomyolysis in pediatric patients.
Compartment Syndrome
Compartment syndrome is another serious complication because 
the swelling can result in vascular and neurologic compression and 
secondary ischemic injury. Frequent evaluations of distal perfusion 
and peripheral neurologic findings are warranted until the patient 
is convalescing. Neurovascular evaluations of the distal extremities 
are warranted every 2–4 hours during the early phases of injury. 
Signs of compartment syndrome include pain out of proportion 
to the examination as well as that induced by manual passive limb 
movement. Consultation with an orthopedic or general surgeon is 
warranted to help evaluate the need for a fasciotomy to relieve the 
pressure.
HOSPITAL FOLLOW-­UP
Following discharge, follow-­up is recommended for all patients with 
rhabdomyolysis. For those patients who have an identified etiology, 
follow-­up with their specialist is warranted to help with recovery as 
well as direct any possible activity level and/or treatment changes.
For patients without a known diagnosis, referral to a neuromus­
cular specialist or neurologist with an interest and expertise in mus­
cle diseases is warranted. Even though the most common cause of 
rhabdomyolysis is exertional or infectious, exercise or periods of high 
energy demand as seen in infection can also induce a patient with an 
underlying disease to have rhabdomyolysis (see Fig. 36.3). If there 
is concern for an underlying genetic or metabolic disorder, refer­
ral to a geneticist can be helpful to further direct additional genetic 
and/or metabolic studies. This type of testing would not typically be 
undertaken during an acute episode of rhabdomyolysis unless a sus­
picious history is presented and clear etiology is suspected. Obtaining 
a baseline CK is warranted in every patient 2–3 months after dis­
charge when they have had 48 hours of no exercise (to prevent mini­
mal elevations from activity) to help differentiate between diseases in 
patients warranting further evaluation or to help screen for muscular 
dystrophies.
DISEASES
There are many genetic and acquired causes of rhabdomyolysis. 
Additionally, there are potentially genetic polymorphisms that could 
predispose certain patients to developing rhabdomyolysis but not sig­
nificant enough to be defined as a current disease. This is important 
for those patients with recurrent episodes but no clear genetic cause 
(see Table 36.2).
Exercise-Induced
Exercise is often the inciting event that causes rhabdomyolysis for 
patients over the age of 2 years. The type of exercise is often important: 
prolonged aerobic vs strenuous anaerobic (see Fig. 36.3).
History
In exercise-­induced rhabdomyolysis, there is typically a monophasic 
episode of rhabdomyolysis with a preceding history of a rapid increase 
in the level of physical activity from the normal baseline. The presence 
of red or dark urine a few hours following the activity in association 
with muscle soreness, localized swelling, and pain, which may last sev­
eral days, is typical. It is not uncommon to discover a history of similar 
episodes prior to this presentation without seeking care. In the recur­
rent episodes, concern should be raised for an underlying etiology and 
additional testing will be guided by the history and physical findings 
(see Fig. 36.3, Tables 36.2 and 36.6).
Physical Examination
The physical examination may establish a possible underlying etiology 
as well as assess for emergent complications such as compartment syn­
drome. The evaluation of strength may be limited by pain and weak­
ness from the muscle damage in the acute setting, and thus the exam 
should be used to evaluate for possible chronic changes, monitor for 
progression of the disease process, and ensure there are no systemic or 
neurovascular complications. In cases where the injury was induced by 
intense focal activity, such as weight lifting, the areas of involvement 
may be isolated.
The presence of atrophy, pseudohypertrophy, dysmorphic features, 
and/or unusual weakness (such as scapular winging, which would be 
unusual in rhabdomyolysis) suggests an underlying disease.
General Management Guidelines for Pediatric Inpatient
Rhabdomyolysis Without Renal Complications
1. Patient presents clinically with rhabdomyolysis signs and
 
symptoms
 
 a. Collect: Basic metabolic panel, creatine kinase, urinalysis
2. Initiate fluids
 
 a. Initiate IV fluids (NS) at rate of 1.5x maintenance
                                             OR
 
 b. If there is concern or known metabolic disease, start 
 
  
D10 NS at 1.5x maintenance or as per genetics/metabolic
 
  
rescue plan based upon glucose infusion rate.
3. Initial lab evaluation
 
 a. Basic metabolic panel
 
  
 i. POSITIVE by RIFLE criteria → patient is developing
 
  
  ARF → not eligible for protocol
 
  
 ii. NEGATIVE by RIFLE criteria → patient not in renal
 
  
  failure. Repeat Q12.
 
 b. Urinalysis
 
  
 i. POSITIVE myoglobin: Repeat UA Q12 until negative
 
  
  for myoglobin.
 
  
 ii. NEGATIVE myoglobin: Do not draw any more UAs.
 
  
  Continue on 1.5x MIVF as above, and monitor CK
 
  
  values per below.
 
 c. Creatine kinase
 
  
 i. POSITIVE: Repeat Q12 hours
 
  
 ii. NEGATIVE: Patient is not in rhabdomyolysis,
 
  
  discontinue protocol.
4. Q12 lab evaluation
 
 a. Basic metabolic panel: Repeat as in step 3
 
 b. Urinalysis: Repeat as in step 3
 
 c. Creatine kinase
 
  
 i. If T1/2 <36 hours, decrease IV plus PO fluid rate by 0.5x.
 
  
  Continue to repeat Q12 until patient achieves discharge
 
  
  criteria (as noted in step 5)
 
  
 ii. If T1/2 >36 hours, increase IV plus PO fluid rate by 0.5x.
 
  
  Continue to repeat Q12 until patient achieves discharge
 
  
  criteria (as noted in step 5)
5. Eligibility for discharge; repeat step 4 until:
 
 a. Patient maintains 1x maintenance fluids orally
 
 b. CK T1/2 is <24 hours
 
 c. Urinalysis is negative for myoglobin
 
 d. Patient exhibits little to no signs or symptoms of clinical
 
  
rhabdomyolysis. 
Fig. 36.4  Treatment algorithm for patients with rhabdomyolysis. ARF, 
acute renal failure; CK, creatine kinase; IV, intravenous; MIVF, mainte­
nance intravenous fluids; NS, normal saline; PO, by mouth; RIFLE, risk, 
injury, failure, loss of kidney function, and end-­stage kidney disease; 
T1/2, half-­life.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
625
CHAPTER 36  Rhabdomyolysis
TABLE 36.6  Inherited Neuromuscular Disorders Associated with Episodes of Rhabdomyolysis*
Gene
Disease Name
Baseline Creatine 
Kinase Levels
Pattern of 
Inheritance
Trigger for Rhabdomyolysis
Disorders of Glycogen Metabolism
PYGM
Glycogen storage disease type V, 
McArdle disease
High
AR
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
PFKM
Glycogen storage disease type VII, Tarui 
disease
High
AR
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
ALDOA
Glycogen storage disease type XII
Normal
AR
Febrile illness, infection
Mild elevation, high
ENO3
Glycogen storage disease type XIII
Normal
AR
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
High
PGAM2
Glycogen storage disease type X
High
AR
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
PGK1
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 deficiency
Normal
X-­linked
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
High
PGM1
Glycogen storage disease type XIV
High
AR
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes, general anesthesia
PHKA1
Glycogen storage disease type IX
?
X-­linked
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise, symptom onset 
within minutes
PHKB
AR
Disorders of Fatty Acid Metabolism
ACADVL
Deficiency of very long-­chain acyl-­CoA 
dehydrogenase
Normal
AR
Fasting, prolonged exercise, cold, infections, fever
High
CPT2
Carnitine palmitoyl-­transferase 
deficiency
Normal
AR
Prolonged exercise, fasting, fever, infection, high 
fat intake, cold exposure, heat, emotional stress, 
drugs
ETFA
Glutaric aciduria type II
Normal
AR
Physical exercise, fasting, irregular diet or infection
ETFB
Multiple acyl-­coenzyme A 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Mildly to moderately 
elevated
ETFDH
Mitochondrial Disorders
COI (MTCO1)
Mitochondrial disorder
Normal
Maternal inheritance
Prolonged or repetitive exercise
COII (MTCO2)
Mitochondrial disorder
Normal
Maternal inheritance
Exercise
COIII (MTCO3)
Mitochondrial disorder
Normal
Maternal inheritance
Prolonged exercise, viral illness, unknown cause
DGUOK
Mitochondrial disorder
?
AR
Viral illness
FDX1L
Mitochondrial disorder
Normal
AR
?After exercise
High
HADHA
Mitochondrial trifunctional protein 
deficiency
Normal
AR
Strenuous physical activity
HADHB
ISCU
Iron–sulfur cluster deficiency myopathy 
(mitochondrial disorder)
?
AR
Exercise
MTCYB
Mitochondrial disorder
Normal
?Sporadic pathogenic 
variants
Exercise
POLG1
One case report of rhabdomyolysis in association with propofol 
infusion syndrome
AD, AR
Propofol infusion syndrome
Disorders of Intramuscular Calcium Release and Excitation–Contraction Coupling
RYR1
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, 
exertional rhabdomyolysis, congenital 
myopathy
Normal or mildly to 
moderately elevated 
(usually <1,000 IU/L)
AD, AR
Heat, infection, alcohol, drugs, anesthetic 
(malignant hyperthermia susceptibility), and 
exercise
Muscular Dystrophies
ANO5
Anoctaminopathy-­5
High
AR
Unprovoked; no trigger has been identified
DMD
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker 
muscular dystrophy
High
X-­linked
Exercise, anesthetic drugs
DYSF
Limb-­girdle muscular dystrophy 2B, 
Miyoshi myopathy
High
AR
Exercise
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
626
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Diagnostic Evaluation
Once a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis is established (see Fig. 36.1 and 
Table 36.4), further evaluation is assessed based on individual clini­
cal findings. For all patients with a clear history of a single episode of 
isolated exertional rhabdomyolysis, no additional evaluation is rec­
ommended. For those with recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis, the 
evaluation should be directed for an underlying disease (see Table 36.6 
and Fig. 36.3). A baseline CK is warranted, but if no other concerning 
features exist, further evaluation is not warranted following an isolated 
event.
Treatment
After the acute episode, it is important to develop an appropriate exer­
cise program. Initially, for 3–4 weeks, strenuous exercise is not rec­
ommended because the myofibers remain damaged. However, a slow 
return to activity, after resolution of any soreness or weakness on exam, 
can help the child recover.
Hospital Follow-­Up
For patients who are following up from presumed exercise-­induced 
rhabdomyolysis, a repeat history of signs and symptoms of an under­
lying cause is warranted. Additionally, reviewing their baseline CK is 
important because elevations in CK would prompt the clinician to look 
for another cause.
INFECTIOUS
Infection is the most common cause of rhabdomyolysis in children 
under the age of 2 years. While there are a large variety of infections, 
viral infections, particularly influenza and enteroviruses, are the most 
common etiologies (see Table 36.5). Any infection producing shock or 
hypoxia may also be associated with high CK levels.
In infectious rhabdomyolysis, the patient often presents with other 
symptoms indicative of their disease (fever, myalgias, rash). In some 
patients with infections and myalgias, consideration of obtaining a CK 
is warranted. However, for patients in the ambulatory setting who are 
not limited in their activities, in whom the myalgias are mild, and who 
have no urine color changes, given the low risk of rhabdomyolysis, this 
may not be necessary. Viral myositis does not always lead to rhabdo­
myolysis. Although there is direct virus infection in the muscle for an 
otherwise healthy patient, the CK level is not as high as in rhabdomy­
olysis, and myoglobinuria is not expected.
In rare cases, there have been reports of asymptomatic patients who 
present with rhabdomyolysis with no infectious symptoms. This is an 
issue in the COVID-­19 pandemic where asymptomatic but infected 
patients are common, thus making the rhabdomyolysis more likely an 
association than causative.
Viral rhabdomyolysis may have a longer time to convalescence 
than other monophasic causes (e.g., exercise-­induced rhabdomy­
olysis) given that the infection’s duration is greater than that of an 
exertional trigger. However, treatment remains the same with the 
goal to avoid renal complications by increasing excretion of the 
by-­products.
TRAUMA
Traumatic rhabdomyolysis includes crush, blast, or electrical injuries, 
ischemia, and/or prolonged immobility.
There should be a documented history of trauma and/or prolonged 
immobility. Crush injuries are more likely to be a cause of rhabdomy­
olysis than other injuries; the injury may be focal rather than a more 
diffuse process.
DRUG/TOXIN
History
Drug-­induced rhabdomyolysis can present in a variety of manners. In 
the setting of recreational drug use, other signs of drug use can be clues. 
However, the list of potential causes is extensive, and each may have other 
associated symptoms (toxidromes) (Table 36.7). Opiates, drugs with sym­
pathomimetic properties, and drugs associated with intense (raving) 
exertion are among the common agents producing rhabdomyolysis.
Evaluation of drug ingestions, intentional or not, and prescrip­
tion medications or over-­the-­counter remedies as well as herbal sup­
plements or toxins is warranted for any patient with rhabdomyolysis 
(Tables 36.7 and 36.8).
Diagnostic Evaluation
For patients presenting without an identifiable etiology for rhabdomy­
olysis, a drug screen is warranted.
TABLE 36.6  Inherited Neuromuscular Disorders Associated with Episodes of 
Rhabdomyolysis—cont’d
Gene
Disease Name
Baseline Creatine 
Kinase Levels
Pattern of 
Inheritance
Trigger for Rhabdomyolysis
FKTN
Fukuyama congenital muscular 
dystrophy
High
AR
One case following the use of halothane and 
succinylcholine
FKRP
Limb-­girdle muscular dystrophy 2I
High
AR
Exercise
Miscellaneous
LPIN1
Phosphatidic acid phosphatase 
deficiency
Normal, high
AR
Febrile illness, anesthesia, and fasting
SIL1
Marinesco-­Sjögren syndrome
Normal, high
AR
Febrile infection
TSEN54
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2
Normal, high
AR
Hyperthermia
TANGO2
Encephalocardiomyopathy
High
AR
Encephalocardiomyopathy crisis
*The table summarizes genes, disease names, baseline serum creatine kinase levels (between acute episodes of rhabdomyolysis), patterns of inher­
itance, and triggers for rhabdomyolysis. Genes commonly associated with rhabdomyolysis episodes are indicated in bold.
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
From Scalco RS, Gardiner AR, Pitceathly RDS, et al. Rhabdomyolysis: a genetic perspective. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015;10:51, Table 1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
627
CHAPTER 36  Rhabdomyolysis
Treatment
Treatment is based upon the exposure. While symptomatic manage­
ment is available for some toxins and drugs, in most cases these will 
not affect the rhabdomyolysis. When possible, removal of the exposure 
is warranted.
Autoimmune
Autoimmune diseases are not common causes of rhabdomyolysis 
but more so of subacute or chronic elevations of CK. Autoimmune 
myositis is associated with elevated CK. The progression correlates 
better to a slow decline of strength, often in proximal muscles. In 
addition, the patients may have the heliotrope rash as well as telan­
giectasias, photosensitivity, and/or extensor joint violaceous or red 
rashes (Gottron papules). Because these can be vasculitic diseases, 
often there are nailbed capillary changes. The best known of the 
pediatric autoimmune myositides is dermatomyositis; other sub­
types exist including lupus myositis and idiopathic inflammatory 
myopathies.
Patients often have a proximal weakness but are less likely to have 
pain in the muscles. Additionally, atrophy can be indicative of a more 
chronic process. Other signs of autoimmune disease such as rash, joint 
pain, and/or systemic disease can be indicative of a more generalized 
systemic process.
The evaluation for autoimmune myositis differs from other causes 
of rhabdomyolysis in that the muscle biopsy is often a key component. 
Given the process is subacute to chronic, the typical nonspecific mus­
cle breakdown seen in rhabdomyolysis that would contraindicate the 
biopsy is not present. The addition of rheumatologic studies such as an 
antinuclear antibody (ANA) as well as muscle-­specific antibodies can 
be helpful in determining the etiology (Table 36.9).
TABLE 36.7  Drugs with Known Associations with Rhabdomyolysis
Recreational/Misused Drugs
Cocaine
Heroin
Ethanol
Amphetamines
LSD
Phencyclidine
Mushrooms
Ecstasy
Neuroleptic/Antipsychotic
Succinylcholine
Propofol
Valproic acid (in patients with CPT II)
Fenfluramine
Lithium
Haloperidol
Fluphenazine
Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Cyclic antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Antibiotics
Fluoroquinolones
Pyrazinamide
Trimethoprim/sulfonamide
Amphotericin B
Itraconazole
Daptomycin
Isoniazid
Pentamidine
Others
Amiodarone
Arsenic trioxide
Emetine
ε-Aminocaproic acid (Amicar)
Lamotrigine
Nicotinic acid
Vasopressin (from ischemia)
Zidovudine
Hemlock
Acetaminophen
Baclofen
Caffeine
Chloral hydrate
Colchicine fibric acid derivatives (bezafibrate, clofibrate, fenofibrate, gemfibrozil)
Quinine
Corticosteroids
Statins (atorvastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, 
simvastatin, cerivastatin)
Theophylline
Benzodiazepines
Antihistamines
Phenylpropanolamine
Ephedra
Proton pump inhibitors
Ritodrine
Vincristine
Salicylates
TABLE 36.8  Toxins with Known 
Associations with Rhabdomyolysis
Buffalo and burbot fish
Birds who eat hemlock: hemlock herbs from quail eggs
Kidney beans
Snake venom (coral, cobra, viper, rattlesnake)
Insect (hornet, African bee, honey bee, and others)
Tricholoma equestre (mushroom)
Carbon monoxide (CO)
Spider venom
Heavy metals
Pesticides
Cyanide
Toluene
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
628
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Treatment
The treatment of autoimmune myositis includes immunosuppressing and/
or immunomodulating agents. Corticosteroids are initiated before tran­
sitioning the patient to steroid-­sparing agents, often azathioprine, meth­
otrexate, or mycophenolate mofetil, depending upon the disease process.
MUSCLE DISEASE
The muscle diseases include the muscular dystrophies and myopathies. 
In the muscular dystrophies, the pathology is associated with dysfunc­
tion in the genes that are part of the scaffolding of the muscle membrane 
and connecting to the surrounding extracellular matrix. The myopathies 
are often due to dysfunction in a component of the contractile apparatus. 
The dystrophies often have hyperCKemia at baseline, whereas the myop­
athies do not. However, there are many diseases in these categories with 
possible overlap and differentiation can be difficult.
The risk of malignant hyperthermia is not ubiquitous in all muscle 
disease, but, unless a specific variant analysis is determined, it is saf­
est to use malignant hyperthermia precautions for any anesthesia in a 
known or suspected patient with muscle disease.
Dystrophinopathy
Dystrophin is an X-­linked gene that links the internal contractile apparatus 
of the myofiber to the sarcolemma, where it connects with other struc­
tural proteins that eventually anchor the cell to the extracellular matrix. A 
defect in this protein results in a progressive muscle disease. There is a large 
phenotypic variation in which the mildest males with the disease with the 
slowest progression are able to ambulate into their adult years, while the 
more severely affected males will lose the ability to walk by age 10–12 years 
and die in their late teens to early 20s without treatment. Differentiation 
of this disease is between Becker muscular dystrophy for those males who 
continue to walk after the age of 12 years and Duchenne muscular dystro­
phy for those who lose the ability to walk prior to 12 years of age; ∼30% 
of males will have some cognitive deficits. Females may also present with 
milder symptoms that range from mild cardiac disease in adult years to 
rarely female children with similar features to the male counterpart.
Patients with dystrophinopathy have baseline hyperCKemia (some­
times up to 40,000 IU/L); they are also at risk for rhabdomyolysis. Rhabdo­
myolysis may be confused with myalgias and an increase in their already 
high CK due to muscle activity; dark urine suggests rhabdomyolysis.
Patients rarely present with rhabdomyolysis as an initial manifes­
tation after exercise. In the patient with an undiagnosed but possible 
muscle disease, a family history is very important because 65% of cases 
of dystrophinopathy are inherited. For males, this is often from asymp­
tomatic mothers, but there may be a distant family history of a young 
male who died of a muscle disease in the family.
In a patient presenting with rhabdomyolysis who has, or is sus­
pected of having, a dystrophinopathy, the males often have calf pseudo­
hypertrophy from fatty infiltrates. While during an acute episode of 
rhabdomyolysis it may be difficult to differentiate baseline weakness 
from weakness from the rhabdomyolysis, the patients often present 
with proximal muscle weakness between the ages of 3 and 5 years.
The diagnostic evaluation of a patient with rhabdomyolysis and 
possible underlying dystrophinopathy begins with a baseline CK as 
an outpatient because all male patients with dystrophinopathy have 
hyperCKemia at baseline. While other muscular dystrophies can also 
cause hyperCKemia, dystrophinopathies have the highest incidence in 
young males. In young females, symptomatic carriers of dystrophinop­
athies at a young age are less common than some of the other muscle 
diseases such as the dysferlinopathies or other limb-­girdle muscular 
dystrophies. The use of genetic muscle disease panel testing after the 
result of an elevated baseline CK can offer rapid diagnostic testing.
Other Muscular Dystrophies
Other muscular dystrophies can also present with rhabdomyolysis. In 
these cases, the specific gene and genetic change can direct the phe­
notype further (see Tables 36.2 and 36.6 and Fig. 36.3). The pattern of 
muscle weakness, age of onset, and progression can vary between many 
of these diseases and may be used to better phenotype the patients. In 
some patients, rhabdomyolysis may be the presenting event; these dis­
orders include fukutin-­related protein muscular dystrophy, anoctami­
nopathy, dysferlinopathy, caveolinopathy, and calpainopathy. Exercise 
or a febrile illness may be precipitating events.
MYOPATHIES
RYR1 and Malignant Hyperthermia
RYR1-­related myopathy has a broad phenotypic presentation. In the 
mildest cases, variants in this gene present only with malignant hyper­
thermia when given an inciting anesthetic; other patients can present 
TABLE 36.9  Myositis-­Specific and Myositis-­Associated Autoantibodies
Type of Autoantibodies
Myositis-­Specific Antibodies (MSAs)
Myositis-­Associated 
Antibodies (MAAs)
Other Autoantibodies 
Often Found in Myositis
Autoantibody specificities
Classic MSAs: Jo-­1, PL-­7, PL-­12, EJ, OJ, Mi-­2, SRP
PM-­Scl, Ku, U1RNP, U1/U2RNP, 
U3RNP
Ro52, Ro60, Su/Ago2
New antibodies that can be considered MSAs: KS, 
TIF1γ/α, TIF1β, MJ/NXP-­2, MDA5/CADM-­140, SAE
—
—
Association with SARDs
PM/DM, PM/DM overlap syndrome
PM/DM, PM/DM overlap syndrome, 
SSc, SLE
Various SARDs
Detection in non-­PM/DM
Uncommon (anti-­ARS can be in overlap syndrome and 
idiopathic ILD)
Not uncommon
Often
Association with myopathy 
when found in non-­PM/DM
Yes
Yes
No or not established
Prevalence in general 
population
Almost none
PM-­Scl, Ku, U1/U2RNP—almost 
none; U1RNP, ∼0.1%
Relatively common (0.5–1%)
DM, dermatomyositis; ILD, interstitial lung disease; PM, polymyositis; SARDs, systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases; SLE, systemic lupus erythe­
matosus; SSc, scleroderma, systemic sclerosis. 
From Satoh M, Tanaka S, Ceribelli A, et al. A comprehensive overview on myositis-­specific antibodies: new and old biomarkers in idiopathic 
inflammatory myopathy. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2017;52(1):1–19 (Table 1, p. 2).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
629
CHAPTER 36  Rhabdomyolysis
with severe respiratory and muscle weakness as a newborn infant. 
However, at baseline there is often no hyperCKemia.
In patients with RYR1-­myopathy-­associated rhabdomyolysis with 
malignant hyperthermia, lactic acidosis and hyperthermia are often 
found; this may not be the case in exertional rhabdomyolysis. Malig­
nant hyperthermia is associated with volatile anesthetics and depolar­
izing agents.
For patients with exertional RYR1 rhabdomyolysis, the features are 
similar to those with exercise-­induced rhabdomyolysis; in addition, 
there may be features of an underlying muscle disease such as ptosis, 
proximal muscle weakness, and/or difficulty keeping up with their 
peers. Recurrent symptoms congruent with possible rhabdomyolysis 
or myalgias are also possible clues in patients with otherwise normal 
baseline examinations.
A family history of weakness, malignant hyperthermia, or exer­
tional myalgias is also helpful in making this diagnosis.
For patients with malignant hyperthermia–related muscle disease, 
immediate consideration for a broad muscle disease genetic panel 
can be helpful. RYR1 is a large gene with a high degree of commonly 
occurring variants. This complicates the interpretation of variants 
identified through gene sequencing, and it is important to provide the 
family with the most current information regarding a variant identified 
through testing.
The treatment of malignant hyperthermia differs somewhat from 
that of typical rhabdomyolysis because there are continued concerns 
about intense muscle contractions perpetuating the disease; the RYR1 
gene is involved with calcium influx and, thus, avoiding continued 
depolarization is needed. The first step is to avoid the inciting agent. 
Dantrolene is beneficial with or without cooling. Avoiding β blockers 
as well as calcium and calcium antagonists is recommended to help 
stop perpetuate the mechanism of injury.
GLYCOGEN METABOLISM/MCARDLE DISEASE
There are a variety of glycogen storage diseases associated with 
rhabdomyolysis, with the best-­known being McArdle disease, also 
known as myophosphorylase deficiency (see Fig. 36.3 and Tables 
36.2 and 36.6).
Patients with McArdle disease often describe intolerance to brief 
intense exercise but do better with moderate exercise; they will describe 
cramping and muscle swelling. After the patient develops acute myal­
gias, they will be able to have further activity (the “second-­wind phe­
nomenon”) if they take a brief rest. However, this is not found in every 
patient. Weakness in childhood is not common and is mild, if present.
The baseline CK is often elevated above baseline even when at rest. 
The electromyogram and nerve conduction studies can have myopathic 
features in some, but not all, patients. Genetic testing is the standard of 
care in diagnosing this disease.
Carnitine Palmitoyl Transferase II Deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyl transferase II (CPT II) deficiency is an autosomal 
recessive disease that presents in various forms. The myopathic form 
will have little to no symptoms prior to the onset of rhabdomyolysis. 
Patients may have some mild myalgias with activity but will often pres­
ent in an acute decompensation from exercise, cold, fasting, valproate 
usage, or anesthesia. The infantile form is more severe and is a hepato-­
cardio-­muscular systemic disorder presenting with hepatomegaly, 
hypoglycemia, hypotonia, cardiomyopathy, and seizures.
Patients with CPT II disease have normal CK levels at rest. This is a 
disease of recurrence presenting with episodes of rhabdomyolysis and 
a history of myalgias or cramping. Analysis of serum acylcarnitines 
and total free carnitine is warranted; there is a high ratio of palmitoyl­
carnitine (C16:0) + oleoylcarnitine (C18:1))/acetylcarnitine (C2) with 
normal serum carnitine.
Systemic Disease
This category includes hypokalemic as well as thyroid storming or 
hypothyroidism-­associated rhabdomyolysis. Given that thyroid-­
associated rhabdomyolysis is very rare, unless other features are sug­
gestive, it is not warranted to screen every patient who presents with 
rhabdomyolysis without other features.
Mitochondrial and Fatty Acid Oxidation Defects
Mitochondrial diseases may have chronic symptoms including other 
neurologic features, cardiac disease, and weakness (see Tables 36.2 
and 36.6). Given the potential heterogeneous presentations of primary 
mitochondrial diseases, a broad array of multisystem symptoms should 
be considered as variations in presentation are significant.
The diagnostic evaluation often begins with biochemical testing 
and in the acute stage this is warranted. In these patients, sending 
serum lactic acid, pyruvic acid, ammonia, very long-­chain fatty acids, 
an acylcarnitine profile, total and free carnitine, and urine organic 
acids is appropriate in the acute phase.
Presumed Isolated HyperCKemia
Elevated CK levels in an otherwise asymptomatic patient may be an 
incidental finding (idiopathic) or an early preclinical manifestation of 
a muscle disease. These latter disorders include muscular dystrophy 
(especially female carriers), other mitochondrial myopathies, myoad­
enylate deaminase deficiency, caveolinopathies, desmin-­related myop­
athies, and inflammatory myositis. Strenuous exercise within 7 days of 
testing may also produce elevated CK levels.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Rhabdomyolysis is a pathologic process that is the end result from either 
structural or energy depletion of myocytes. The treatment focuses on 
protecting the kidneys and other organs from secondary damage from 
the released intracellular substances into the serum by use of appropriate 
hydration as well as glucose in patients with suspected metabolic disease.
While most causes of rhabdomyolysis are due to exercise or infec­
tion, being aware of signs that may indicate an underlying disease 
is important and this would warrant treatment. Often, the use of 
a baseline (at rest and postevent) CK can help differentiate between 
groups of muscle diseases and help direct further evaluation. Recurrent 
episodes, a personal or family history (cramping, prolonged postex­
ercise muscle soreness), decompensation or death during surgery 
(anesthesia), calf pseudohypertrophy, muscle wasting, being unable to 
keep up with peers, hepatic–cardiac–central nervous system dysfunc­
tion, and persistent elevations of CK after recovery strongly suggest an 
underlying genetic etiology.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
629.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Medical Association. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment. 6th ed. 2007:510.
Baird MF, Graham SM, Baler JS, Bickerstaff GF. Creatine-­kinase-­and 
exercise-­related muscle damage implications for muscle performance 
and recovery. J Nutr Metab. 2012:2012. |Article ID 960363 | https://doi.
org/10.1155/2012/960363.
Brancaccio P, Maffulli N, Limongelli FM. Creatine kinase monitoring in sport 
medicine. Br Med Bull. 2007;81–82:209–230.
Chamberlain MC. Rhabdomyolysis in children: a 3-­year retrospective study. 
Pediatr Neurol. 1991;7(3):226–22.
Chan EK, Kornberg AJ, Ryan MM. A diagnostic approach to recurrent myalgia 
and rhabdomyolysis in children. Arch Dis Child. 2015;100(8):793–797.
Chavez LO, Leon M, Einav S, et al. Beyond muscle destruction: a systematic 
review of rhabdomyolysis for clinical practice. Crit Care. 2016;20(1):135.
Chen CY, Lin YR, Zhao LL, et al. Clinical spectrum of rhabdomyolysis 
presented to pediatric emergency department. BMC Pediatr. 2013;13:134.
Conable KM, Rosner AL. A narrative review of manual muscle testing and 
implications for muscle testing research. J Chiropr Med. 2011;10(3):157–165.
Elsayed EF, Reilly RF. Rhabdomyolysis: a review, with emphasis on the 
pediatric population. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010;25(1):7–18.
Gelbart B, DeMarco R, David Hussey A, et al. Rhabdomyolysis in a tertiary 
PICU: a 10-­year study. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2018;19(1):e51–e57.
Giannoglou GD, Chatzizisis YS, Misirli G. The syndrome of rhabdomyolysis: 
pathophysiology and diagnosis. Eur J Intern Med. 2007;18(2):90–100.
Kendall FP, Kendall McCreary E, Provance PG. Muscles—Testing and Function. 
4th ed. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins; 1993:179–190.
Lahoria R, Milone M. Rhabdomyolysis featuring muscular dystrophies. J 
Neurosci. 2016;361:29–33.
Lalani SR, Liu P, Rosenfeld JA, et al. Recurrent muscle weakness with 
rhabdomyolysis, metabolic crises, and cardia arrhythmia due to bi-­allelic 
TANGO2 mutations. Am J Hum Genetics. 2016;98:347–357.
Mannix R, Tan ML, Wright R, et al. Acute pediatric rhabdomyolysis: causes 
and rates of renal failure. Pediatrics. 2006;118(5):2119–2125.
Pestronk A. Neuromuscular Disease Center. 2020. Available from: https://
neuromuscular.wustl.edu/msys/myoglob.html.
Quinlivan R, Buckley J, James M, et al. McArdle disease: a clinical review. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 2010;81:1182–1188.
Rider LG, Nistala K. The juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: 
pathogenesis, clinical and autoantibody phenotypes, and outcomes. J Intern 
Med. 2016;280(1):24–38.
Satoh M, Tanaka S, Ceribelli A, et al. A comprehensive overview of myositis-­
specific antibodies: new and old biomarkers in idiopathic inflammatory 
myopathy. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2017;52(1):1–19.
Scalco RS, Gardiner AR, Pitceathly RDS, et al. Rhabdomyolysis: a genetic 
review. Orphan J Rare Dis. 2015;10:51.
Schneiderbanger D, Johannsen S, Roewer N, et al. Management of 
malignant hyperthermia: diagnosis and treatment. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 
2014;10:355–362.
Stahl K, Rastelli E, Schoser B. A systematic review on the definition of 
rhabdomyolysis. J Neurol. 2020;267(4):877–882. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00415-­019-­09185-­4.
Szugye HS. Pediatric rhabdomyolysis. Pediatr Rev. 2020;41(6):265–275.
Topçu Y, Bayram E, Karaoğlu P, et al. Carnitine palmitoyl transferase II 
deficiency in an adolescent presenting with rhabdomyolysis and acute 
renal failure. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2014;30(5):343–344.
Topçu Y, Bayram E, Karaoğlu P, et al. Importance of acylcarnitine profile 
analysis for disorders of lipid metabolism in adolescent patients with 
recurrent rhabdomyolysis: report of two cases. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 
2014;17(4):437–440.
Torres PA, Helmstetter JA, Kaye AM, et al. Rhabdomyolysis: pathogenesis, 
diagnosis, and treatment. Ochsner J. 2015;15(1):58–69.
Wu CT, Huang JL, Lin JJ, et al. Factors associated with nontraumatic 
rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure of children in Taiwan population. 
Pediatr Emerg Care. 2009;25(10):657–660.
Yang Y, Carter LP, Cook RE, et al. A case of exertional rhabdomyolysis: a cheer 
for standardizing inpatient management and prevention. Hosp Pediatr. 
2016;6(12):753–756.
Yao Z, Yuan P, Hong S, et al. Clinical features of acute rhabdomyolysis in 55 
pediatric patients. Front Pediatr. 2020;8:539.
Zimmerman JL, Shen MC. Rhabdomyolysis. Chest. 2013;144(3):1058–1065.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
