862
The incidence of pediatric back pain increases with age and has a prev­
alence of nearly 40% by 18 years of age. While back pain is often related 
to overuse in sports, work, or a specific traumatic event, it may also be 
idiopathic, infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic, or secondary to ana­
tomic lesions. While back pain may be mild and resolve spontaneously 
in athletically active adolescents, back pain in younger children is more 
unusual and may suggest significant disease (tumor, infection). Per­
sistent back pain in children necessitates a thorough evaluation to rule 
out disorders that can result in significant morbidity, such as infection 
or tumor. Back pain is not a disease but a symptom and is often asso­
ciated in adolescents with headaches, emotional problems, daytime 
tiredness, and behavioral disorders. Activity modification and rehabil­
itation or exercises for the spine may help reduce risk for recurrent 
episodes. Severe or persistent back pain necessitates a thorough history, 
physical examination, and appropriate imaging studies to evaluate the 
child for potentially serious pathologic processes.
NORMAL ANATOMY, GROWTH, AND 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SPINE
The back is often defined as the area from the first thoracic vertebra to 
the top of the sacrum. The spinal column is composed of vertebral bodies 
that articulate with each other through intervertebral disks. Each verte­
bral body has a posterior arch, which includes the spinal and transverse 
processes, as well as the articulation of the superior and inferior facets.
Vertebral growth occurs in an orderly manner throughout child­
hood and adolescence. About 50% of vertebral column height is pres­
ent by the age of 2 years. Each vertebral body contains superior and 
inferior growth plates, which typically ossify at approximately 4 years 
of age and close in late adolescence. Acceleration of vertebral growth 
occurs during the adolescent growth spurt but contributes less to total 
height than does lower limb growth; the sitting heights of siblings in 
early and late adolescence are often remarkably similar. Spinal growth 
slows at menarche in girls and at the time of voice change in boys and 
is usually complete 2–3 years later. Developmental abnormalities of 
the column, such as idiopathic scoliosis, most commonly first appear 
just before the growth spurt. Alterations in spinal configuration caused 
by congenital deformities of vertebral segments change most rapidly 
during periods of rapid spinal growth: before the age of 2 years and at 
the time of the adolescent growth spurt.
There is a strong association of genitourinary, neurologic, gastro­
intestinal, and dermatologic system abnormalities in patients with 
congenital abnormalities of the spine. Warning signs of more systemic 
pathology in patients with congenital spine deformities include leg 
length inequality, foot size asymmetry, high foot arches, hairy patches 
or hemangiomas or a mass over the spine, sacral dimpling, enuresis, 
toe-­walking, asymmetry or abnormality in the lower extremity deep 
tendon reflexes, and lower extremity weakness.
NORMAL SPINAL ALIGNMENT
The normal trunk is symmetric when viewed from the front or the back 
(Fig. 46.1). The shoulders and pelvis are parallel to each other and to the 
ground. The distance between the right and left elbows and the sides of the 
trunk is equal. When the trunk is viewed from the side, a series of curves 
is present (see Fig. 46.1). A convex anterior lordotic curve is present in the 
cervical region. The thoracic spine is concave anteriorly in a kyphotic pat­
tern. The normal lumbar spine is lordotic, and the sacrum and coccygeal 
regions are kyphotic. Normal adult sagittal alignment develops gradually; 
children younger than 10 years typically have less cervical lordosis and more 
lumbar lordosis than adults. Injuries, infections, tumors, inflammation, and 
developmental abnormalities of the spine often produce alterations in these 
expected contours. Range of motion is demonstrated in Fig. 46.2.
EVALUATION OF THE PEDIATRIC SPINE
Examination of the spine should be part of the routine physical exam­
ination in the healthy child and adolescent. Patients presenting with a 
chief complaint of back pain require a detailed history and thorough 
physical examination (Table 46.1).
When findings on screening examinations are abnormal or when a 
patient presents with complaints of back pain, a more detailed exam­
ination is required. The spinal vertebral column, spinal cord, and spi­
nal nerves are intimately related, and disorders affecting any of these 
elements may produce symptoms and signs in the others. Detailed 
examination of strength in the muscles of the spine and lower extrem­
ities (Fig. 46.3), sensation (Fig. 46.4), abdominal and lower extremity 
reflexes, anal sphincter tone, and perianal sensation should be per­
formed when the primary examination suggests involvement of the 
neural structures that pass through the spinal column.
BACK PAIN OF BRIEF DURATION
In children younger than 10 years of age, extremity injuries are more 
common than back pain related to routine play and organized sports 
activities. When the trunk is involved, contusions and abrasions are 
much more common than ligament sprains and muscle strains.
When a child presents with back pain of brief duration after a play-­ 
or sports-­related injury, a careful examination should be performed. If 
there are no other associated injuries and the screening examination 
shows no alterations in trunk configuration or lower extremity strength 
or sensation (see Figs. 46.3 and 46.4), no further work-­up is necessary. 
A brief period of rest for 1–2 days, followed by gradual resumption of 
activities, is appropriate treatment. Imaging studies are not necessary 
when the duration of symptoms is short and the physical examination 
findings are normal. Signs of systemic illness (fever, weight loss) or 
neurologic deficits warrant an immediate, more in-­depth evaluation.
Back Pain
Kevin D. Walter
46
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
863
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
Acute back injuries occur more frequently in adolescence, as the 
sizes of participants and potential forces generated in recreational activ­
ities increase. If there are no other associated injuries and the screen­
ing examination findings are normal, no further imaging work-­up is 
necessary. A brief period of rest followed by gradual resumption of 
activities remains appropriate treatment. The importance of a com­
prehensive and balanced conditioning exercise program should be 
stressed to young athletes. Sport-­related injuries can be reduced by 
preparticipation conditioning, appropriate warm-­up, careful supervi­
sion, and resting when fatigued.
Trauma sufficient to cause acute spine fractures may occur because 
of motor vehicle or bicycle crashes, falls, and diving and gymnastic 
injuries. The frequency and severity of spine trauma rises in later ado­
lescence as exposure to these events increases. In such cases, there is 
a clear relationship between the trauma and the onset of symptoms. 
Injury to the spinal column should be suspected in all individuals 
whose level of consciousness is impaired after a crash or sports injury, 
regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms.
Children with suspected acute spinal injury should be immobilized 
on backboards designed for children until definitive imaging studies 
can be performed and interpreted. Immobilization of the child’s cervi­
cal spine on a solid backboard should be avoided. The child’s occiput 
projects farther posteriorly than an adult’s, causing cervical flexion if 
the child’s neck is immobilized on a standard backboard. Spinal immo­
bilization boards for children are readily available and have a cut-­out 
section to accommodate the occiput. When such boards are not avail­
able, a blanket or firm mattress should be interposed between the trunk 
and the backboard to prevent neck flexion.
PERSISTENT BACK PAIN
Persistent or severe back pain is uncommon in young children but is 
more common in athletically active adolescents. Mechanical low back 
pain is said to be present in the patient with no definable pathology 
on physical exam or imaging studies, but frequent exam findings 
include tight hamstrings, poor posture, weak core musculature, and 
discomfort with paraspinal muscle palpation. This is the situation in 
over 50% of patients presenting with low back pain. The implications 
of severe or persistent back pain are more serious in younger patients 
than in adolescents. Persistent back pain in young children is usually 
not the result of a congenital spinal deformity or developmental dis­
orders of the spine but may be due to infection or tumor. As a child 
enters and passes through the adolescent growth spurt, back pain may 
arise from a small number of congenital and developmental disor­
ders of the spinal column. Degenerative disorders of the spine such 
as intervertebral disk herniation are uncommon causes of back pain 
A
D
E
F
B
C
L
 
O
 
R
 
D
 
O
 
S
 
I
 
S
Fig. 46.1  A, Normal posture with normal lumbar lordosis. B, Exaggerated lumbar lordosis caused by pelvic 
tilting. C, “Paunchy” posture. D, Spastic scoliosis caused by muscle spasm. E, Normal posture without scolio­
sis. F, The normal orientation of the lumbar spine is that of mild lordosis. Exaggerated lordosis may predispose 
the patient to mechanical back pain. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:908.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 46.2  Back range of motion. A, Flexion. Note the normal reversal of lumbar lordosis during flexion (arrow). 
B, Extension. C, Persistent lordosis during back flexion as a result of muscle spasm (arrow). D, Lateral flexion. 
E, Lateral torsion (rotation). (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1991:909.)
TABLE 46.1  Guidelines for Primary Examination of the Back
History
Is there a history of back pain? If so, what is the:
Frequency?
Duration?
Relationship to activity?
Antecedent trauma?
Is there associated pain in the legs?
Is there incontinence or enuresis?
Is walking painful?
Have there been systemic signs of chronic illness?
Is there a family history of deformity?
Is there a family history of disc disease?
Physical Examination
General Appearance and Palpation
Are the right and left sides of the trunk symmetric?
Are there hairy patches, nevi, sinuses, or dimpling over the midline of the spine?
Are the pelvis and shoulders level?
Is there normal kyphosis and lordosis?
On forward bending, is a rib hump present?
Is there muscle atrophy?
Is there localized tenderness?
Motion
Can the patient easily bend forward and touch their toes?
Is there pain with range of motion?
Is normal hamstring flexibility present?
Is the gait normal?
Lower Extremities
Are leg lengths equal?
Is strength normal in the major motor groups of the lower limbs?
Is sensation normal in the lower limbs?
Are reflexes normal at the knees and ankles?
Are pathologic reflexes present?
What is the response to straight leg and cross straight leg raising maneuvers?
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
865
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
in childhood. In evaluating a patient, it is important to try to distin­
guish musculoskeletal-­mechanical disorders from those with more 
generalized systemic signs or those suggestive of a neoplasia (Fig. 
46.5). Concerns for neoplastic or infectious etiologies herald the need 
for advanced imaging; if the MRI shows no definitive pathology, then 
patients are considered to have mechanical low back pain. Pediatric 
multidisciplinary pain clinics also help those who have persistent pain 
that is not responding to usual treatment.
Differential Diagnosis (Table 46.2)
The differential diagnosis for pediatric back pain varies with age. In 
neonates and infants, infection, neoplasm, and nonaccidental trauma 
should be considered. As patients age, it becomes easier to obtain a his­
tory and physical exam. In children younger than 10 years, there is still 
heightened concern for both bone and hematologic neoplasm (osteo­
blastoma, leukemia, lymphoma). Infectious disorders like spondylo­
diskitis (diskitis and osteomyelitis) tend to be more localized. At this 
time, rheumatologic disorders may begin to appear. In older children 
and adolescents, infectious, neoplastic, and rheumatologic disorders 
should remain in the differential diagnosis list. Congenital and devel­
opmental variations in the formation of the spine may cause back pain. 
Most commonly, the period of rapid growth and increase in physical 
activity and athletics results in a greater frequency of musculoskeletal 
injuries (strains, stress fractures, disk pathology).
Hip
Knee
Foot
Inversion   Eversion
Ankle
L4
S1
L5
L4, 5
S1, 2
L2, 3
L3, 4
L4, 5
L5, S1
Fig. 46.3  Motor control of the lower extremity. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:926.)
L2
Obturator
L2
L1
L3
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve
Peroneal
Posterior
cutaneous
Femoral
Peroneal
Femoral
L3
L4
L4
L4
L5
L5
L5
L5
L5
S1
Cutaneous branch of tibial (sciatic) nerve
S1
S2
A
B
Fig. 46.4  Sensory innervation of the lower extremity. A, Peripheral nerve innervation. B, Dermatomal (root) 
innervation. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1991:927.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
866
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
SPECIFIC DIAGNOSES
Spondylodiskitis
Diskitis and vertebral osteomyelitis represent a single bacterial infec­
tious process involving both the disk space and the adjacent vertebral 
bodies (Fig. 46.6). Spondylodiskitis is most common in toddlers and 
in early adolescence. Diskitis may begin as a microabscess within the 
vertebral body adjacent to the vertebral end plate. The disk becomes 
infected from perforating vascular channels across the end plate. Vas­
cular channels may also perforate the end plate on the opposite side of 
the disk, leading to involvement of the opposite vertebral body.
Most commonly, diskitis is a bacterial infection, usually caused 
by Staphylococcus aureus. Other pathogens include Kingella and Bru­
cella organisms. Mycobacterium tuberculosis should be considered in 
patients who have spent significant time outside the United States, in 
patients who have recently immigrated, or in high-­risk, immunocom­
promised patients (Fig. 46.7).
Clinical Findings
Three age-­dependent patterns of presentation have been noted for 
spondylodiskitis. Children younger than 3 years (the most common 
age) often present with irritability and refusal to walk and sit, and may 
have apparent dysfunction (limp, antalgic gait) of the lower extremi­
ties. Patients may have loss of lumbar lordosis (the lumbar spine is the 
most common site) and refusal to allow passive motion of the lum­
bar spine. Patients between the ages of 3 and 8 years often have pain 
Nonspecific back
pain
Negative
MRI
BACK PAIN
History, physical exam,
blood tests
Negative
x-rays
Positive
x-rays
Intermittent pain
only
Constant, night, or
radicular pain, and/or
abnormal neurologic
exam
MRI
Positive
MRI
Specific
diagnosis
Treat with rest,
PT, and/or NSAID
Treat as
diagnosed
Fig. 46.5  Pediatric back pain algorithm for children 4 years of age and 
older. NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PT, physical ther­
apy. (From Feldman D, Straight J, Badra M, et  al. Evaluation of an 
algorithmic approach to pediatric back pain. J Pediatr Orthop. 2006;26:
353–357.)
TABLE 46.2  Differential Diagnosis of Back Pain
Inflammatory and Infectious Diseases
Spondylodiskitis: diskitis* and vertebral osteomyelitis (pyogenic, tuberculosis)
Spinal epidural abscess
Transverse myelitis
Pyelonephritis*
Perinephric abscess
Pancreatitis
Paravertebral muscle abscess, myositis
Psoas abscess
Endocarditis
Pelvic osteomyelitis or myositis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Rheumatologic Diseases
Pauciarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis*
Reactive arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Psoriatic arthritis
Ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease
Fibromyalgia, fibrositis
Developmental Diseases
Spondylolysis (in adolescence)*
Spondylolisthesis (in adolescence)*
Scheuermann syndrome (in adolescence)*
Lumbar Scheuermann syndrome
Scoliosis
Chiari malformation type 1 with or without syringomyelia
Spinal dysraphism
Mechanical Trauma and Abnormalities
Muscle strain/sprain*
Overuse syndromes (common with athletic training and in gymnasts and dancers)*
Hip/pelvic anomalies
Herniated disk
Juvenile osteoporosis (rare)
Vertebral stress fractures
Apophyseal ring fracture
Lumbosacral sprain*
Seatbelt injury
Trauma (direct injury; e.g., motor vehicle crash)*
Strain from heavy backpacks
Neoplastic Diseases
Primary vertebral tumors (osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Metastatic tumor (neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma)
Primary spinal tumor (astrocytoma, ependymoma, lipoma, cysts)
Malignancy of bone marrow (ALL, lymphoma)
Benign tumors (eosinophilic granuloma, osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma, 
aneurysmal bone cyst)
Other
Disk space calcification (idiopathic, S/P diskitis)
Conversion reaction
Sickle cell anemia*
Nephrolithiasis
Hemolysis (acute)
Hematocolpos
S/P lumbar puncture
*Common.
ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia; S/P, status post.
Modified from Behrman R, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:711.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
867
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
referred to the abdomen, particularly when the disk involves the lower 
thoracic spine. Preteens and adolescents (next most common age) with 
diskitis often have back pain; the discomfort often radiates into both 
legs. Additional features at all ages include fever in ∼50%; refusal to 
bear weight (sitting or standing); refusal to bend forward; and, if intra­
spinal inflammation is present, decreased lower extremity muscle tone 
and strength, and alterations of deep tendon reflexes. Both S. aureus 
and tuberculosis may also involve adjacent paravertebral soft tissue 
abscesses (psoas, iliopsoas muscles).
Radiographs of the spine in nontuberculosis disease may be nor­
mal early in the disease. Over about 3 to 4 weeks, radiographs may 
reveal disk space narrowing with subsequent erosion and sclerosis of 
the vertebral end plates. Radiographic findings often lag behind clini­
cal presentation with diskitis. MRI is the definitive imaging study (see 
Figs. 46.6 and 46.7). The MRI reveals the extent of the inflammatory 
process better and can delineate the degree of bone destruction (if 
any), the presence of paravertebral or epidural abscess formation, or 
intraspinal inflammation. Tuberculous spondylodiskitis (Pott disease) 
often has multiple levels of vertebral involvement as well as noncontig­
uous lesions, while bacterial spondylodiskitis usually involves one disk 
space and the adjacent vertebral bodies. CBC is normal in ∼50%; how­
ever, the ESR is elevated in >90%. Blood culture should be obtained as 
well, but this is also usually negative. If positive, a blood culture can 
help identify appropriate antibiotic treatment.
A
B
C
T 12
L 1
T 12
L 1
D
E
Fig. 46.6  Diskitis/osteomyelitis in a 15-­month-­old female with abnormal gait and concern for intraspinal 
mass. A, Lateral spine radiographs demonstrate narrowing of the T12–L1 intervertebral disk space (arrow). 
B, Axial noncontrast CT of the spine demonstrates irregularity to the vertebral end plates (arrows). Sagittal 
T2-­weighted (C) and sagittal fat-­saturated postcontrast T1-­weighted (D) images and axial postcontrast T1-­
weighted MRI (E) of the thoracolumbar junction demonstrate loss of height of the T12–L1 intervertebral disk 
space with T2 prolongation of the adjacent end plates (arrows in C), with corresponding abnormal enhance­
ment in the same regions (arrows in D) and surrounding masslike soft tissue enhancement (arrowheads in 
E). (From Rothenberg Maddocks AB, Pollock AN. Infections of the spine and spinal cord. In: Coley BD, ed. 
Caffery’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:421, Fig. 44.7.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
868
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
A
B
C
D
Fig. 46.7  Tuberculous osteomyelitis in a 13-­year-­old female with progressive loss of strength and coordi­
nation in legs. Sagittal reformatted (A) and axial soft tissue window (B) images from a CT of the spine, and 
sagittal (C) and coronal (D) fat-­saturated postcontrast T1-­weighted MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrate 
marked kyphosis at site of bony collapse at the level of the midthoracic spine (arrows in A and C), as well 
as surrounding soft tissue abscess (arrowheads in B–D), predominately anteriorly, at the same level. (From 
Rothenberg Maddocks AB, Pollock AN. Infections of the spine and spinal cord. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffery’s 
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:422, Fig. 44.8.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
869
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
Treatment
The diagnosis of bacterial spondylodiskitis should be suspected in 
patients with fever and unexplained back or leg pain and in previously 
healthy toddlers who become irritable and refuse to walk. Spinal cord 
and vertebral tumors are major considerations in the differential diag­
nosis, which can usually be diagnosed with MRI. After appropriate 
laboratory studies, including blood cultures, have been performed, 
treatment should be started. In patients with a positive blood culture, 
targeted antibiotic therapy should be started. Patients with negative 
blood cultures should begin broad-­spectrum antibiotics, ensuring 
coverage of S. aureus. Consultation with pediatric infectious disease 
specialists may be helpful. Initial therapy should be intravenous; oral 
antibiotics can be considered as pain decreases and laboratory studies 
return to normal. A total of 4–6 weeks of therapy is recommended for 
patients with bacterial spondylodiskitis. Pain control and immobiliza­
tion of the spine may be helpful in reducing symptoms.
Patients who remain ill or worsen (or those with epidural or 
paraspinal abscesses) after the initiation of antibiotic treatment should 
undergo surgical biopsy and drainage. Biopsy should also be performed 
in patients in whom tuberculous intervertebral disk space infection is 
suspected (positive exposure history, positive purified protein deriva­
tive, pulmonary lesions, or positive QuantiFERON results).
Radiographic changes continue long after the inflammatory pro­
cess has resolved. Progressive disk space narrowing, intervertebral 
disk space calcification, and spontaneous intervertebral arthrodesis are 
potential late findings.
Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis
The most common cause of low back pain in the adolescent (particularly 
those active in athletic activity) is spondylolysis. This is a fracture at the 
pars interarticularis, or the junction between the superior and inferior 
facet in the posterior arch of the vertebral body. The prevalence of spon­
dylolysis has been reported in up to 8% of the population and nearly 50% 
of adolescent athletes with low back pain. The frequency is increasing in 
younger children due to the dramatic rise in year-­round training for youth 
sports. In 80% the spondylolysis is bilateral; some develop spondylolis­
thesis, a deformity where the superior vertebral body translates or slips 
anteriorly on the vertebral body beneath it (Figs. 46.8, 46.9, and 46.10).
Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis in children and adolescents 
usually involve the fifth lumbar and first sacral units. Less commonly, 
spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis can occur at L4, L3, and L2. Spon­
dylolysis appears to be less common in Black persons and much more 
common in some North American Eskimo groups; the lowest incidence 
has been reported in Black females, and the highest in White males. 
The male-­to-­female ratio is 2:1. The disorder appears to be multifac­
torial; both hereditary and mechanical factors have been implicated.
Spondylolysis can be secondary to underlying dysplasia of the pos­
terior spine. It is not present at birth, but with growth and activity, it is 
seen by age 6 years in about 4% of children and 6% of adults. A high 
rate of spondylolysis has been reported in Scheuermann disease (tho­
racic kyphosis), which may be related to compensatory excessive lum­
bar lordosis. In addition, an increased incidence of spondylolisthesis has 
been noted among both patients with neural tube defects and those with 
cerebral palsy. It can also result from acute trauma, although fracture/
dislocation of the spine from violent trauma are other causes.
Most commonly, spondylolysis is secondary to repeated stress from 
activity and sport, especially sports that require repetitive trunk flexion 
and extension like gymnastics, dance, and football linemen, but can 
occur in any sport. These forces cause stress or fatigue fracture of the 
posterior elements of L5 and may be responsible for acutely painful 
spondylolysis in some preadolescent and adolescent athletes.
Clinical Findings
Symptoms in patients with spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis are quite 
variable; many patients are asymptomatic. Some patients with minimal 
slips have extreme pain, while others with moderate to severe slips have 
little or no discomfort. Most patients will complain of aching low back 
pain that is exacerbated by activity and somewhat reduced by rest. Pain 
is often reported with prolonged sitting or standing as well. Activity that 
involves back extension tends to be particularly painful. Buttock and 
Fig. 46.8  Stress leading to fracture of the pars interarticularis.
Fig. 46.9  Clinical picture of severe spondylolisthesis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
870
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
posterior thigh pain may be present, but radicular symptoms of nerve 
root compression are usually absent; however, severe spondylolisthesis 
may cause radicular symptoms and bowel and bladder dysfunction.
On physical examination, patients will have increased pain with back 
extension, as this movement loads the posterior elements of the spine. 
A positive “stork test,” or back extension while balancing on a single leg, 
has been associated with spondylolysis, but the test does not have a high 
level of specificity or sensitivity. Patients often have discomfort to palpa­
tion near the midline of the spine near the injury and also the paraspi­
nal musculature. Patients with spondylolisthesis may have a palpable 
“step-­off” or loss of prominence to palpation of the spinous process. 
Hamstring and hip flexor tightness are frequently observed, as is core 
weakness on manual muscle testing. Patients often have increased lum­
bar lordosis. Neurologic evaluation of the lower extremities is usually 
normal, although severe spondylolisthesis may have nerve involvement.
If spondylolysis or spondylolisthesis is suspected, standing antero­
posterior and lateral radiographs of the lumbar spine should be 
obtained. Unilateral spondylolysis may appear on radiographs as a 
lucency or defect near the pars interarticularis or hypertrophy of the 
contralateral side. Previous recommendations included oblique radio­
graphs to assess for the “Scotty dog” sign, but current research has 
shown no increased sensitivity in diagnosis from oblique views (see 
Fig. 46.10). Given the added radiation exposure and cost, oblique 
radiographs have fallen out of favor. The lateral radiograph will allow 
for spondylolisthesis grading using the Meyerding classification based 
on the severity of anterior translation (Fig. 46.11). Grade 1 spondylo­
listhesis is 0–25%, grade 2 is 25–50%, grade 3 is 50–75%, and grade 4 is 
75–100%, and spondyloptosis is complete anterior displacement.
While radiographs show spondylolisthesis, they are commonly nor­
mal with spondylolysis. If there is a high clinical suspicion for spondy­
lolysis with normal radiographs, providers should proceed to advanced 
imaging. MRI is the procedure of choice in assessing spondylolysis. Not 
only does MRI eliminate radiation exposure, but also it has the added 
benefit of showing stress reactions prior to complete fracture and is 
better at assessing other pathologies, like disk herniation or infection.
Treatment
In asymptomatic patients with a low-­grade spondylolisthesis, serial 
evaluations until linear growth is finished and encouraging lower body 
flexibility and core strength are recommended, as the likelihood of pro­
gression is low. However, if significant progression occurs (even if a 
patient is asymptomatic) or if the slip exceeds 50%, the likelihood of 
continued progression and neurologic impairment is high, so surgical 
intervention (spinal fusion) is recommended.
Initial treatment of patients with symptomatic spondylolysis and 
grade 1 or 2 spondylolisthesis without neurologic impairment is non­
operative. Treatment strategies focus on rest or activity reduction, 
pain control with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
and physical therapy to improve flexibility and core strengthening. 
Bracing with a lumbosacral orthotic to improve posture and prevent 
extension can be used but is controversial. Athletes should be told to 
expect at least 6 weeks away from sport before gradually returning to 
activity if pain-­free and progressing in physical therapy. Most patients 
with symptomatic spondylolysis or mild spondylolisthesis respond to 
conservative therapy and are able to return to sports; however, a small 
B
C
A
Fig. 46.10  A, Radiograph features of spondylolysis showing lytic defect (arrow) in the pars interarticularis. B, 
In isthmic defects, this appears as the collar (arrow) of the “Scotty dog” sign. C, Collar of the Scotty dog sign 
outlined on film. (From Rathjen KE. Back pain. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:95.)
Fig. 46.11  Spondylolisthesis. Slippage of L5 on the underlying body of 
S1 has occurred as a consequence of the defective formation of the 
posterior elements of L5. In this case, slippage is moderate, measuring 
slightly more than 25% of the width of the S1 vertebral segment.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
871
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
percentage of patients do not respond to nonoperative therapy and sur­
gical intervention may be necessary.
Intervertebral Disk Herniation
Intervertebral disk herniation is much less common in children than 
in adults. Estimates show that <10% of adolescents with low back pain 
have a lumbar disk herniation. Most patients have a significant his­
tory of trauma, as opposed to degenerative change common in adults. 
There may be an association with congenital anomalies of the lumbar 
spine, such as transitional vertebra or spina bifida occulta. There may 
be a family history of low back pain or herniated disk, as an autosomal 
dominant trait has been linked to the COL9A2 collagen IX gene.
Clinical Findings
The symptoms of a herniated lumbar disk in adolescents differ somewhat 
from those in adults. The initial complaint in adolescents is significant 
low back discomfort. While adults more commonly have lower extremity 
radicular symptoms early on, it is only months later that the symptoms 
of leg discomfort become more noticeable or prominent in the pediatric 
population. Pain is typically aggravated by activity, forward flexion, and 
Valsalva maneuver, and relieved with rest. Paraspinal muscular spasm 
and loss of lumbar lordosis is common. Hamstring tightness, positive 
straight leg raise, and slump test are often present. A thorough neuro­
logic evaluation should be performed, but abnormal findings are less 
likely in the adolescent with herniated disc than in the affected adult. 
Clues to suggest a lumbosacral radiculopathy include abnormal straight 
leg or cross straight leg raising responses, weak ankle dorsiflexion, calf 
wasting, diminished ankle reflex, and decreased sensation.
Plain radiographs are needed as an initial study, but these are usu­
ally normal except for loss of lumbar lordosis. MRI is the procedure 
of choice for diagnosing a disk herniation (Fig. 46.12). In rare cases, 
adolescents (often weightlifters) may develop a vertebral apophyseal 
ring fracture, where the bone displaces posteriorly into the spinal canal 
and acts like a herniated disk. This is an avulsion fracture that is iden­
tified with either a CT scan or MRI. Presentation and treatment for 
apophyseal ring fracture are similar to disk herniation.
Treatment
Most adolescents will benefit from nonoperative treatment. The cor­
nerstones are rest from activity, pain control, and physical therapy 
focusing on core strength and extension-­based exercises. Bracing or 
a lumbar corset may be helpful in reducing pain for some patients. 
Patients should expect a slow recovery with a gradual return to activity.
Patients who do not respond to conservative therapy or patients 
who present with progressive neurologic deficits may benefit from sur­
gical intervention. Surgical correction has been successful at providing 
symptom relief to the young patient.
Idiopathic Kyphosis
Abnormal increases in expected thoracic kyphosis in children and ado­
lescents produce round back deformities (Fig. 46.13). These may be 
congenital, neuromuscular, or idiopathic in origin. Mild to moderate 
Fig. 46.12  MRI of herniated disk at L4–5. (From Rathjen KE. Back pain. 
In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics. 5th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2014:94, Fig. 7-­3.)
A
B
C
D
Fig. 46.13  Preoperative (A, B) and postoperative (C, D) views of an 
adolescent boy with severe kyphosis secondary to Scheuermann dis­
ease. He required both anterior and posterior spinal fusion. He now 
has a markedly improved appearance and no further progression of the 
kyphosis. (From Renshaw TS. Pediatric Orthopedics. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1986:53.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
872
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
increases in kyphosis cause little deformity and few symptoms. Severe 
kyphosis is disfiguring, often causes midscapular back pain, and may 
lead to spinal cord compromise.
Round back posture is often encountered in otherwise healthy 
adolescents during screening examinations. Although their parents 
often report poor posture, affected patients are usually asymptomatic. 
A history should be obtained and physical examination performed. 
Complaints of severe back pain or leg pain, enuresis, and findings of 
lower extremity weakness or increased reflex tone in patients with 
round back are ominous findings and warrant further evaluation and 
referral.
When accentuated kyphosis is present, radiographs are indicated. 
Patients with 20-­ to 45-­degree thoracic kyphotic curves on the lateral 
radiograph and no underlying structural vertebral changes are less 
concerning. Usually such curves correct easily on passive or active 
hyperextension. For such children, no treatment except for a thoracic 
hyperextension exercise program to improve posture and periodic fol­
low-­up examination is necessary.
Scheuermann kyphosis is a progressive (usually thoracic) kypho­
sis, which occurs in approximately 5–8% of the population. This is 
typically found in adolescents and affects males 5 to 10 times more 
often than females. The etiology remains unknown. Patients will have 
a kyphotic curve over 45 degrees with anterior vertebral body wedging 
in three consecutive vertebrae on lateral radiographs. In addition, disk 
herniation into the vertebral body may be present (Schmorl nodules). 
Scheuermann kyphosis is treated with antiinflammatory medications 
and physical therapy exercises focused on back extension. Patients 
with more severe kyphosis often have kyphotic curves >60 degrees and 
show little correction with hyperextension. Radiographs show verte­
bral wedging, end plate irregularity, and kyphosis (Fig. 46.14). Cardio­
pulmonary complications can result from very significant curves (>100 
degrees). Lumbar Scheuermann kyphosis is less common and associ­
ated with overuse injury producing microfractures.
Treatment depends on the degree of deformity and the age of the 
patient. Skeletally immature individuals with significant deformity 
may improve with a program of exercise and use of a Milwaukee or 
modified Boston brace. Bracing does not reverse a deformity, but it 
may prevent progression. Skeletally mature patients will not respond to 
bracing but may improve with a back-­strengthening exercise program. 
Patients with unacceptable deformity who are too old for brace treat­
ment require surgical correction.
Congenital vertebral malformations that produce kyphotic defor­
mities develop during the first trimester of gestation and, like other 
congenital abnormalities of the spine, are often associated with abnor­
malities of the genitourinary tract or the spinal cord. Kyphosis that 
results from congenital vertebral deformities is often obvious early in 
life and may be rapidly progressive (Fig. 46.15). The spinal cord may 
become tented over the apex of the deformity, producing symptoms 
and signs of spasticity in the lower extremity and bladder. Progression 
of deformity is dangerous; congenital kyphosis is the spinal deformity 
most often associated with paraplegia. Patients should be promptly 
referred for orthopedic evaluation.
Scoliosis
Idiopathic scoliosis is a combination of lateral deviation and rotation 
of vertebral bodies that may produce back pain in ∼30% of patients. 
When painful scoliosis is present, a careful search for the cause of the 
symptoms must be undertaken. Infection, tumor, a spinal cord syrin­
gomyelia or diastematomyelia (more common with left thoracic curves), 
and occult fractures may produce clinical findings that resemble idio­
pathic scoliosis but, in contrast to idiopathic scoliosis, cause significant 
chronic pain as well. Any patient with painful scoliosis should have a 
careful evaluation for other spinal anomalies causing the pain.
Etiology
Idiopathic scoliosis begins in the immature spine, although progres­
sion of pre-­existing curvatures may occur in adult life. The cause of 
Fig. 46.14  Scheuermann kyphosis. Lateral radiographs of the midtho­
racic spine in an asymptomatic 16-­year-­old male with moderately 
severe kyphosis. There is severe wedging, loss of vertebral height, and 
end plate irregularity present on these films. His radiographic findings 
appear far worse than his symptoms and signs. If further collapse were 
to develop and the kyphosis became more severe, surgical intervention 
would be necessary.
A
B
Fig. 46.15  A, Congenital kyphosis secondary to failure of vertebral 
bodies to form at T12 and L1. B, The clinical appearance of the child. 
Thoracolumbar kyphosis is obvious. (From Renshaw TS. Pediatric 
Orthopedics. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1986:44.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
873
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
idiopathic scoliosis remains unclear. Hormonal factors appear to play 
a role in curve progression, inasmuch as severe curves occur much 
more often in girls. Some studies have demonstrated abnormalities of 
proprioception and vibratory sensation in affected patients, suggesting 
that abnormalities of posterior column function may contribute to the 
development of curvature. Other investigators have implicated cerebel­
lar or muscular (myopathy) dysfunction as a possible cause of spinal 
imbalance.
No clear genetic pattern has been established. Curves occur more 
frequently in individuals with affected first-­degree relatives, but trans­
mission is not Mendelian. Although curvature is more likely to develop 
in the daughters of affected mothers than in other children, the mag­
nitude of curvature in an affected individual is not related to the mag­
nitude of curvature in relatives. It appears likely that a combination of 
genetic predisposition and other undefined factors is responsible for 
development and progression of idiopathic scoliosis.
Classification
Idiopathic curves are grouped into infantile (birth–3 years), juvenile 
(4–10 years), and adolescent categories on the basis of age at onset of 
curvature. The infantile form is considered a distinct entity, while the 
difference between juvenile and adolescent scoliosis is not as sharp.
Infantile idiopathic scoliosis. Infantile idiopathic scoliosis is rare 
in the United States, accounting for <1% of new cases of idiopathic 
scoliosis. It is more common in Europe. The majority of patients are 
males, and most curves are convex toward the left rather than the right, 
as in the other varieties of idiopathic scoliosis. Some infants suspected 
of having idiopathic deformity actually have subtle congenital vertebral 
abnormalities. The diagnosis of idiopathic deformity is appropriate 
only when radiographic studies show no evidence of congenital 
vertebral anomalies (e.g., hemivertebra) and there are no signs of 
spinal dysraphism or of neuropathic or myopathic disorders.
Although many infantile curves resolve spontaneously, others pro­
gress relentlessly and are very difficult to effectively treat. Observation 
is appropriate until 6 months of age in infants with mild idiopathic sco­
liosis, but prompt referral should be made if curves persist or increase 
during the period of observation.
Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis. Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis begins 
before the adolescent growth spurt. Some curves are probably 
undetected cases of infantile scoliosis. Others, particularly those that 
occur in older children, may be early manifestations of adolescent 
idiopathic scoliosis. Some curves remain small and, in fact, may 
resolve spontaneously. Others remain stable until the onset of the 
growth spurt and then progress unless treated. Still others progress 
steadily throughout childhood and adolescence. Some are associated 
with intraspinal anomalies (syrinx). There is no reliable method of 
predicting the behavior of juvenile curves at the time of diagnosis, but, 
in general, high-­magnitude curves in young patients are more likely to 
increase with growth than smaller curves in older children.
The majority of patients with juvenile curves >25 degrees at the 
time of diagnosis require some form of active treatment. Treatment 
must begin at the time progression is first documented to reduce risk 
for development of severe deformity.
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Most cases of idiopathic scoliosis 
in North America develop around the time of the adolescent growth 
spurt (Figs. 46.16 and 46.17). Often parents and children are unaware 
of the presence of curvature at the outset. Nerve root impingement, 
intervertebral disk disease, and spinal cord compression are 
uncommon in young patients with idiopathic scoliosis. Large curves 
are seven times more common in females than in males. Pain is so rare 
that children and adolescents with painful curves must be carefully 
evaluated to exclude neoplastic and inflammatory processes of the 
spinal column or neural canal. Idiopathic scoliosis is usually a painless 
disorder during childhood and adolescence. Severe structural curves 
may cause no pain until degenerative changes develop in adulthood.
School Screening Programs
School screening programs for spinal deformity concentrate on chil­
dren in the late juvenile and early adolescent periods. The most com­
mon screening method employed is the forward-­bend test, based 
anatomically on the vertebral rotation that accompanies lateral spinal 
deviation (see Fig. 46.16). Associated clinical findings include shoul­
der asymmetry, unequal distances between the medial borders of the 
elbows and the flanks, and apparent leg length inequality or pelvic tilt. 
Breast asymmetry, caused by forward rotation of the chest wall on the 
side of the curve concavity and backward displacement of the chest 
wall on the convex side of the curve, is often present in affected girls.
The threshold for “identification” on screening examination is 
subjective, and the incidence of spine asymmetry detected by school 
screening programs varies with the method of screening and the expe­
rience of the examiner. A range of 3–20% has been reported. Follow-­up 
radiographic studies of children thought to have abnormal curvatures 
on school screening examinations indicate an incidence of scoliosis in 
screened children of <15% (range, 0.4–14%). The incidence of curves 
>20 degrees at the time of primary screening is probably <0.5%. Simple 
devices such as the scoliometer determine spine asymmetry by mea­
suring the angle of trunk rotation at the apex of the rib hump. An angle 
of >7 degrees is an appropriate criterion for referral.
The initial response to a positive school screening examination is a 
repeat physical evaluation in clinic. If asymmetry is confirmed, a single 
A
B
C
Fig. 46.16  A, Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, viewed from the back. 
Note the right-­sided thoracic prominence. When the patient bends for­
ward (B), the rib prominence is even more apparent. This is secondary 
to rotation of the ribs and spine. The rib prominence is also quite evident 
when viewed from the front (C). (From Renshaw TS. Pediatric Orthope­
dics. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1986:47.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
874
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
standing posteroanterior spine film, including vertebral levels T1 to S1, 
should be obtained. Lateral films, bending films, and oblique views are 
not necessary. Referral is appropriate for skeletally immature children 
or adolescents with curves >20 degrees.
Natural History
The natural history of curvature in patients with spine asymmetry 
is highly variable. Factors that appear to be associated with risk of 
progression include the magnitude of curvature at the time of detec­
tion, the chronological and skeletal age of the patient, the pattern of 
curvature, and the menarchal status. Immature patients with large-­
magnitude curves are far more likely to experience progression than 
are more mature patients with smaller curves. Progression of idio­
pathic thoracic curves of <30 degrees after skeletal growth has finished 
is uncommon; however, progression is likely to occur in patients with 
curves >50 degrees at skeletal maturity.
Uncontrolled curve progression causes significant problems in adult 
life. Unacceptable deformity, back pain, chronic fatigue, and decreased 
work capacity are common. Premature degenerative arthritis and 
nerve root impingement caused by deformity and osteophytic spur­
ring occur in patients with lumbar curves or double thoracic-­lumbar 
curves. Asymptomatic decreased vital capacity is common in patients 
with thoracic curves; symptomatic cardiopulmonary compromise (cor 
pulmonale) may develop in patients with curves >80 degrees.
Treatment
The goal of treatment in idiopathic scoliosis is to bring a patient 
to skeletal maturity with a cosmetically acceptable, balanced, and 
stable curve that is unlikely to progress in adult life. Mature ado­
lescents with curves <30 degrees need no treatment beyond initial 
evaluation. Further progression of curvature is unlikely to occur in 
these individuals. Patients with juvenile scoliosis and less mature 
adolescents with curves between 10 and 20 degrees should be mon­
itored at 6-­month intervals with single standing posteroanterior 
spine radiographs. If progression occurs, they should be referred 
for orthopedic care.
Active treatment is indicated for growing patients with curves >30 
degrees. Brace treatment remains the standard method of nonoperative 
treatment of idiopathic curvature. Surgical treatment is appropriate for 
patients with curves too severe for brace treatment. Documented pro­
gression in spite of nonoperative treatment is another indication for 
surgical intervention.
Improved instrumentation and internal fixation devices, intraoper­
ative monitoring of spinal cord function, and autologous transfusion 
have improved the safety and efficacy of surgical correction. In most 
cases, patients can be out of bed the day after surgery and are dis­
charged within 5 days of surgery. Return to school is usually possible 
within 3 weeks; most activities of normal life, including sports, can be 
resumed within 6 months. In many instances, no postoperative immo­
bilization is required; in other cases, a removable lightweight plastic 
orthosis can be employed. Prolonged periods of immobilization in a 
plaster cast are uncommon.
Syringomyelia
Syringomyelia (syrinx) is a fluid-­filled cavitation of the spinal cord 
that may be congenital or acquired. Predisposing conditions include 
Chiari malformation, trauma, intraspinal tumor, scoliosis, and arach­
noiditis. Most patients have headaches and back (constant, gradual) 
pain that may be aggravated by Valsalva maneuvers (coughing, sneez­
ing). If the cavity enlarges, long tract signs may develop including 
sensory loss, dysesthesias, weakness, muscle atrophy, and abnormal 
deep tendon reflexes. MRI is the diagnostic study of choice (Figs. 
46.18 and 46.19).
Fig. 46.17  Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. The patient, a 13-­year-­old 
girl, had a severe double-­curve pattern with significant accompanying 
deformity but no pain. Surgical treatment was warranted to halt pro­
gression and restore spinal alignment.
A
B
Fig. 46.18  Sagittal T2-­weighted images of the cervical spine in an 
8-­year-­old male. A, Image was obtained after a brain magnetic resonance 
examination identified a Chiari 1 malformation. B, Image was obtained 10 
months later, after the child developed numbness and tingling in the left 
arm and leg. In most cases of syrinx-­complicating Chiari 1 malformation, 
the spinal cord lesion is apparent at the time of diagnosis, but there is 
a risk of syringomyelia developing over time in this patient population. 
(From Jones BV. Cord cystic cavities: syringomyelia and prominent cen­
tral canal. Semin Ultrasound CT MRI. 2017;38:98–104 [Fig. 3, p. 100].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
875
CHAPTER 46  Back Pain
Tumors of the Spinal Column
Persistent and progressive back pain, muscle spasm, and abnormal 
trunk posture and signs of spinal cord compression are ominous find­
ings in children. Neoplastic disease must be considered in patients with 
no other obvious source of pain (see Table 46.2). Prompt referral is 
essential when spinal neoplasia is suspected. The success of treatment 
depends in large part on early discovery and intervention.
Primary Lesions of Bone
The most common primary bone tumors affecting the spinal column 
in children are osteoid osteomas and osteoblastomas, with eosino­
philic granuloma and aneurysmal bone cyst also in the differential. 
Although benign, these lesions may cause considerable back pain 
and local bone destruction. Osteoid osteoma pain usually increases 
throughout the day and may awaken the child at night. It is classically 
relieved with NSAID use. Osteoid osteoma lesions are small and often 
difficult to see on plain radiographs, but if seen will have slight scle­
rosis. Therefore, advanced imaging with MRI or CT scan is helpful 
(Fig. 46.20). Osteoid osteoma does not undergo malignant transfor­
mation and can be treated with radiofrequency ablation or surgical 
excision. Osteoblastomas are often larger and do not respond to 
medication like osteoid osteomas. Radiographs often show cystic 
lesions with local destruction of bone (Fig. 46.21). Osteoblastoma 
can undergo malignant transformation and is usually treated with 
surgical excision.
Malignant bone lesions, such as osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma, 
can occur in the spine but are more common in long bones. These 
lesions usually occur in the vertebral body and can cause spinal cord 
compression. Unexplained pain is the hallmark of spinal neoplasia and 
is usually the presenting complaint. Malignancies often have associated 
systemic signs, such as fever, night sweats, and unexplained weight loss. 
These lesions are frequently seen on radiographs due to their destruc­
tive nature, but advanced imaging is routinely obtained to assist with 
treatment and surgical planning.
Fig. 46.19  Sagittal T2-­weighted image of the cervical spine in a 24-­year-­old 
patient with neurofibromatosis type 2 and a cervical cord ependymoma 
shows syrinx cavities cephalad and caudad to the tumor (arrows). (From 
Jones BV. Cord cystic cavities: syringomyelia and prominent central canal. 
Semin Ultrasound CT MRI. 2017;38:98–104 [Fig. 4, p. 101].)
Fig. 46.20  Osteoid osteoma of the spine. Technetium bone scanning 
shows increased uptake in the T10 vertebral body in a 15-­year-­old boy. 
Note the scoliosis that accompanies this painful lesion. The condition 
did not respond to antiinflammatory medications, and surgical excision 
was necessary.
Fig. 46.21  The patient presented with left-­sided lumbar back pain. Note 
the destruction of the vertebral pedicle at L4 (arrows). This proved to 
be an osteoblastoma. Children with back pain should be suspected of 
having a tumor of the spine or spinal cord until it is proven otherwise. 
(From Renshaw TS. Pediatric Orthopedics. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1986:57.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
876
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
Tumors of Neural Elements
Back pain, lower extremity weakness, and sphincter disturbances are 
common manifestations of neoplasms of the spinal cord. Although such 
lesions are rare, they must be suspected in children with unexplained 
back or leg pain, weakness, sensory or reflex abnormalities, bowel or 
bladder incontinence, or unexplained gait abnormalities. Neuroblas­
toma is the most common lesion, but sarcomas (including Ewing sar­
coma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and hemangiosarcoma) and astrocytomas 
or ependymomas also occur in the neural contents of the spinal canal.
In such patients, standard radiography often shows only loss of lor­
dosis or scoliosis secondary to muscle spasm. MRI demonstrates the 
abnormality, but definitive diagnosis usually requires biopsy.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
Skeletal involvement is common in patients with leukemia and lym­
phoma. Back pain or limb pain may be the presenting symptom in 
some children. Proliferation of abnormal hematopoietic tissue in the 
marrow of long bones or vertebral bodies causes pain and weakens 
their structure.
Clinical symptoms and signs in children with leukemic skeletal 
involvement may be confusing. The history should include questions 
on fever, localized pain and swelling, and history of unusual bruising 
and bleeding. Elevations of the white blood cell count and ESR may 
be mistaken as signs of septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, or intervertebral 
disk space infection. The presence of abnormal white blood cells on 
the peripheral blood cell count or of thrombocytopenia increases the 
likelihood of bone marrow tumor rather than infection.
Leukemia and lymphoma can show osteopenia, periosteal elevation, 
and metaphyseal lucencies on radiographs of long bones, but these find­
ings are difficult to detect with spine radiographs. Vertebral compression 
and wedging are sometimes present and may mimic acute fracture or, on 
occasion, osteomyelitis. The absence of a history of trauma should alert 
the examiner to search for other causes of the radiographic abnormality. 
Preservation of intervertebral disk space height with collapse of adjacent 
vertebral segments is an indication that the vertebral bodies rather than 
the intervertebral disk are the sites of the abnormality. MRI can identify 
areas of involvement and extent of intraspinal infiltration.
The diagnosis of leukemia can be established by bone marrow aspi­
ration. Biopsy of involved vertebral segments is rarely necessary. Sup­
port of the spine in a custom-­fabricated orthosis is useful for relieving 
pain and preventing further vertebral collapse during the initial phases 
of treatment. Prolonged brace treatment may be necessary to prevent 
vertebral compression fractures that may accompany the osteopenia 
resulting from steroid therapy. Surgical decompression and fusion may 
be required in rare cases of acute vertebral compression and spinal cord 
compromise.
Mechanical Back Pain
Many pediatric patients have no identifiable cause for their back pain. 
These patients are thought to have mechanical or myofascial back pain. 
It is felt that tight hamstrings, poor posture, and weak core muscula­
ture are major contributing factors. It is critical to ensure that all other 
causes of back pain have been ruled out before making a diagnosis of 
mechanical back pain. Treatment for these patients is avoiding activi­
ties that increase pain, pain control, and physical therapy to improve 
the aforementioned concerns. If the pain is persistent, then involve­
ment of a multidisciplinary pain program with behavioral health can 
be helpful.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Back pain in children may be referred pain from intraabdominal or ret­
roperitoneal disease (see Table 46.2) or may represent direct involve­
ment of the spinal cord, vertebral bodies, or paraspinal musculature. 
The prevalence of back pain in the pediatric population is greater than 
previously estimated; the prevalence increases with both sedentary life­
style and increased physical activity/athletic participation. Acute back 
pain associated with physical activity should respond to reduced activ­
ity levels, NSAIDs, and exercises fairly quickly.
Chronic persistent back pain, pain with associated neurologic deficits 
(lower extremity or bowel and bladder), cutaneous lesions over the lumbar 
spine, systemic signs (fever, night waking, weight loss), and tenderness 
with neurologic dysfunction after trauma are red flags (Table 46.3).
Spinal cord involvement above T10 produces symmetric weakness, 
increased deep tendon reflexes, up-­going toes, and an appropriate sen­
sory loss; conus medullaris involvement (T10 to L2) produces symmetric 
weakness, increased knee and decreased ankle deep tendon reflexes, a 
saddle-­type anesthesia, and up-­ or down-­going toes on Babinski testing; 
and cauda equina involvement (below L2) produces asymmetric weak­
ness, loss of deep tendon reflexes, and down-­going toes. Signs of cord 
involvement are particularly ominous and are medical emergencies.
   
TABLE 46.3  Red Flags: Most Common 
Indications from History and Examination for 
Pathologic Findings Needing Special Attention 
and Sometimes Immediate Action
 • Children younger than 18 yr old with considerable pain
 • History of violent trauma
 • Nonmechanical nature of pain (i.e., constant pain not affected by 
movement; pain at night)
 • History of cancer
 • Systemic steroid use
 • Drug use
 • HIV infection or other immunocompromised patients
 • Unintentional weight loss
 • Systemically ill, particularly signs of infections such as fever or night sweats
 • Persisting severe restriction of motion or intense pain with minimal motion
 • Structural deformity including scoliosis, Chiari malformation, tethered cord
 • Difficulty with micturition
 • Loss of anal sphincter tone or fecal incontinence, saddle anesthesia
 • Progressive motor weakness or gait disturbance, paresthesias, pes cavus, 
foot drop
 • Marked morning stiffness
 • Peripheral joint involvement
 • Iritis, skin rashes, colitis, urethral discharge, or other symptoms of 
rheumatologic disease
 • Inflammatory disorder such as ankylosing spondylitis suspected
 • Family history of rheumatologic disease or structural abnormality
Modified from Nachemson A, Vingard E. Assessment of patients with neck 
and back pain: a best-­evidence synthesis. In: Nachemson AL, Johnsson B, 
eds. Neck and Back Pain: The Scientific Evidence of Causes, Diagnosis, 
and Treatment. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
876.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aartun E, Degerfalk A, Kentsdotter L, et al. Screening of the spine in 
adolescents: inter- and intra-­rater reliability and measurements error of 
commonly used clinical tests. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014;15:37.
Altaf F, Heran MK, Wilson LF. Back pain in children and adolescents. Bone 
Joint Lett J. 2014;96-­B(6):717–723.
Batirel A, Erdem H, Sengoz G, et al. The course of spinal tuberculosis (Pott 
disease): results of the multinational, multicentre Backbone-­2 study. Clin 
Microbiol Infect. 2015;21:1008.e9–1008.e18.
Brown R, Hussain M, McHugh K, et al. Discitis in young children. J Bone Joint 
Surg Br. 2001;83:106–111.
Calvo-­Munoz I, Gomez-­Conesa A, Sanchez-­Meca J. Prevalence of low back pain 
in children and adolescents: a meta-­analysis. BMC Pediatr. 2013;13:14.
Cassar-­Pullicino VN, Eisenstein SM. Imaging in scoliosis: what, why and how? 
Clin Radiol. 2002;57:543–562.
Chi H, Huang FY, Liu SC, et al. Pott disease with cold abscess. J Pediatr. 
2015;166:500.
Cohodarevic T, Mailis A, Montanera W. Syringomyelia: pain, sensory 
abnormalities, and neuroimaging. J Pain. 2000;1(1):54–66.
Deyo RA, Weinstein JN. Low back pain. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:363–370.
Dormans JP, Moroz L. Infection and tumors of the spine in children. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2007;89(suppl 1):79–97.
Dunn J, Henrikson NB, Morrison CC, et al. Screening for Adolescent Idiopathic 
Scoliosis: A Systematic Evidence Review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force [internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality (US); 2018. PubMed PMID: 29638297. Report No.: 17-­05230-­EF-­1.
Edgar M. A new classification of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Lancet. 
2002;360:270–271.
Feldman D, Straight J, Badra M, et al. Evaluation of an algorithmic approach to 
pediatric back pain. J Pediatr Orthop. 2006;26:353–357.
Gagnet P, Kern K, Andrews K,  et al. Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis: a 
review of the literature. J Orthop. 2018;15:404–407.
Hadley MN. Management of pediatric cervical spine and spinal cord injuries. 
Neurosurgery. 2002;50:S85–S99.
Harvey BS, Brooks G, Hergenroeder A. Lumbar injuries of the pediatric 
population. Prim Care. 2013;40(2):289–311.
Herman MJ, Pizzutillo PD, Cavalier R. Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis in 
the child and adolescent athlete. Orthop Clin North Am. 2003;34:461–467.
Jatav G, Rege SV, Varma S. Lumbar spontaneous pyogenic epidural spinal abscess 
with cauda equina syndrome: a rare case. Intersicp Neurosurg. 2020;22:100713.
Lamb M, Brenner JS. Back pain in children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 
2020;41:557–569.
Letts MH, Haasbeek J. Hematocolpos as a cause of back pain in premenarchal 
adolescents. J Pediatr Orthop. 1990;10:731–732.
Lowe TG, Line BG. Evidence based medicine: analysis of Scheuermann 
kyphosis. Spine. 2007;32:s115–s119.
MacDonald J, Stuart E, Rodenberg R. Musculoskeletal low back pain in 
school-­aged children. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171:280–287.
McCleary MD, Congeni JA. Current concepts in the diagnosis and treatment 
of spondylolysis in young athletes. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2007;6:62–66.
Michaleff ZA, Kamper SJ, Maher CG, et al. Low back pain in children and 
adolescents: a systematic review and meta-­analysis evaluating the effectiveness 
of conservative interventions. Eur Spine J. 2014;23(10):2046–2058.
Miller R, Beck NA, Sampson NR, et al. Imaging modalities for low back pain 
in children: a review of spondylosis and undiagnosed mechanical back 
pain. J Pediatr Orthop. 2013;33(3):282–288.
Paassilta P, Lohinvia J, Goring HHH, et al. Identification of a novel 
common genetic risk factor for lumbar disk disease. J Am Med Assoc. 
2001;285:1843–1849.
Prahinski JR, Polly Jr DW, McHale KA, et al. Occult intraspinal anomalies in 
congenital scoliosis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2000;20:59–63.
Raj A, Singh KA, Shah H. Orthopedic manifestation as the presenting 
symptom of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Orthop. 2020;22:326–330.
Ramirez N, Flynn JM, Hill BW, et al. Evaluation of a systematic approach to 
pediatric back pain: the utility of magnetic resonance imaging. J Pediatr 
Orthop. 2015;35(1):28–32.
Sachs B, Bradford D, Winter RB, et al. Scheuermann kyphosis. Follow-­up of 
Milwaukee brace treatment. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1987;69:50–57.
Sponseller PD. Sizing up scoliosis. J Am Med Assoc. 2003;289:608–609.
Stewart DG, Skaggs DL. Consultation with the specialist: adolescent idiopathic 
scoliosis. Pediatr Rev. 2006;27:299–306.
Tofte JN, CarlLee TL, Holte AJ, et al. Imaging pediatric spondylolysis: a 
systematic review. Spine. 2017;42:777–782.
Tyagi R. Spinal infections in children: a review. J Orthop. 2016;13:254–258.
Varo R, Bila R, Saavedra B, et al. Paraplegia and spinal deformity in a 
Mozambican child with Pott’s disease and tuberculous scrofula. Lancet. 
2019;394:1651.
Walden JH, Schmitz J. Pott’s disease resulting in complete cervical vertebral 
destruction. Wilderness Environ Med. 2018;20:90–93.
Weinstein SL, Dolan LA, Spratt KF, et al. Health and function of patients with 
untreated idiopathic scoliosis. J Am Med Assoc. 2003;289:559–566.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
