177
WHAT IS SHOCK: PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Shock is a condition in which inadequate tissue perfusion results 
in an insufficient delivery of oxygen to meet the body’s metabolic 
needs. Tissue perfusion is dependent on cardiac output. Cardiac out­
put (CO) is determined by the heart rate (HR) and the stroke volume 
(SV): CO = HR × SV. If either the heart rate or the stroke volume 
does not allow for proper tissue perfusion, the patient has shock. 
Patients are considered in compensated shock if their blood pres­
sure remains in the normal range despite other abnormal vital signs 
or abnormal tissue perfusion. A child with decompensated shock 
(abnormal blood pressure) is at high risk for associated morbidity 
and mortality.
Heart Rate: An increased heart rate is the primary compensatory 
mechanism that enables children to maintain adequate blood pressure, 
cardiac output, and tissue perfusion. It is dependent on an intact cardiac 
conduction system and a responsive autonomic nervous system. There are 
several conditions whereby heart rate is inadequate, resulting in reduced 
cardiac output. Newborns and infants have a higher resting heart rate, so 
their ability to further increase their heart rate to improve cardiac output 
may be limited. While an adolescent can double their heart rate from 70 
to 140, an infant cannot double their heart rate from 150 to 300. A child 
with an arrythmia will have an ineffectual heart rate that may result in 
shock. Both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias can cause shock. In chil­
dren arrhythmias are due to either structural abnormalities or drug intox­
ication. A child with abnormal sympathetic venous tone that is associated 
with neurogenic shock will also have an inappropriately low heart rate that 
results in shock. A heart rate out of proportion to the degree of fever should 
suggest septic shock or an arrythmia.
Stroke Volume: Stroke volume is determined by three elements: 
preload, cardiac contractility, and afterload. Inadequate stroke volume 
will result in reduced cardiac output and shock.
Preload is based on the filling volume of the ventricle at the end of 
diastole. Inadequate preload is most often due to hypovolemia or insuf­
ficient circulating volume. Hypovolemic shock is the most common cause 
of shock in children. Hypovolemia may be due to excessive intravascular 
losses caused by blood loss associated with trauma, or it may be due 
to excessive fluid losses caused by vomiting and diarrhea or excessive 
urinary losses associated with diabetes. Young children are at increased 
risk of having profound volume depletion despite shorter duration of 
illness. If the circulating volume is not adequate to perfuse the tissues, 
the patient will show signs of shock.
Cardiac contractility is the inotropic force generated by the 
ventricles to pump blood. Newborns and infants are known to have 
stiffer, less compliant myocardium, which limits contractility in this 
age group. However, compared to adults, inadequate contractility 
due to an injury to the heart muscle caused by infectious, inflam­
matory, or familial causes is rare in children. Cardiac tamponade, 
when pressure due to blood or retained fluid within the pericardial 
sack limits cardiac contractility, may result in obstructive shock. 
Toxins associated with ingestions may inhibit the heart’s contrac­
tility and lead to shock. Children with septic shock may also have 
release of toxins that can affect the heart’s contractility, resulting in 
shock. Children with congenital heart disease, particularly left-­sided 
obstructive lesions, may have lesions that result in a pump that does 
not work properly.
Afterload is the systemic vascular resistance or pressure within the 
blood vessels that the ventricle must contract against to eject blood 
to perfuse the body. Sympathetic activation and increased systemic 
vasoconstriction are compensatory mechanisms for children. This 
preserves central perfusion by redistributing blood flow to the critical 
organs. When systemic vascular resistance is low, the patient may be in 
shock, with increased cardiac output. However, this results in abnor­
mal blood flow and inadequate tissue prefusion that results in signs and 
symptoms of shock. Loss of vascular resistance is noted in sepsis with 
the release of toxic chemicals that vasodilate, IgE-­medicated release of 
histamine during anaphylaxis, and a loss of sympathetic venous tone 
associated with injury to the spinal cord.
Oxygen Delivery: The pediatric patient may also be in shock due to 
inadequate delivery of oxygen to meet the body’s metabolic needs if the 
oxygen-­carrying capacity is limited. Conditions such as severe anemia 
whereby there is inadequate hemoglobin to deliver oxygen to the tis­
sues or carbon monoxide poisoning and methemoglobinemia in which 
oxygen cannot be delivered to the tissues can also result in shock.
KEY HISTORICAL ELEMENTS TO AID IN 
DIAGNOSIS AND ETIOLOGY OF SHOCK
Initial historical elements should focus on evidence of decreased end-­
organ perfusion. The family should be asked if the child has had a 
change in behavior or activity. Altered mental status may suggest poor 
brain perfusion. Hypotonia or weakness may suggest decreased per­
fusion of the muscles. Reduced urine output is associated with poor 
perfusion of the kidneys.
Historical elements that are specific to the possible etiology of the 
shock should also be investigated. A history that quickly evaluates 
the most common causes of pediatric shock may lead the clinician 
to the most likely etiology (Figs. 10.1 and 10.2). Query about any 
recent high or low temperatures or illnesses, particularly if the child 
is very young or immunocompromised, because this may be associ­
ated with untreated or fulminant infection that could lead to septic 
shock. Ask whether the oral intake of the child has decreased and/or 
whether the urine and stool output has increased, which may result 
in hypovolemic shock. Poor oral intake also may be a nonspecific 
sign of illness in general. Any traumatic mechanism may suggest an 
injury-­related shock. However, for pediatric patients, nonaccidental 
Shock
Shannon H. Baumer-­Mouradian and Amy L. Drendel
10
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
178
SECTION 3   Cardiac Disorders
trauma must also be considered, and historians may not be forth­
coming with accurate details about the mechanism of injury. Aller­
gen exposure with stridor or wheezing may be related to distributive 
shock due to anaphylaxis. Toxic ingestion may result in distributive 
shock. Chest pain and palpitations may be associated with arrhyth­
mias or other intrathorax-­related etiology. Cough or shortness of 
breath may suggest pneumonia as a source of septic shock. Abdomi­
nal pain should be evaluated in patients with shock related to trauma 
or infection. Last menstrual period should be obtained to evaluate 
for pregnancy-­related concerns or retained tampon placing the child 
at risk of toxic shock. Any weakness, numbness, or difficulties with 
movement should lead the provider to consider neurogenic causes of 
shock. Rash suggests allergic, immunologic, and infectious etiologies. 
Suicidal ideation or self-­injury suggests a toxic ingestion.
Other important elements to inquire about include a family his­
tory evaluating for familial cardiomyopathies or metabolic condi­
tions that may be associated with shock. Surgical history should be 
queried to evaluate for underlying disorders or recent procedures 
that may put the patient at risk for infection or blood loss. Birth his­
tory may identify congenital malformations that may be associated 
with shock.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION TO ASSESS AND 
MANAGE SHOCK
The initial assessment of a child who may have shock should be focused 
on “airway, breathing, and circulation,” also referred to as the ABCs, 
to determine if emergent resuscitation is needed. “DE” is included for 
Fever or hypothermia
± immunocompromised
Gastrointestinal or
urinary
fluid losses
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Traumatic
mechanism of
injury
Allergen
exposure
Hypovolemic shock
Distributive shock
due to anaphylaxis
Distributive shock
Self-harm or
toxic
ingestion
Distributive shock
due to sepsis
Ask about other rare
historical elements:
 Chest pain or palpitations
 Cough or shortness of breath
 Abdominal pain and menses
 Change in sensation or
  movement
 Rash
 Family history
 Surgical history
 Birth history
Hemorrhagic shock due to blood loss
Neurogenic shock due to spinal cord injury
Obstructive shock due to cardiac tamponade or pneumothorax
Consider
Fig. 10.1  Algorithm for historical elements to determine shock etiology.
Shock
Type
Etiology
Hypovolemic
Major trauma
Gastrointestinal bleed
Dehydration
Cardiogenic
Obstructive
Distributive
Myocarditis
Arrhythmia
Coronary disease
Pulmonary embolus
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
Status asthmaticus
Ingestion
Sepsis
Spinal cord injury
Anaphylaxis
Dissociative
Anemia, carbon
monoxide or cyanide
poisoning,
methemoglobinemia*
Cardiovascular findings
Preload (filling pressures)
Cardiac contractility
Cardiac output
Afterload (peripheral tone)
Hemodynamic support
Relieve obstruction
Volume expansion
Inotropes
Vasopressors
Fig. 10.2  The causes, cardiovascular findings, and hemodynamic support for different types of shock. 
Under cardiovascular findings, bidirectional arrows indicate variation in findings among patients with the 
particular type. Under hemodynamic support, the number of + signs indicates the importance of therapy. 
A combined + and − indicates that the intervention could help some patients but must be used with 
caution. *Treat specific etiology transfusion or specific antidotes. (Modified from Goldman L, Schafer AI, 
eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:642, Fig. 98-­1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
179
CHAPTER 10  Shock
“disability and exposure” to guide the initial assessment of the patient 
who may have shock. Shock is a medical emergency that requires 
timely interventions to improve the patient’s conditions as well as aid 
in coming to a proper diagnosis.
Airway should be assessed to determine if the child is able to pro­
tect their airway because inadequate perfusion of the brain may dimin­
ish this ability. Asking the child their name is an excellent assessment 
of their ability to protect their airway and is also the first step in eval­
uating their mental status. For an infant or nonverbal child, crying or 
verbalizing may be the best sign of an intact airway.
Breathing assessment should include a determination of whether 
tachypnea is present to alert the provider to a compensatory response to 
metabolic acidosis that occurs with shock. Evaluation of breath sounds 
may tip the provider off to a pneumonia that could be the source of sep­
tic shock. Asymmetric breath sounds may be associated with a pleural 
effusion or a pneumothorax that can cause obstructive shock or with 
a hemothorax associated with hypovolemic shock. Wheezing may be a 
sign of anaphylactic shock.
Circulatory assessment is critical to the evaluation of a patient 
with concerns for shock. The circulatory exam includes auscultation 
of the chest to determine heart rate and rhythm, palpation of central 
and peripheral pulses, and assessment of distal cutaneous capillary 
refill time. Pulses can be assessed centrally at the femoral or brachial 
sites. Peripheral pulses can be palpated at the radial or dorsalis pedis 
sites. Tachycardia is an expected compensatory response. Heart tones 
should be evaluated for evidence of murmur or muffled heart sounds 
that are associated with pericardial tamponade. For infants during 
the first 2 weeks of life, the lack of a murmur that was previously 
noted can suggest closure of a patent ductus arteriosus that can result 
in shock for patients with congenital heart disease. Careful evalua­
tion of heart rhythm is important since arrhythmias may be a source 
of shock. Vasoconstriction results in decreased capillary refill time, 
reduced pulses, and cool and mottled distal extremities. Sometimes 
vasodilation may result in flash capillary refill time, bounding pulses, 
and flushed hyperemic skin. These seemingly contradictory findings, 
both associated with shock, highlight the diagnostic challenge that 
providers are faced with when evaluating children who may have 
shock.
Disability assessment provides insights into the mental state of 
the child. Inability to respond in an age-­appropriate manner is a sign 
of inadequate perfusion of the brain. Typically, infants and children 
under 2 years do not cooperate with a thorough examination; therefore 
complete cooperation or sleeping during an exam should be concern­
ing for possible altered mental status. Agitation can also be a sign of 
decreased brain perfusion; observing the child’s interaction with family 
can aid in determining whether it is fear of the medical examination or 
a sign of shock.
Exposure identifies any source of active bleeding that could be the 
source of shock. With full exposure of the patient, the provider will 
be able to perform a thorough head-­to-­toe examination. Care must be 
taken to ensure that the child does not remain completely exposed for 
long periods of time because children are at an increased risk of hypo­
thermia, particularly in shock states.
Vital signs are particularly critical to assess and monitor in a child 
with concerns for shock. Elevated heart rate is a common compensa­
tory response in the early phase of shock. Compensatory tachypnea 
(to metabolic acidosis) can also be noted. Hypotension is a late finding 
for patients with shock. Healthy children can lose over 30% of their 
circulating blood volume before the development of hypotension. 
An oxygen saturation that is abnormal could be a sign of pulmonary 
pathology associated with shock. Abnormal or difficult-­to-­obtain 
oxygen saturation may be due to poor perfusion of the extremity where 
the probe is placed. For the pediatric patient, normal vital signs change 
with age, so utilization of an age-­appropriate table can help the pro­
vider to better identify abnormal vital signs (Table 10.1). For children 
over 1 year of age, a simple calculation can be relied on by providers to 
determine the minimum systolic blood pressure: age × 2 + 70. Provid­
ers should be vigilant to abnormal vital signs and continuously monitor 
patients at risk for shock.
In addition to the initial assessment of the ABCs, a head-­to-­toe 
physical examination is essential, and an orderly top-­to-­bottom 
approach can ensure that nothing on examination is missed (Table 
10.2 and Fig. 10.3). Pupillary examination requires the patient to 
open their eyes, providing insight into their mental alertness. Mucous 
membrane assessment may show pallor that is associated with blood 
loss. Dry mucous membranes are associated with hypovolemic shock. 
A gag reflex will also cue the provider to the patient’s level of alertness. 
Reduced neck mobility can be seen with meningitis and septic shock. 
Jugular venous distension is associated with cardiac tamponade and 
pneumothorax, and it may also be seen in cardiogenic shock due to 
the heart’s poor contractility. The abdominal examination should 
evaluate for bowel sounds and any signs of tenderness or distension. 
Abdominal pain may be an indication of an intraabdominal infection 
causing septic shock or intraabdominal bleeding in trauma patients 
that can result in hypovolemic shock. Careful evaluation for hepato­
megaly that is associated with heart failure may be the key to identifi­
cation of cardiogenic shock. Pelvic stability should be assessed in the 
trauma patient since pelvic blood loss can be very difficult to identify 
but can be associated with severe morbidity and mortality. The skin 
of the extremities should be assessed for evidence of rash that may 
be associated with infection (purpura) or anaphylaxis (urticaria). Skin 
tenting can be found with severe hypovolemia and shock. Frequent 
reassessment of the distal skin perfusion initially evaluated during the 
circulatory assessment is important during ongoing resuscitation. A 
femur fracture can result in significant blood loss and shock and thus 
should be evaluated for in a trauma patient. Neurologic assessment 
including movement of the extremities on command is a good assess­
ment of mental status. Lack of extremity movement should cue the 
provider to consider neurogenic shock associated with a spinal cord 
injury. If there is no movement of the lower extremities and a rectal 
TABLE 10.1  Normal Vital Signs by Age of 
the Patient
Age
Heart Rate 
(beats/min)
Blood Pressure 
(mm Hg)
Respiratory 
Rate (breaths/
min)
Premature
110–170
SBP 55–75, DBP 35–45
40–70
0–3 mo
110–160
SBP 65–85, DBP 45–55
35–55
3–6 mo
110–160
SBP 70–90, DBP 50–65
30–45
6–12 mo
90–160
SBP 80–100, DBP 55–65
22–38
1–3 yr
80–150
SBP 90–105, DBP 55–70
22–30
3–6 yr
70–120
SBP 95–110, DBP 60–75
20–24
6–12 yr
60–110
SBP 100–120, DBP 60–75
16–22
>12 yr
60–100
SBP 110–135, DBP 65–85
12–20
DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Adapted from Goldstein B, Giroir B, Randolph A. International Pediatric 
Sepsis Consensus Conference: definitions for sepsis and organ dys­
function in pediatrics. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2005;6(1):2–8.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
180
SECTION 3   Cardiac Disorders
examination finds the patient to have a lack of rectal tone, this may 
also be indicative of a spinal cord injury.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF SHOCK
Evaluation should include laboratory tests to detect an etiology and 
to assess poor end-­organ perfusion (Table 10.3). Poor oxygen delivery 
results in anaerobic metabolism, which produces lactic acid. A CBC can 
evaluate for hypovolemic shock due to blood loss or dissociative shock 
due to anemia. If these are likely, a type and cross-­match should be 
performed. Leukocytosis or leukopenia may be found in septic shock. 
Electrolyte abnormalities may be found in children with hypovolemic 
shock due to gastroenteritis. Obtaining a glucose level is particularly 
important because young infants may become hypoglycemic in shock 
states. Alternatively, hyperglycemia can be seen due to the release of 
hormones such as catecholamines, corticosteroids, and glucagon. A 
chest radiograph can evaluate a number of different sources of shock 
including a pericardial or pleural effusion pneumothorax, pneumonia 
associated with septic shock, and secondary signs of cardiogenic shock 
(cardiomegaly, pulmonary edema). An abdominal image can assess 
for signs of intestinal perforation or obstruction. A bedside focused 
assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) abdominal point-­of-­
care ultrasound examination can evaluate for intraabdominal injuries. 
Consideration of an ECG and, for concerns of cardiogenic shock, an 
echocardiogram is indicated.
TYPES OF SHOCK
Pediatric shock can be divided into five categories based on the 
source and subsequent pathophysiology of the shock (Table 10.4 
and Fig. 10.2). These include hypovolemic, cardiogenic, distribu­
tive, obstructive, and dissociative shock. The most common type of 
shock is hypovolemic shock, which includes both nonhemorrhagic 
and hemorrhagic shock. Worldwide, hypovolemic shock due to gas­
troenteritis is the most common cause of pediatric shock. Children 
with hypovolemic shock present with a history of either volume loss 
(vomiting, diarrhea) or both inadequate volume intake and a mecha­
nism of injury suggesting blood loss. Cardiogenic shock can be diffi­
cult to diagnose based on history, but careful attention to the cardiac 
examination can sometimes identify abnormalities suggesting a car­
diogenic etiology. Additionally, children with cardiogenic shock do 
not have improvement in perfusion with large-­volume intravenous 
TABLE 10.2  Physical Examination and Selected Laboratory Signs in Shock
Central nervous system
Acute delirium, restlessness, disorientation, confusion, and coma, which may be secondary to decreased cerebral perfusion pres­
sure (mean arterial pressure minus intracranial pressure). Patients with chronic hypertension or increased intracranial pressure 
may be symptomatic at normal blood pressures. Cheyne-­Stokes respirations may be seen with severe decompensated heart 
failure. Blindness can be a presenting complaint or complication.
Temperature
Hyperthermia results in excess tissue respiration and greater systemic oxygen delivery requirements. Hypothermia can occur when 
decreased systemic oxygen delivery or impaired cellular respiration decreases heat generation.
Skin
Cool distal extremities (combined low serum bicarbonate and high arterial lactate levels) aid in identifying patients with hypoperfu­
sion. Pallor, cyanosis, sweating, and decreased capillary refill and pale, dusky, clammy, or mottled extremities indicate systemic 
hypoperfusion. Dry mucous membranes and decreased skin turgor indicate low vascular volume. Low toe temperature correlates 
with the severity of shock.
General cardiovascular
Neck vein distention (e.g., heart failure, pulmonary embolus, pericardial tamponade) or flattening (e.g., hypovolemia), tachycardia, 
and arrhythmias. Decreased coronary perfusion pressures can lead to ischemia, decreased ventricular compliance, and increased 
left ventricular diastolic pressure. A “mill wheel” heart murmur may be heard with an air embolus.
Heart rate
Usually elevated. However, paradoxical bradycardia can be seen in patients with pre-­existing cardiac disease and severe hemor­
rhage. Heart rate variability is associated with poor outcomes.
Systolic blood pressure
May actually increase slightly when cardiac contractility increases in early shock and then fall as shock advances.
Diastolic blood pressure
Correlates with arteriolar vasoconstriction and may rise early in shock and then fall when cardiovascular compensation fails.
Pulse pressure
Defined as systolic minus diastolic pressure and related to stroke volume and the rigidity of the aorta. Increases early in shock and 
decreases before systolic pressure decreases.
Pulsus paradoxus
An exaggerated change in systolic blood pressure with respiration (systolic blood pressure declines >10 mm Hg with inspiration) 
seen in asthma, cardiac tamponade, and air embolus.
Mean arterial blood pressure
Diastolic blood pressure + [pulse pressure/3]
Shock index
Heart rate/systolic blood pressure. Normal = 0.5–0.7. A persistent elevation of the shock index (>1.0) indicates impaired left ven­
tricular function (as a result of blood loss or cardiac depression) and is associated with increased mortality.
Respiratory
Tachypnea, increased minute ventilation, increased dead space, bronchospasm, hypocapnia with progression to respiratory failure, 
acute lung injury, and adult respiratory distress syndrome.
Abdomen
Low-­flow states may result in abdominal pain, ileus, gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, acalculous cholecystitis, mesenteric 
ischemia, and shock liver.
Renal
Because the kidney receives 20% of cardiac output, low cardiac output reduces the glomerular filtration rate and redistributes renal 
blood flow from the renal cortex toward the renal medulla, thereby leading to oliguria. Paradoxical polyuria in early sepsis may be 
confused with adequate hydration.
Metabolic
Respiratory alkalosis is the first acid-­base abnormality, but metabolic acidosis rapidly occurs as shock progresses. Hyperglycemia, 
hypoglycemia, and hyperkalemia may develop.
From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020:643, Table 98-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
181
CHAPTER 10  Shock
fluid administration. Distributive shock includes septic shock due to 
infection, shock due to toxins, anaphylactic shock, and neurogenic 
shock. Septic shock is a common etiology for children, particularly 
those who are very young or have other chronic diseases that leave 
them immunosuppressed. Obstructive shock is much less common 
in children. Dissociative shock is high cardiac output failure due to 
inadequate oxygen-­releasing capacity. Appropriate diagnosis of the 
type of shock is necessary to choose the correct medical management 
and can be made based on history and clinical exam findings as well 
as response to intravenous fluid administration.
PEDIATRIC SEPTIC SHOCK
Septic shock is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in U.S. chil­
dren and infants. There are pediatric-­specific definitions for systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), infection, sepsis, severe sep­
sis, and septic shock (Table 10.5). Pediatric septic shock is defined as a 
vital sign abnormality with cardiovascular compromise. Pediatric sep­
sis is defined as the presence of SIRS plus suspected or proven infec­
tion. SIRS is defined as abnormal temperature or leukocyte count plus 
either tachycardia or tachypnea. There are many sepsis mimics that 
also present as SIRS (Table 10.6).
Early recognition of septic shock and initiation of goal-­directed 
therapy including intravenous fluid boluses, vasopressors, and anti­
biotics have demonstrated improved pediatric sepsis-­associated mor­
tality. Key components of early goal-­directed therapy include (1) 
first-­hour fluid resuscitation and inotrope therapy directed to goals 
of threshold heart rates, normal blood pressure, and capillary refill ≤2 
seconds, as well as evaluation after each bolus for fluid overload; (2) 
first-­hour broad-­spectrum antibiotics; and (3) goal-­directed hemody­
namic support (Table 10.7).
FIRST CRITICAL ACTIONS IN THE EVALUATION 
AND TREATMENT OF SHOCK
The patient should be placed on monitors for continuous evaluation of 
the heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygenation if there is concern for 
shock. The overall goal of the treatment of shock is to increase oxygen 
delivery and decrease oxygen demand. Simply administering oxygen 
will improve the delivery of oxygen to tissues for nearly all causes of 
shock. The goal is to eliminate hypoxemia, and placing an oxygen mask 
with high-­flow oxygen requires little technical skill but sometimes is 
forgotten.
TABLE 10.3  Diagnostic Evaluation of Shock 
for Pediatric Patients
ALL SHOCK ETIOLOGY
Blood sample:
Rapid blood glucose
Blood gas
CBC with differential
Chemistry panel
Blood lactate
Urine sample:
Urinalysis
Imaging:
Chest radiograph, two views
TRAUMATIC ETIOLOGY
Blood sample: type and cross-­match and coagulation studies
Point-­of-­care ultrasound examination of the abdomen
CARDIOLOGY ETIOLOGY
Electrocardiogram
Echocardiogram
SEPSIS ETIOLOGY
Blood sample: inflammatory markers, coagulation studies, and blood 
culture
Urine and spinal fluid for analysis and culture
Unexplained
bradycardia with
hypotension?
Unexplained
hypoxemia?
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Abdominal
or low
back pain?
No
Wheezing
with hives or
skin flushing?
No
1. Evaluate or treat for
    ingestion of negative
    inotropic drug
2. Initiate thyroid function
    tests
3. Consider treatment for
    addisonian crisis or
    steroid withdrawal
1. Volume resuscitate
2. Emergent abdominal
    computed tomography
    or surgical consultation
to evaluate for peritoneal
inflammation or vascular
rupture
Rule out pulmonary
embolism
Treat for
anaphylaxis
History
of trauma?
Evidence of
gastrointestinal
hemorrhage,
vomiting,
or diarrhea?
Fever or
hypothermia?
Echocardiographic 
evidence of poor 
contractility, congenital or
acquired heart disease, 
coronary artery disease, 
pericardial effusion 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
1. Begin treatment for
    sepsis syndrome
2. Search for source
    of infection
3. Consider thyroid
    function tests
Search for:
1. Hemorrhagic shock
2. Tension pneumothorax
3. Cardiac tamponade
4. Cardiac injury
Volume resuscitate
No
1. Treat for cardiogenic shock
2. Consider massive
    pulmonary embolism
with right ventricular
strain effect
3. Treat tamponade 
    physiology 
Fig. 10.3  Flow diagram to classify undifferentiated shock. (Modified 
from Walls R, Hockberger R, Gausche-­Hill M. Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:71, Fig. 6.1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 10.4  Types of Shock
Types of Shock
Pathophysiology
Appearance
Examples
Treatments
Hypovolemic shock*
Decreased cardiac output 
due to volume depletion → 
decreased preload
Tachycardia and vasoconstriction main­
tain adequate circulation up to 30% of 
circulating volume
Narrowed pulse pressure, delayed 
capillary refill, orthostatic changes, late 
hypotension, AMS, and decreased UOP
Nonhemorrhagic (vomiting 
and diarrhea)
Hemorrhagic (trauma)
IV fluid bolus
Vasopressors
Blood replacement
Cardiogenic shock
Decreased cardiac output due 
to myocardial dysfunction, 
increased afterload, and/or 
lack of ventricular filling
Tachycardia, vasoconstriction, cool 
extremities, narrow pulse pressure, 
delayed capillary refill, respiratory dis­
tress, rales or gallop rhythm, enlarged 
liver, JVD, cardiomegaly on chest 
radiograph
Significant gradient between upper and 
lower extremity blood pressures
Cardiomyopathies, infectious 
myocarditis, and systemic 
inflammatory process, auto­
immune disease, impaired 
coronary perfusion, cardio­
pulmonary bypass, acidosis, 
HIE, and dysrhythmias
Infants: ductal dependent 
lesions, tachydysrhythmias
Judicious IV fluid resuscitation, 
ionotropic agents to improve 
contractility, vasodilators to 
reduce afterload, and man­
agement of tachyarrhythmias
PGE for infants <2 mo
Distributive shock
Decreased cardiac output 
and systemic vascular 
resistance due to peripheral 
vasodilation → decreased 
afterload and preload, 
redistribution of blood flow 
away from vital organs, and 
loss of sympathetic outflow
Tachycardic, vasodilated, flushed, warm 
extremities, wide pulse pressure, 
bounding pulses, flush capillary refill
Anaphylaxis: rash; facial swelling; lip, 
tongue, or airway swelling; broncho­
spasm; hypotension
Spinal shock: unable to raise HR, hypo­
tension
Septic shock
Toxic ingestions
Anaphylaxis
Spinal cord injuries
IV fluids, vasopressors, antibiotics
Specific antidotes
Remove triggers, IV fluids, IM 
epinephrine, antihistamines, 
vasopressors
IV fluids, vasoconstrictors
Obstructive shock
Decreased cardiac output due 
to increased afterload of 
the right ventricle from an 
obstructive process
Tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, cool 
extremities, narrow pulse pressure, 
distended neck veins, distant heart 
tones, asymmetric breath sounds
Tension pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolism
Cardiac tamponade
Evacuate pneumothorax
Anticoagulants
Drain pericardial effusion
Dissociative shock
High cardiac output failure 
due to inadequate oxygen-­
releasing capacity
Tachycardia, +/- delayed capillary refill, 
cool extremities, weakened pulse pallor 
or flushed cheeks
Anemia
Carbon monoxide
Methemoglobinemia
Gradual fluid replacement and 
blood replacement 5 mL/dL
Oxygen, hyperbaric chamber
Methylene blue
Cyanide
Hydroxocobalamine and 
cyanide antidote kit (sodium 
thiosulfate, sodium nitrate, 
amyl nitrite) plus oxygen.
AMS, altered mental status; HIE, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathies; HR, heart rate; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; JVD, jugular venous disten­
tion; PGE, prostaglandin; UOP, urine output.
*Most common.
TABLE 10.5  Definitions for Terminology Used for Septic Shock States
Sepsis
SIRS
Temperature abnormality
Leukocyte count elevated or depressed for age
Fever >38.5°C or <36°C
Plus either
HR abnormality
HR >2 SD above normal without external stimulus or 
bradycardia in child <1 yr old without a source
RR abnormality
RR >2 SD above normal for age or mechanical ventilation
Infection
Suspected or proven caused by any pathogen based on 
exam or laboratory and imaging findings
+ Cardiac 
­Dysfunction
Cardiac dysfunction
(Despite >40 mL/kg isotonic fluid in 1 hr)
Hypotension
<5th percental for age
Need for vasoactive drug
Or two of the following:
Unexplained metabolic acidosis
Base deficit >5.0 mEq/L
Increased arterial lactate
>2× the upper limit of normal
Oliguria
Urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr
Prolonged cap refill
>5 sec
Core-to-peripheral temp gap
>3°C
HR, heart rate; RR, respiratory rate; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
183
CHAPTER 10  Shock
In shock, obtaining rapid vascular access is required to restore 
circulating volume, obtain blood samples, and administer vasoactive 
medications and antibiotics if indicated. Ideally vascular access would 
be obtained in the first 5 minutes after recognition of shock. Although 
intravenous vascular access protocols can vary, traditionally, after two 
attempts at peripheral access, alternative methods should be used. 
Intraosseous access has been shown to be a rapid and effective method 
to obtain access within 2 minutes with an 80–100% success rate. Opti­
mally, a patient with shock should have two large-­bore intravenous 
lines placed.
Once intravenous access is obtained, administration of intravenous 
fluids will treat shock, and the patient’s response to the fluids admin­
istered will also aid in the determination of the etiology of the shock 
(Table 10.8). Fluid boluses of 20 mL/kg of isotonic crystalloid fluid 
should be administered as quickly as possible. In neonates or children 
with pre-­existing cardiovascular compromise, a fluid bolus of 10 mL/
kg of isotonic fluid may be considered with careful assessment after 
each bolus, and repeat boluses as needed to treat shock. Monitor for 
signs of fluid overload, including rales, respiratory distress, or hep­
atomegaly. Several intravenous fluid infusion strategies exist and vary 
based on speed of infusion rate, equipment and preparation needed, 
unique benefits, and limitations.
Rapid identification of reversible causes of shock should be pri­
oritized by clinicians as intravenous access is being obtained. If the 
patient has a traumatic mechanism of injury, then active bleeding, ten­
sion pneumothorax, and cardiac tamponade should be identified and 
appropriate interventions initiated. If the child is known to have been 
exposed to an allergen, then treatment of anaphylaxis should be pur­
sued. If the ECG identifies a cardiac arrythmia, then treatment for life-­
threatening causes should be pursued. If the patient is an infant within 
the first month of life, a ductal-­dependent cardiac lesion may cause 
shock and initiation of prostaglandins should be considered. If the 
patient is not responsive to interventions or there is concern for adre­
nal insufficiency, then systemic corticosteroids should be administered.
TABLE 10.6  Differential Diagnosis of Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
Infection
 • Bacteremia or meningitis (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae 
type b, Neisseria meningitidis, group A Streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus)
 • Viral illness (influenza, enteroviruses, hemorrhagic fever group, herpes simplex 
virus, respiratory syncytial virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, COVID-­19)
 • Encephalitis (arboviruses, enteroviruses, herpes simplex virus)
 • Rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Ehrlichia, Q fever)
 • Syphilis
 • Vaccine reaction (pertussis, influenza, measles)
 • Toxin-­mediated reaction (toxic shock, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome)
Cardiopulmonary
 • Pneumonia (bacteria, virus, mycobacteria, fungi, allergic reaction)
 • Pulmonary emboli
 • Heart failure
 • Arrhythmia
 • Pericarditis
 • Myocarditis
Metabolic-­Endocrine
 • Adrenal insufficiency (adrenogenital syndrome, Addison disease, corticoste­
roid withdrawal)
 • Electrolyte disturbances (hypo-­ or hypernatremia, hypo-­ or hypercalcemia)
 • Diabetes insipidus
 • Diabetes mellitus
 • Inborn errors of metabolism (organic acidosis, urea cycle, carnitine deficiency, 
mitochondrial disorders)
 • Hypoglycemia
Gastrointestinal
 • Gastroenteritis with dehydration
 • Volvulus
 • Intussusception
 • Appendicitis
 • Peritonitis (spontaneous, associated with perforation or peritoneal dialysis)
 • Necrotizing enterocolitis
 • Hepatitis
 • Hemorrhage
 • Pancreatitis
Hematologic/Immune
 • Anemia (sickle cell disease, blood loss, nutritional)
 • Methemoglobinemia
 • Splenic sequestration crisis
 • Leukemia or lymphoma
 • Hemophagocytic syndromes
 • Cytokine release syndrome s/p CAR-­T therapy
 • Immune reconstitution syndrome
 • Graft versus host disease
Neurologic
 • Intoxication (drugs, carbon monoxide, intentional or accidental overdose)
 • Intracranial hemorrhage
 • Infant botulism
 • Trauma (child abuse, accidental)
 • Guillain-­Barre syndrome
 • Myasthenia gravis
Other
 • Anaphylaxis (food, drug, insect sting, idiopathic)
 • Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
 • Kawasaki disease
 • Erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis
 • MIS-­C
 • Poisoning, iron, cyanide
 • Toxic envenomation
 • Systemic JIA
 • Macrophage activation syndrome
 • Idiopathic systemic capillary leak (Clarkson) syndrome
CAR-­T, chimeric antigen receptor T-­cell; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children; S/P, status post.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
184
SECTION 3   Cardiac Disorders
ANAPHYLAXIS
Anaphylaxis is an acute life-­threatening allergic reaction that may be 
initially overlooked as a cause of shock. The presentation is often rapid 
(usually minutes or hours) following exposure to a triggering agent 
(Fig. 10.4 and Tables 10.9 and 10.10). The skin and respiratory sys­
tems are the most commonly affected sites. The differential diagnosis 
is noted in Table 10.11. Elevated serum tryptase levels may be present 
within 5 hours of onset but should not be relied upon to initiate ther­
apy. Treatment relies on epinephrine as the first-­line and most import­
ant agent (Table 10.12).
TABLE 10.7  Pediatric Sepsis Management 
Algorithm
Time
Intervention
0 min
Recognize signs of severe sepsis
Identify temperature and HR abnormality + either altered mental 
status, perfusion, other vitals, or high risk for sepsis
Provider notification
5 min
Provider/RN assessment
ABCDE, mental status
Monitor and complete VS
Immediate IV access
Obtain labs
Administer high-­flow o2
Order antibiotics
5–20 min
Rapid-­push fluid resuscitation, 20 mL/kg isotonic saline
Repeat boluses as needed if no hepatomegaly, rales, or crackles
Initiate IV antibiotics
Order vasopressors to the bedside
Fluid refractory shock: initiate vasopressors
Cold shock: epinephrine or dopamine if epinephrine not 
available
Warm shock: norepinephrine or dopamine if norepinephrine is 
not available
Notify PICU
20–40 min
Monitor response
MS, VS, airway, breathing, perfusion
Detailed H&P to identify infection source
40–60 min
Catecholamine-­resistant shock
Consider hydrocortisone if at risk for absolute adrenal 
insufficiency
Consider additional inotropes, vasopressors, and vasodila­
tors as clinically indicated
Goal is normal MAP/CVP, Scvo2 >70%, and CI 3.3–6.0 L/
min/m2
Persistent catecholamine-­resistant shock
Evaluate for pericardial effusion or pneumothorax
Refractory shock
ECMO
ABCDE, airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure; CI, cardiac 
index; CVP, central venous pressure; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation; H&P, history and physical examination; HR, heart rate; IV, 
intravenous; MAP, mean arterial pressure; MS, mental status; PICU, 
pediatric intensive care unit; Scvo2, central venous oxygen saturation; 
VS, vital signs.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
185
CHAPTER 10  Shock
Septic shock with myocardial failure (hypodynamic shock)
Overdose of negative inotropic drug
β Blocker
Calcium channel antagonist
Structural cardiac damage
Traumatic (e.g., flail mitral valve)
Ventriculoseptal rupture
Papillary muscle rupture
IMMEDIATE RELIEF FROM OBSTRUCTION TO 
CARDIAC OUTPUT
Pulmonary embolism
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
Valvular dysfunction
Acute thrombosis of prosthetic valve
Critical aortic stenosis
Congenital heart defects in newborn (e.g., closure of patent ductus 
arteriosus, with critical aortic coarctation)
Critical idiopathic subaortic stenosis (hypertrophic obstructive 
­cardiomyopathy)
SPECIFIC ANTIDOTES DUE TO CELLULAR OR 
MITOCHONDRIAL POISONS
Carbon monoxide
Methemoglobinemia
Hydrogen sulfide
Cyanide
PRIMARILY INFUSION OF VOLUME
Hemorrhagic shock
Traumatic
Gastrointestinal
Body cavity
Hypovolemia
Gastrointestinal losses
Dehydration from insensible losses
Third-space sequestration from inflammation
VOLUME INFUSION AND VASOPRESSOR SUPPORT
Septic shock
Anaphylactic shock
Central neurogenic shock
Drug overdose
IMPROVEMENT IN PUMP FUNCTION BY INFUSION OF 
INOTROPIC SUPPORT OR REVERSAL OF THE CAUSE OF 
PUMP DYSFUNCTION
Myocardial ischemia
Coronary artery thrombosis
Arterial hypotension with hypoxemia
Cardiomyopathy
Acute myocarditis
Chronic diseases of heart muscle (ischemic, diabetic, infiltrative, 
­endocrinologic, congenital)
Cardiac rhythm disturbances
Atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response
Ventricular tachycardia
Supraventricular tachycardia
TABLE 10.8  Five Categories of Shock According to Primary Treatment of Causes and Problems
From Walls R, Hockberger R, Gausche-­Hill M. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 9th ed., Vol. 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:69, Box 6.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Anaphylaxis is
likely when any
one of the three
criteria is fulfilled:
1
Acute onset of an illness
(minutes to several hours)
with involvement of:
Pruritus
Flushing
Hives
Angioedema
Dyspnea
Wheeze-bronchospasm
↓ Peak expiratory flow
Stridor
Hypoxemia
Collapse
Syncope
Incontinence
Skin and/or mucosa
And either
Or
Respiratory compromise
↓ BP or end-organ
dysfunction
2
2 or more of the following that
occur rapidly after exposure to
a likely allergen for that patient:
Pruritus
Flushing
Hives
Angioedema
Dyspnea
Wheeze-bronchospasm
↓ Peak expiratory flow
Stridor
Hypoxemia
Collapse
Syncope
Incontinence
Skin and/or mucosa
Respiratory compromise
↓ BP or end-organ
dysfunction
Vomiting
Crampy abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Persistent GI symptoms
3
After exposure to known allergen
for that patient
(minutes to several hours):
↓ BP
Fig. 10.4  Visual presentation of anaphylaxis criteria. (From Campbell RL, Li JTC, Nicklas RA, et al. Emergency 
department diagnosis and treatment of anaphylaxis: a practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 
2014;113:599–608.)
TABLE 10.9  Symptoms and Signs of Anaphylaxis in Infants
Anaphylaxis Symptoms That 
Infants Cannot Describe
Anaphylaxis Signs That May Be Difficult to 
Interpret/Unhelpful in Infants (and Why)
Anaphylaxis Signs in Infants
GENERAL
Feeling of warmth, weakness, anxiety, 
­apprehension, impending doom
Nonspecific behavioral changes such as persistent crying, 
fussing, irritability, fright
SKIN/MUCOUS MEMBRANES
Itching of lips, tongue, palate, uvula, ears, 
throat, nose, eyes, etc.; mouth tingling 
or metallic taste
Flushing (may also occur with fever, hyperthermia, or crying 
spells)
Rapid onset of hives (potentially difficult to discern 
in infants with acute atopic dermatitis; scratching 
and excoriations will be absent in young infants); 
angioedema (face, tongue, oropharynx)
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Nasal congestion, throat tightness, chest 
tightness, shortness of breath
Hoarseness, dysphonia (common after a crying spell), drooling 
or increased secretions (common in infants)
Rapid onset of coughing, choking, stridor, wheez­
ing, dyspnea, apnea, cyanosis
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Dysphagia, nausea, abdominal 
pain/cramping
Spitting up/regurgitation (common after foods), loose stool (normal 
in infants, especially if breastfed), colicky abdominal pain
Sudden, profuse vomiting
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Feeling faint, presyncope, dizziness, 
confusion, blurred vision, difficulty 
in hearing, palpitations
Hypotension (need appropriate-­size blood pressure cuff; low 
systolic blood pressure for children is defined as <70 mm Hg 
from 1 mo to 1 yr, and less than (70 mm Hg + [2 × age in yr]) 
from 1 to 2 yr; tachycardia, defined as 120–130 beats/min 
from 3 mo to 2 yr; loss of bowel and bladder control 
(ubiquitous in infants)
Weak pulse, arrhythmia, diaphoresis/sweating, 
collapse/unconsciousness
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Headache
Drowsiness, somnolence (common in infants after feeds)
Rapid onset of unresponsiveness, lethargy, or 
hypotonia; seizures
Adopted from Simons FER. Anaphylaxis in infants: can recognition and management be improved? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120:537–540.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
187
CHAPTER 10  Shock
TABLE 10.11  Differential Diagnosis of 
Anaphylaxis
 • Acute generalized urticaria
 • Asthma exacerbation
 • Pulmonary embolus
 • Syncope
 • Adverse cutaneous drug reaction
 • Anxiety/panic attacks
Flush Syndrome
 • Flushing associated with food
 • Alcohol
 • MSG
 • Sulfites
 • Scombroidosis
 • Carcinoid tumor
 • Perimenopause
 • Thyrotoxicosis
 • Basophilic leukemia
 • Mastocytosis (systemic mastocytosis and urticaria pigmentosa)
 • Vasointestinal peptide tumors
 • Auriculotemporal syndrome (Frey syndrome-gustatory flushing)
Shock Syndromes
 • Septic shock
 • Hypovolemic shock
 • Cardiogenic shock
 • Distributive shock
Miscellaneous
 • Hypoglycemia
 • Acquired and HAE
 • ACE inhibitor–associated angioedema
 • Red man syndrome (vancomycin)
 • Neurologic disorders (seizure, stroke, autonomic epilepsy)
 • Vocal cord dysfunction syndrome
 • Pheochromocytoma
ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme; HAE, hereditary angioedema; 
MSG, monosodium glutamate.
Modified from Walls R, Hockberger R, Gausche-­Hill M. Rosen’s Emer­
gency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2018:1424, Box 109.6.
TABLE 10.10  Anaphylaxis Triggers in the 
Community
Allergen Triggers (IgE-­
Dependent Immunologic 
Mechanism)*
Other Immune Mechanisms 
(IgE Independent)
Foods (e.g., peanuts, tree nuts, 
shellfish, fish, milk, egg, wheat, 
soy, sesame, meat [galactose-­α-­
1,3-­galactose])
IgG mediated (infliximab, high-­
molecular-­weight dextrans)
Immune aggregates (IVIG)
Drugs (aspirin, NSAID, opiates, 
contrast material, ethylene oxide/
dialysis tubing)
Complement activation
Physical factors (e.g., exercise,† cold, 
heat, sunlight/ultraviolet radiation)
Ethanol
Idiopathic*
Food additives (e.g., spices, colorants, 
vegetable gums, contaminants)
Stinging insects: Hymenoptera 
species (e.g., bees, yellow jackets, 
wasps, hornets, fire ants)
Medications (e.g., β-­lactam 
­antibiotics, ibuprofen)
Biologic agents (e.g., ­monoclonal 
antibodies [infliximab, ­omalizumab] 
and allergens [challenge tests, 
specific ­immunotherapy])
Natural rubber latex
Vaccines
Inhalants (rare) (e.g., horse or ham­
ster dander, grass pollen)
Previously unrecognized allergens 
(foods, venoms, biting-­insect saliva, 
medications, biologic agents)
IgE, immunoglobulin E; IVIG, intravenous immune globulin; NSAID, non­
steroidal antiinflammatory drug.
*In the pediatric population, some anaphylaxis triggers, such as hor­
mones (progesterone), seminal fluid, and occupational allergens, are 
uncommon, as is idiopathic anaphylaxis.
†Exercise with or without a co-­trigger, such as a food or medication, cold 
air, or cold water.
Adapted from Leung DYM, Sampson HA, Geha RS, et al. Pediatric 
Allergy Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010:652.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
188
SECTION 3   Cardiac Disorders
Emergency Measures (Taken Simultaneously)
Remove any triggering agent.
Place patient in supine position.
Begin cardiac monitoring, pulse oximetry, and blood pressure autonomic monitoring.
Begin supplemental oxygen if indicated.
Establish large-bore IV lines (e.g., 16 or 18 gauge).
Establish a patent airway.
Be prepared for endotracheal intubation with or without rapid sequence intubation.
Be prepared to use adjunct airway technique (e.g., awake fiberoptic intuba­
tion, surgical airway).
Start rapid infusion of isotonic crystalloid (normal saline):
Adult: 1,000 mL IV in the first 5 min in the adult (several liters of normal 
saline may be required)
Pediatric: 20–30 mL/kg IV increments
Anaphylaxis Treatment Medications
First-Line Agent
Epinephrine is the first-line medication and should be given immediately at 
the first suspicion of an anaphylactic reaction.
Adult: 0.3–0.5 mg IM (1:1,000 concentration) in anterolateral thigh every 
5–10 min as necessary
Pediatric: 0.01 mg/kg IM (1:1,000 concentration) in anterolateral thigh 
every 5–10 min as necessary
Alternatively, epinephrine (EpiPen, 0.3 mL; or EpiPen Jr, 0.15 mL) can be 
administered into anterolateral thigh.
Second-Line Agents (Should Not Precede the Administration 
of Epinephrine)
Antihistamines
Diphenhydramine:
Adult: 50 mg IV or 50 mg oral
Pediatric: 1 mg/kg IV or oral
Ranitidine*:
Adult: 50 mg IV (150 mg oral)
Pediatric 1 mg/kg IV or oral
Aerosolized β-Agonists (if Bronchospasm Is Present)
Adult:
Albuterol: 2.5 mg, diluted to 3 mL of normal saline; may be given 
continuously
Ipratropium: 0.5 mg in 3 mL of normal saline; repeat as necessary
Pediatric:
Albuterol: 2.5 mg, diluted to 3 mL of normal saline; may be given contin­
uously
Ipratropium: 0.25 mg in 3 mL of normal saline; repeat as 
necessary
Glucocorticoids (No Benefit in the Acute Management)
Methylprednisolone:
Adult: 125–250 mg IV
Pediatric: 1–2 mg/kg IV
Prednisone/prednisolone:
Adult: 40–60 mg oral
Pediatric: 1–2 mg/kg oral
Refractory Hypotension
Consider continuous IV epinephrine drip (dilute 1 mg [1 mL 1:1,000] in 
1,000 mL of normal saline or D5W to yield a concentration 
of 1 μg/mL)
Adult: 1–10 μg/min IV (titrated to desired effect)
Pediatric: 0.1–1.5 μg/kg/min IV (titrated to desired effect)
Other Vasopressors to Consider
Dopamine: 5–20 μg/kg/min continuous IV infusion (titrated to desired 
effect)
Norepinephrine: 0.05–0.5 μg/kg/min (titrated to desired effect)
Phenylephrine: 1–5 μg/kg/min (titrated to desired effect)
Vasopressin: 0.01–0.4 units/min (titrated to desired effect)
Patients Receiving β-Blockade
Glucagon: 1–5 mg IV over 5 min, followed by 5–15 μg/min continuous IV 
infusion
TABLE 10.12  Treatment Algorithm for Anaphylaxis
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
*Alternate drugs include cimetidine or famotidine in appropriate dosages.
From Walls R, Hockberger R, Gausche-­Hill M. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 9th ed, Vol. 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:1426, Box 109.7.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Shock is a serious result of many pediatric diseases with distinct pat­
terns (see Fig. 10.2 and Table 10.4). A careful history and physical exam 
will help identify both predisposing conditions (congenital anomalies, 
immunosuppression, immune deficiencies) and possible etiologies 
(gastroenteritis, hemorrhage, fever, rash).
SIRS is a final common pathway for many inflammatory conditions 
(see Table 10.6); sepsis is a leading cause, although there are serious 
disorders that “mimic” sepsis.
Red flags of shock/SIRS are noted in Table 10.13 (next page).
   
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
189
CHAPTER 10  Shock
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 10.13  Red Flags of Shock/SIRS
General
Recurrent episodes
Culture-­negative presumed sepsis
Fluid unresponsive shock
Atypical or unusual rashes
Medical devices: CVL, urinary catheter
Weight loss
Night sweats
Travel to endemic areas
Exposure to infected people
Coagulopathy (DIC)
Salt craving, pigmentation
Weaning chronic steroids
Cardiogenic Concerns
Cardiomegaly
↑ Tachypnea, tachycardia during fluid resuscitation
Pulmonary edema, hypoxia during fluid resuscitation
Elevated troponin
Elevated BNP
Criteria for Kawasaki disease
Criteria for MIS-­C
History of palpitations or chest pain
Anaphylaxis Concern
Sudden onset
Urticaria/angioedema
Stridor
Wheezing
Exposure to medication, venoms
Anxiety
Intraabdominal Concern
Tender distended abdomen out of proportion to an ileus or shock
Bile-­stained emesis
Hepatic failure
Elevated lipase
Ascites
Hematemesis
Hematochezia
Immune Dysfunction Concern
Asplenia, splenectomy, sickle cell anemia
Cytopenia
Lymphopenia
Splenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Recurrent fevers
Elevated acute-­phase reactants: CRP, ESR, procalcitonin
Elevated ferritin
High total protein
Criteria for MAS
Criteria for HLH
Abnormal newborn screen
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; CVL, central venous line; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; 
MAS, macrophage activation syndrome; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome—children; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
189.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Shock Pathophysiology, Physical Examination, History, and 
Diagnostics
Balamuth F, Fitzgerald J, Weiss SL. Shock. In: Shaw KN, Bachur RG, eds. 
Fleisher and Ludwig’s Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2016.
Pediatric Advances Life Support: Provider Manual, American Heart ­Association.
Types of Shock
Balamuth F, Weiss SL, Neuman MI, et al. Pediatric severe sepsis in U.S. chil­
dren’s hospitals. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15(9):798–805.
Berlot G, Moratelli G, Tarchini M, et al. The conundrum of septic shock imi­
tators in patients with hematologic cancers: case presentation and possible 
differential diagnosis. Case Rep Crit Care. 2019. Article ID 6561018.
Carcillo JA, Davis AL, Zaritsky A. Role of early fluid resuscitation in pediatric 
septic shock. J Am Med Assoc. 1991;266(9):1242–1245.
Cruz AT, Perry AM, Williams EA, et al. Implementation of goal-­directed 
therapy for children with suspected sepsis in the emergency department. 
Pediatrics. 2011;127(3):e758–e766.
Dave S, Cho JJ. Neurogenic shock. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island 
(FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK459361/.
Davis AL, Carcillo JA, Aneja RK, et al. American College of Critical Care Medicine 
clinical practice parameters for hemodynamic support of pediatric and 
neonatal septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(6):1061–1093.
Drage LA. Life-­threatening rashes: dermatologic signs of four infectious dis­
eases. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999;74:68–72.
Goldstein B, Giroir B, Randolph A. International Pediatric Sepsis Consensus 
Conference: definitions for sepsis and organ dysfunction in pediatrics. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2005;6(1):2–8.
Han YY, Carcillo JA, Dragotta MA, et al. Early reversal of pediatric-­neonatal 
septic shock by community physicians is associated with improved out­
come. Pediatrics. 2003;112(4):793–799.
Hindi Z, Khaled AA, Abushahin A. Hemophagocytic syndrome masquerading 
as septic shock: an approach to such dilemma. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 
2017;5:1–4.
Kanegaye JT, Wilder MS, Molkara D, et al. Recognition of a Kawasaki disease 
shock syndrome. Pediatrics. 2009;123(5):e783–e789.
Kemp SF, Lockey RF. Anaphylaxis: a review of causes and mechanisms. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002;110:341–348.
Kim HI, Kim SW, Park GY, et al. Causes and treatment outcomes of Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in 82 adult patients. 
Korean J Intern Med. 2012;27:203–210.
Ku B, Funari MK, Lavelle J, Jacobstein C, Davis D, Fitzgerald J, Gerber J, 
Metjian T, Fesnak S, Hutchins L, Potts D, eds. Pathway for evaluation/
treatment of infants > 28 days of age and children with suspected severe 
sepsis. Clinical Pathways. 2010. https://www.chop.edu/clinical-­pathway/
sepsis-­emergent-­care-­clinical-­pathway.
Lachmann G, Spies C, Schenk T, et al. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: 
potentially underdiagnosed in intensive care units. Shock. 2018;50(2):
149–155.
Larsen GY, Mecham N, Greenberg R. An emergency department septic shock 
protocol and care guideline for children initiated at triage. Pediatrics. 
2011;127(6):e1585–e1592.
Long B, Koyfman A. Clinical mimics: an emergency medicine-­focused review 
of sepsis mimics. J Emerg Med. 2016;52(1):34–42.
Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-­directed therapy in the 
­treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):
1368–1377.
Ruth A, McCracken CE, Fortenberry JD, et al. Pediatric severe sepsis: current 
trends and outcomes from the Pediatric Health Information Systems data­
base. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15(9):828–838.
Schlapbach LJ, Straney L, Alexander J, et al. Mortality related to invasive infec­
tions, sepsis, and septic shock in critically ill children in Australia and New 
Zealand, 2002-­13: a multicentre retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect 
Dis. 2015;15(1):46–54.
Sinhabahu VP, Sunthraresan J, Wijeskara DS. Kawasaki shock syndrome in 
a 12-­year-­old girl mimicking septic shock. Case Reports Infect Dis. 2016. 
Article ID 4949036.
Val-­Flores L, For A, Santos A, et al. Is this septic shock? A rare case of distribu­
tive shock. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2014;26(4):416–420.
Weiss SL, Fitzgerald JC, Balamuth F, et al. Delayed antimicrobial therapy 
increases mortality and organ dysfunction duration in pediatric sepsis. Crit 
Care Med. 2014;42(11):2409–2417.
Weiss SL, Fitzgerald JC, Pappachan J, et al. Global epidemiology of pediatric 
severe sepsis: the sepsis prevalence, outcomes, and therapies study. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2015;191(10):1147–1157.
Zhang MM, Shi L, Li XH, et al. Clinical analysis of Kawasaki disease shock 
syndrome. Chin Med J. 2017;130:2891–2892.
Treatment of Shock
Association AH. Vascular access procedures. In: Pediatric Advanced Life Support. 
American Heart Association. 2006:1–21.
Auten JD, McLean JB, Kemp JD, et al. A pilot study of four intraosseous blood 
Transfusion strategies. J Spec Oper Med. 2018;18(3):50–56.
de Caen A. Venous access in the critically ill child: when the peripheral intra­
venous fails! Pediatr Emerg Care. 2007;23(6):422–424. Quiz 425–426.
Doniger SJ, Ishimine P, Fox JC, et al. Randomized controlled trial of 
ultrasound-­guided peripheral intravenous catheter placement versus tradi­
tional techniques in difficult-­access pediatric patients. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2009;25(3):154–159.
Duran-­Gehring P, Bryant L, Reynolds JA, et al. Ultrasound-­guided peripheral 
intravenous catheter training results in physician-­level success for emer­
gency department technicians. J Ultrasound Med. 2016;35(11):2343–2352.
El-­Nawawy AA, Omar OM, Khalil M. Intraosseous versus intravenous access 
in pediatric septic shock patients admitted to Alexandria University pedi­
atric intensive care unit. J Trop Pediatr. 2018;64(2):132–140.
Ellemunter H, Simma B, Trawöger R, et al. Intraosseous lines in preterm and full 
term neonates. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 1999;80(1):F74–F75.
Gallagher RA, Levy J, Vieira RL, et al. Ultrasound assistance for central venous 
catheter placement in a pediatric emergency department improves place­
ment success rates. Acad Emerg Med. 2014;21(9):981–986.
Kanter RK, Zimmerman JJ, Strauss RH, et al. Pediatric emergency intravenous 
access: evaluation of a protocol. Am J Dis Child. 1986;140(2):132–134.
King C, Henretig FM, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Procedures. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2008.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
