409
The most serious causes of acute scrotal swelling are testicular torsion 
and incarcerated inguinal hernia, both of which necessitate immedi­
ate surgical correction. Consequently, a prompt, careful approach to 
a painful or inflamed scrotum is essential. The differential diagnosis 
of scrotal swelling is extensive and varies depending on the age of the 
patient (Tables 24.1 and 24.2). The most common causes include testic­
ular torsion, torsion of the appendix testis, and epididymitis.
SCROTAL AND INGUINAL ANATOMY
Inguinal Region
The inguinal canal runs obliquely between the external and internal 
inguinal rings. The anterior wall of the canal is formed by the exter­
nal oblique aponeurosis; the posterior wall is formed by the inguinal 
ligament and conjoined tendon. The oblique direction of the inguinal 
canal allows for the posterior and anterior walls to coapt with increases 
in intraabdominal pressure.
Testis Descent
The testes develop in the lumbar region of the abdominal cavity between 
the peritoneum and the transversalis fascia at approximately 7 weeks of 
gestation. By the eighth week of gestation, the gubernaculum extends 
from the caudal end of the epididymis through the inguinal canal to insert 
on the internal wall of the scrotum. The processus vaginalis, a finger-­like 
outpouching of the peritoneum, extends adjacent to the gubernaculum 
to form the inguinal canal. As the processus vaginalis descends into the 
scrotum, it carries extensions of the abdominal wall layers.
The testis normally descends through the inguinal canal into the scro­
tum before birth. As the testis and spermatic cord descend through the 
inguinal canal, they are covered by the three concentric layers of the ante­
rior abdominal fascia (Fig. 24.1). When the testis reaches the scrotum, the 
testis and surrounding layers of fascia and tunica vaginalis fuse to the dartos 
of the scrotum. The processus vaginalis is initially patent, leaving a connec­
tion between the scrotum and the peritoneal cavity. Normally, the proces­
sus vaginalis obliterates, leaving a residual tunica vaginalis surrounding the 
testis. Typically, the tunica vaginalis contains 1–2 mL of clear fluid.
Scrotum
The scrotum has two separate compartments, each containing a testis, 
epididymis, and distal spermatic cord. It comprises multiple layers that 
are continuous with the superficial layers of the anterior abdominal 
wall. The external location of the scrotum results in the temperature of 
the testes being 2–3°F below the core body temperature, which allows 
for normal spermatogenesis.
Testis
The testes are the male reproductive organs and are suspended in the 
tunica vaginalis of the scrotum by the spermatic cords. The epididymis, 
attached to the testis posteriorly, consists of the caput (upper pole), cor­
pus (body), and cauda (tail) (Fig. 24.2). The vas deferens can be pal­
pated as a narrow, firm, tubular structure in the spermatic cord. The 
epididymis is responsible for sperm maturation and storage. Each testis 
relies on three arteries for its blood supply: the testicular artery, the 
cremasteric artery, and the deferential artery. Each enters the scrotum 
through the spermatic cord. The testicle receives both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic innervation. These autonomic nerves carry impulses 
that, with testicular stimulation, produce symptoms of deep visceral 
pain and nausea.
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGIES
History
In evaluating acute or chronic scrotal swelling, the following historical 
elements should be established:
	1.	 Onset of pain: Testicular torsion has a very sudden onset and can 
be precipitated by activity or can occur at rest or during sleep. 
Epididymitis or torsion of the appendix testis or other testicular 
appendage often has a more insidious onset over the course of days, 
with progressive pain and swelling.
	2.	 Duration of pain: Episodic pain lasting seconds and abating is 
rarely pathologic, whereas severe pain, persistent pain, or episodes 
lasting more than 1 hour raise concern.
	3.	 Associated/radiation of pain: If there is radiation of pain from 
the flank, then renal or ureteral pathologic processes, such as an 
obstructing ureteral calculus, should be considered. Inguinal dis­
comfort may suggest hernia or other inguinal pathology.
Although sometimes nonspecific, associated manifestations are 
also important:
	1.	 General systemic: Fever, chills, or rigors suggest an infectious 
cause.
	2.	 Abdominal signs/symptoms: Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal or 
inguinal pain are common but nonspecific. They may indicate an 
intestinal process.
	3.	 Urologic signs/symptoms: Dysuria, urinary frequency, hematuria, 
or penile discharge suggests an infectious process such as urinary 
tract infection, urethritis, or epididymitis.
	4.	 Unusual rashes: Henoch-­Schönlein purpura may result in vas­
culitis of the spermatic cord with associated scrotal pain and 
swelling.
In addition, a thorough medical history is imperative and should 
include the following:
	1.	 History of urinary tract infections or renal calculi.
	2.	 Prior sexual activity, which would raise the possibility of a sexually 
transmitted infection.
	3.	 History of any surgical procedures on the groin, scrotum, or abdo­
men. Often an orchiopexy performed for an undescended testis 
Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
John V. Kryger and Susan L. Jarosz
24
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
410
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
places the testis in a dartos pouch, which would make testicular 
torsion unlikely in the future.
	4.	 History of any previous episodes of testicular pain. Previous epi­
sodes of intermittent or severe pain in the same testis may be sec­
ondary to intermittent torsion of the testis.
	5.	 Lower urinary tract pathologic processes, such as posterior urethral 
valves, neuropathic bladder, or urethral stricture (e.g., after trauma 
or hypospadias repair), may predispose to urinary tract infection, 
which could cause bacterial epididymitis.
Physical Examination
Examination of the scrotal contents should be performed in any male 
patient presenting with abdominal, inguinal, or scrotal pain. Essential 
components include inspection, palpation, and transillumination of 
any masses.
Pubertal development. In prepubertal males, torsion of the appendix 
testis is more common than testicular torsion (Table 24.3). Conversely, 
in the postpubertal male, testicular torsion and epididymitis (if the 
patient is sexually active) are more common.
Scars in the inguinal region. Scars may imply previous surgery for 
hernia, hydrocele, undescended testis, or varicocele.
Scrotal skin changes and fixation. Erythema suggests an underlying 
inflammatory process but is nonspecific. Duskiness or fixation of the 
skin over the testis is suggestive of testicular necrosis.
Testis position within the scrotum. A testis positioned high in 
the scrotum is suggestive of testicular torsion. The spermatic cord 
TABLE 24.1  Differential Diagnosis of 
Scrotal Enlargement/Swelling in Young and 
Adolescent Males
Painful
Painless*
Testicular torsion
Torsion of testicular appendage 
(less common after adolescence)
Epididymoorchitis
Trauma: testicular rupture, 
hematocele
Inguinal hernia (incarcerated)
Mumps orchitis
Vasculitis
Hydrocele
Inguinal hernia (reducible)
Varicocele
Spermatocele (postpubertal males)
Testicular tumor (see Table 24.5)
ALL
Paratesticular tumor
Idiopathic scrotal edema
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
*Occasionally associated with discomfort.
ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
TABLE 24.2  Differential Diagnosis of 
Scrotal Swelling in Newborns
Hydrocele
Inguinal hernia (reducible)
Inguinal hernia (incarcerated)*
Testicular torsion*
Scrotal hematoma
Testicular tumor
Meconium peritonitis
Epididymitis*
*May be associated with scrotal inflammation.
Extraperitoneal fascia
Transversalis fascia
Transversus abdominis muscle
Internal oblique muscle
External oblique muscle
Testis
Gubernaculum
Processus vaginalis
Parietal peritoneum
Fig. 24.1  Descent of the testis from week 7 (postfertilization) to birth. As the testis and spermatic cord 
descend through the inguinal canal, they are covered by the three concentric layers of the anterior abdominal 
fascia. (From Drake RL, Vogl AW, Mitchell AWM, eds. Gray’s Anatomy for Students. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2015:253–420.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
411
CHAPTER 24  Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
shortens as it twists. The affected testis should be compared with the 
contralateral testis with respect to size, consistency, and tenderness. 
Accurate localization of pain to the testis, epididymis, or both is 
important.
Cremasteric reflex. Stimulated by gently scratching the ipsilateral 
medial thigh, reflexive cremaster muscle contraction causes the 
scrotum to retract. The presence of a symmetric cremasteric reflex 
makes testicular torsion less likely. An absent cremasteric reflex is 
nonspecific. Sometimes with anxiety, the testis of a child will retract 
high into the inguinal canal. An important maneuver to relax the 
cremaster muscle is to examine the patient in a seated position with 
the legs crossed.
Laboratory Data
Basic laboratory evaluation of acute and chronic testicular swelling 
includes UA, urine culture, and tests for Chlamydia and gonorrhea if 
the patient is sexually active.
Imaging Studies
Imaging studies are often helpful in determining the cause of acute 
and chronic testicular or scrotal swelling. They should not be sub­
stituted for a thorough history and careful physical examination 
performed by a surgical specialist. The conditions necessitating 
immediate surgical treatment include testicular torsion, incarcerated 
inguinal hernia, and testicular rupture secondary to trauma; testicu­
lar tumor mandates urgent surgical attention. If the history and phys­
ical examination strongly support the diagnosis of testicular torsion, 
then prompt surgical exploration is recommended, without confir­
mation by an imaging study. If the history or physical findings are 
equivocal for testicular torsion, or if an alternate diagnosis requires 
investigation, color Doppler ultrasonography should be obtained 
(Fig. 24.3). Sonography provides a relatively accurate image of the 
testis and epididymis, and color Doppler imaging assesses blood flow. 
It is performed by examining the uninvolved testis first and adjust­
ing the color flow settings to detect normal flow. The affected testis 
is then examined for decreased or absent flow in comparison with 
the normal testis. Color flow Doppler imaging distinguishes between 
the increased collateral blood flow within the scrotal skin and the 
decreased blood flow to the testis in patients with testicular torsion. 
The sensitivity of Doppler ultrasonography for detecting testicular 
torsion ranges from 69% to 100%, and specificity ranges from 77% to 
100%. Sonography can also help determine if a scrotal hematoma rep­
resents a testicular rupture. Color flow Doppler imaging accurately 
demonstrates increased flow resulting from torsion of the appendix 
testis or epididymitis but is usually unable to distinguish these two 
entities. It also cannot distinguish viral from bacterial epididymitis. 
If a tumor is present, sonography can demonstrate whether the mass 
arises from the testis or paratesticular structures. It can also distin­
guish the presence of a hydrocele, cyst, tumor, or varicocele. The test 
is quick, easy to perform, and noninvasive. There are several import­
ant limitations of color Doppler imaging:
TABLE 24.3  Differentiation of Acute Painful Scrotal Swelling in Childhood
Testicular Torsion
Epididymoorchitis
Torsion of the Appendix Testis
Age
Usually perinatal and 12–18 yr, but any 
age possible
Usually adolescence, but any age 
possible
2–12 yr
Symptoms and signs
Abrupt onset; may have previous similar 
episodes
Gradual onset
Gradual onset
Pain
Localized to the testis and may radiate 
to groin and lower abdomen
Localization to epididymis; may involve 
entire testis after 24 hr
Localization to upper pole of testis; may 
involve entire testis after 24 hr
Fever
Rare
Common
Rare
Vomiting
Common
Rare
Rare
Dysuria
Rare
Common
Rare
Physical examination
Testis may be high riding, swollen, 
exquisitely tender; scrotal erythema 
may be present; cremasteric reflex 
absent
Testis and epididymis are firm, tender, 
swollen; scrotal erythema may be 
present; cremasteric reflex present
Testis is normal or enlarged; firm mass 
may be seen or felt at upper pole, 
distinct from epididymis; scrotal 
erythema may be present; cremasteric 
reflex present
Pyuria, urinary infection
Rare
Possible, particularly in bacterial 
epididymitis
Rare
Blood flow (color Doppler study)
Diminished or absent
Increased
Normal or increased
Paradidymis—Organ
of Giraldes
Caput (head) of
epididymis
Corpus (body) of
epididymis
Cauda (tail) of
epididymis
Posterior
Appendix
epididymis
Appendix
testis
Superior
Inferior
Vas aberrans
of Haller
Anterior
Fig. 24.2  Lateral view of the testis showing the posterior location 
of epididymis and appendix testes. The appendix testis is present in 
almost all males, the appendix epididymis is present in approximately 
50% of males, and the other appendages are rarely present. (From 
Kelalis PP, King LR, Belman AB, eds. Clinical Pediatric Urology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1985.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
412
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
	1.	 If the duration of torsion is brief and if the torsional rotation is 
incomplete, there may be venous congestion without impairment 
of arterial blood flow; color Doppler imaging may demonstrate 
normal or decreased blood flow.
	2.	 In the prepubertal testis, blood flow may be difficult to demon­
strate, even when the testes are normal, and absence of flow may be 
misinterpreted for testicular torsion.
	3.	 The color Doppler aspect of the study is user dependent.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
(Table 24.4; see also Table 24.3)
Testicular Torsion
Testicular torsion is a surgical emergency because prolonged periods 
without blood flow lead to progressive ischemic changes within the tes­
tis. The likelihood of testicular survival depends on the duration and 
severity of torsion. Consequently, testicular survival depends on accu­
rate diagnosis and timely emergency management.
The incidence of spermatic cord torsion is 1 in 4,000 among male 
patients younger than 25 years. The peak ages for testicular torsion are 
in the neonatal period, as well as from the ages of 12 to 18 years. The 
pathogenesis of torsion and the presentation in these two age groups 
are different.
In testicular torsion, the testis and spermatic cord rotate or 
twist within the tunica vaginalis (termed “intravaginal” torsion), 
resulting in obstruction of venous drainage, followed by compro­
mise of arterial flow and subsequent infarction (Fig. 24.4). In many 
instances of torsion occurring beyond the neonatal period, a pre-­
existing anatomic abnormality termed the bell clapper deformity 
increases the likelihood of the testis rotating on the spermatic cord. 
The “bell clapper” refers to a redundant tunica vaginalis that inserts 
higher along the spermatic cord, allowing the testis to rotate freely 
within, and lie more transversely in the scrotum (Fig. 24.5). The 
deformity is common, present unilaterally in 17% and bilaterally in 
40% of males.
The likelihood of irreversible testicular damage depends on the 
severity and duration of torsion. If the torsion results in complete isch­
emia, the testis may become necrotic within 6–12 hours; however, if 
testicular torsion is incomplete, there may be continued arterial perfu­
sion for 24–48 hours. Because the viability of the testis cannot reliably 
be gauged based on the perceived duration of torsion, immediate sur­
gical exploration should always be considered.
Patients with testicular torsion typically experience the sudden 
onset of severe testicular pain and swelling. The event is often incor­
rectly attributed to minor trauma or exercise, but pain may also occur 
independent of activity or suddenly awaken the patient from sleep. The 
pain is usually localized to the affected hemiscrotum, and patients may 
also report inguinal or abdominal pain. Associated symptoms may 
include nausea and vomiting. Up to half of patients describe previous 
episodes of severe scrotal pain that resolved spontaneously. Dysuria 
and other voiding symptoms are absent.
On examination, the scrotum is erythematous and edematous, and 
the testis is enlarged and extremely tender (Fig. 24.6). If the patient 
has been experiencing severe pain for more than 24 hours, there may 
be too much inflammation to delineate the scrotal contents. The cre­
masteric reflex is usually always absent, although this is not a perfectly 
reliable sign. The testis may be high in the scrotum with a transverse lie. 
UA results are negative. If testicular torsion has been present for more 
than 48 hours, the scrotum is typically severely enlarged, erythema­
tous, and edematous, and the testis is an enlarged and indurated mass. 
Color Doppler imaging typically reveals hyperemia in the scrotal wall 
and absent testicular blood flow.
In most cases, the diagnosis of testicular torsion can be made from the 
history and physical examination. If torsion is the likely diagnosis, scrotal 
exploration should proceed immediately and should not be delayed await­
ing confirmatory imaging. If the diagnosis is uncertain, imaging should be 
obtained. Color Doppler ultrasonography typically demonstrates absent 
blood flow.
R
L
R
L
Fig. 24.3  Testicular torsion and axis change. A color Doppler ultrasound 
in the transverse plane shows color flow in the right testicle. The right 
testicle (R) is oval to circular because it has been evaluated in the trans­
verse plane. The left testicle (L) is elongated as if it is in the longitudinal 
plane. This axis change is the ultrasound equivalent of the worrisome 
clinical finding suggestive of torsion when accompanied by a history of 
sudden pain. Lack of color Doppler flow in the left testicle confirms a 
left testicular torsion. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic 
Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 126.13.)
TABLE 24.4  Causes of Acute Scrotal Pain
Common
Uncommon
Testicular torsion
Torsion of testicular appendage
Epididymitis (gonorrheal and/or chla­
mydial infection in sexually active 
adolescents)*
Trauma*
Scrotal edema (Henoch-­Schönlein 
purpura)
Pain referred to scrotum (nephrolithiasis, 
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, 
appendicitis, spinal cord tumor, IgA 
nephropathy)
Granulomatous orchitis*
Drug-­induced epididymitis 
(amiodarone)*
Behçet disease
Sarcoidosis
Polyarteritis nodosa*
Epididymitis (tuberculosis, brucel­
losis, actinomycosis, leprosy, 
Salmonella infection, fungal 
infection, parasitic infestation, 
Nocardia infection)
Orchitis (rickettsial, Nocardia 
infections, toxoplasmosis, 
cytomegalovirus, COVID-19)
Testicular pyocele
Fournier gangrene
Less Common
Orchitis (mumps, varicella, coxsackie­
virus, dengue)*
Abscess
Infarction
Malignancy: primary testicular neoplasm 
(e.g., seminoma), germ cell (usually 
painless mass)
Leukemia: primary or relapse (usually 
painless swelling)*
*Bilateral involvement possible.
IgA, immunoglobulin A.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
413
CHAPTER 24  Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
Some patients present with a history of severe testicular pain that 
resolved in the emergency room or on the way to the hospital. In these 
cases, intermittent torsion should be suspected. While immediate 
scrotal orchiopexy is not mandated under these circumstances, surgi­
cal fixation should still be considered, as the recurrence rate is high. 
Furthermore, some patients may fail to seek prompt medical evalua­
tion in the event of recurrence because of fear of surgery or wishful 
thinking that the torsion will spontaneously resolve again.
Surgical management of testicular torsion consists of exploration, 
detorsion, and evaluation of testicular viability. An infarcted testicle 
A
B
C
Epid.
Testis
Tunica vaginalis
(normal)
Torsion
Bell clapper
deformity
Fig. 24.4  A to C, Mechanism of testicular torsion associated with the bell clapper deformity. Epid, epididy­
mis. (From Fleisher GR, Ludwig S. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1993.)
A
D
E
C
B
Fig. 24.5  Anomalies of suspension associated with intravaginal tes­
ticular torsion. A, Normal. B, Envelopment by the tunica vaginalis. 
C, Inversion of the epididymis. D and E, Horizontal lie. Bell clapper 
deformity is shown in B through E. (From Kelalis PP, King LR, Bel­
man AB, eds. Clinical Pediatric Urology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1985.)
A
B
Fig. 24.6  A and B, Right testicular torsion in a newborn. The right hemi­
scrotum is darker, and the testis was indurated and enlarged. (From 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2831, Fig. 560.5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
414
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
is removed. If the testis is viable, orchiopexy is performed, in which 
the viable testis is fixed to the dartos layer of the scrotal wall with non­
absorbable sutures. Contralateral scrotal orchiopexy is also performed 
given the significant risk of contralateral torsion. If torsion is detected 
and treated within 4 hours of the onset of symptoms, the salvage rate 
approaches 100%; at 8–12 hours, it falls to 20%; and after 24 hours, 
infarction is likely.
Testicular torsion also occurs in the fetus and neonate. In these 
cases, torsion results from incomplete attachment of the gubernaculum 
and tunica vaginalis to the scrotal wall. The entire testis, epididymis, 
and tunica vaginalis twist in a process termed extravaginal testic­
ular torsion. If torsion occurs prenatally, the testis is typically large 
and firm. The ipsilateral hemiscrotum may be ecchymotic if torsion 
occurred shortly prior to birth, although if torsion occurred more 
remotely, ecchymoses may have resolved by the time of delivery. Pre­
natal torsion always results in a nonviable testis. Postnatal extravagi­
nal testicular torsion can occur up to 46 weeks’ corrected gestational 
age. Affected neonates typically have sudden onset of irritability with 
progressive enlargement of the testis, with associated scrotal erythema. 
Color Doppler ultrasonography in the neonate is fairly reliable in dis­
tinguishing testicular torsion from scrotal hematoma and testicular 
tumor. Although testicular salvage in neonates with in utero torsion 
is highly unlikely, urgent exploration is recommended to confirm the 
diagnosis and to perform a contralateral scrotal orchiopexy to protect 
the solitary remaining testis, which is also at risk for torsion. If there is 
a possibility that torsion occurred after birth, there is a chance of saving 
the testis, and immediate exploration is warranted.
TORSION OF THE APPENDIX TESTIS
The appendix testis, a vestigial remnant of the müllerian duct system, 
is attached to the upper pole of the testis and is present in approxi­
mately 90% of males. The appendix epididymis, a remnant of the wolf­
fian ducts, is present in about 10% of males. When these appendages 
are long and pedunculated, they tend to twist at their base, resulting 
in ischemia and eventual infarction (Fig. 24.7). This type of torsion is 
most common between 2 and 12 years of age and is uncommon in ado­
lescents. Torsion of the appendix testis results in progressive pain and 
inflammation of the epididymis and scrotum.
The onset of pain and swelling is typically gradual. Affected males 
often adopt a wide-­based gait but otherwise appear comfortable. Con­
stitutional symptoms are usually less severe than with testicular tor­
sion but may include nausea, vomiting, and pain referred to the lower 
abdomen. Physical examination reveals an erythematous and edema­
tous scrotum. Palpation of the testis may reveal a 3-­ to 5-­mm tender 
indurated mass on the upper pole. The torsed appendix testis may be 
visible through the scrotal skin; this finding is termed the blue dot sign 
and is present in approximately 20% of cases. As the duration of torsion 
increases, differentiation from testicular torsion becomes increasingly 
difficult as reactive inflammation of the testis and epididymis wors­
ens. A clinical diagnosis of torsion of the appendix testis should not be 
made unless the appendix testis is palpated or visualized.
The natural history of torsion of the appendix testis is for the 
inflammation to resolve gradually after infarction of the appendage. 
In general, the process is complete within 10 days from the onset of 
symptoms. Scrotal exploration and excision of the torsed appendage 
is unnecessary unless there is uncertainty regarding the diagnosis and 
testicular torsion is possible. If the diagnosis of torsion of the appen­
dix testis is highly likely, color Doppler ultrasonography is optional for 
confirmation. Management includes strict rest for 2–3 days and non­
steroidal antiinflammatory medications to reduce inflammation and 
pain. Vigorous activity such as sports should be restricted for at least 7 
days, as activity may worsen and prolong pain and swelling. The patient 
should be instructed to seek prompt medical evaluation if pain does 
worsen, as such worsening may be indicative of testicular torsion.
EPIDIDYMITIS, EPIDIDYMOORCHITIS, 
AND ORCHITIS
The inflammation of epididymitis may be caused by an infectious 
process or may be secondary to trauma, torsion of the appendix tes­
tis, or sterile reflux of urine down the vas deferens. Pain and swell­
ing are typically insidious in onset. Patients may have associated 
dysuria, urgency, frequency, and urethral discharge, and some may 
report transient episodes of inguinal pain that preceded the onset 
of testicular symptoms and that were secondary to spermatic cord 
inflammation. The epididymis is tender, enlarged, indurated, and 
situated posterior to the testis; in epididymoorchitis, inflammation 
progresses to involve the testis, which also becomes enlarged and 
tender. A reactive hydrocele may be present, obscuring testicular 
examination. The cremasteric reflex is typically preserved. Isolated 
orchitis is less common, particularly in prepubertal males, though 
it may be seen in postpubertal males with mumps virus infection.
Bacterial epididymitis usually results from urethral infection pass­
ing retrograde through the vas deferens to the epididymis (Fig. 24.8). 
In prepubertal males, bacterial epididymitis is most frequently second­
ary to a structural abnormality of the lower genitourinary tract, such 
as ectopic ureter, ectopic vas deferens, or urethral stricture, or may be 
secondary to dysfunctional voiding. UA typically demonstrates pyuria, 
bacteriuria, or both, and bacterial culture of the urine may isolate 
the causative organism, usually a gram-­negative coliform. Given the 
association with underlying urogenital abnormalities, further eval­
uation should include renal ultrasonography and voiding cystoure­
thrography. In postpubertal males without underlying genitourinary 
abnormalities, bacterial epididymitis is most frequently caused by sex­
ually transmitted infection, typically Chlamydia trachomatis, although 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Ureaplasma urealyticum may be causative 
as well. Additional causes of bacterial epididymitis include extension 
of urinary tract infection or infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
or mycobacteria. UA and bacterial culture of the urine should be 
obtained, as should nucleic acid amplification tests for C. trachomatis 
and N. gonorrhoeae from urine or urethral swab specimens. Patients 
whose epididymitis is related to a sexually transmitted infection should 
further be tested for syphilis and HIV.
Viral epididymitis may be difficult to distinguish from noninfectious 
inflammatory causes of epididymitis. Enteroviruses and adenoviruses 
are typically implicated, either as a primary infection or as a postinfec­
tious sequela. The inflammation of orchitis most commonly represents 
Fig. 24.7  Torsed appendix epididymis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
415
CHAPTER 24  Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
an extension of epididymitis; however, isolated orchitis may be seen in 
males with mumps infection. This manifestation is rare in prepubertal 
males, though it may complicate infection in up to 35% of postpuber­
tal males. The onset of orchitis usually occurs within 1 week of the onset 
of mumps parotitis and is more frequently unilateral. Diagnosis may be 
clinical, although given the markedly decreased incidence of mumps fol­
lowing the introduction of an effective vaccine and the possibility of alter­
nate infectious etiologies, confirmatory testing may be obtained. Patients 
with parotitis may provide buccal swabs or saliva samples for nucleic acid 
amplification testing. Mumps-­specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) anti­
body testing or acute and convalescent serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
antibody titer quantification may confirm the diagnosis. Up to a third of 
patients with mumps orchitis develop testicular atrophy and subfertility, 
although true infertility is rare, even with bilateral testicular involvement.
Noninfectious etiologies of epididymitis include torsion of the 
appendix testis, trauma, and medication exposure, particularly to 
amiodarone. Scrotal ultrasonography shows epididymal swelling and 
hyperemia consistent with epididymitis. Urinalysis and urine culture 
reveal no evidence of bacterial urinary tract infection.
TRAUMA AND HEMATOCELE
Blunt scrotal trauma can result in a spectrum of injuries ranging 
from testicular contusion to testicular rupture (Fig. 24.9). Testicular 
injuries usually result from a fall, kick, or direct blow from a blunt 
object that compresses the testis up against the pubic bone. A detailed 
history of the nature of the injury aids in recognizing the likelihood 
of serious testicular injury. With disruption of the tunica albuginea 
(capsule) of the testis, there is such significant painful scrotal swelling 
that the testis cannot be palpated. Often there is associated erythema 
or ecchymosis of the scrotal wall. In cases of suspected testicular 
injury, other diagnoses such as torsion and epididymitis should be 
considered. Scrotal ultrasonography should be performed to assess 
the integrity of the testis and to assess for torsion. UA should be per­
formed to assess for bacterial epididymitis.
VARICOCELE
A varicocele is an abnormal dilation of the veins of the pampiniform 
plexus in the scrotum. Varicoceles are rare under 10 years of age; 
approximately 10% of adolescent males and 15% of adult males have 
a varicocele. The increased prevalence among adolescents and adults 
is secondary to the increased testicular blood flow that occurs with 
puberty. More than 95% of varicoceles are left-­sided, likely secondary 
to the higher venous pressure of the left internal spermatic vein and the 
absence of a venous valve at the insertion of the left internal spermatic 
vein into the renal vein. If a varicocele is detected on the right side or in 
a male younger than 10 years old, abdominal ultrasonography is indi­
cated to ascertain whether an abdominal tumor is present.
A varicocele manifests as a painless, paratesticular mass often 
described as a “bag of worms” (Fig. 24.10). On occasion, patients describe 
a chronic, dull ache in or adjacent to the testis. Physical examination in 
both the supine and the upright positions, with and without the Valsalva 
Fig. 24.8  Epididymitis in a 6-­year-­old male. Note the reactive orchitis as 
well as the significant enlargement of the epididymis.
A
B
Fig. 24.9  A, Appearance in an 8-­year-­old male kicked in the scrotum while performing karate with his brother. 
Note right scrotal swelling. An ultrasound study showed scrotal hematoma and a ruptured testis. B, Scrotal 
exploration shows a nonviable testis. Orchiectomy was performed.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
416
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
maneuver, facilitates the diagnosis. Typically, the varicocele is decom­
pressed while supine and is more prominent when standing. Measuring 
the volume of both testicles is important to document size discrepancies, 
as approximately one third of affected males have associated volume loss. 
Calipers, an orchiometer, or ultrasonography may be used.
Appropriate and timely diagnosis is essential, as an untreated vari­
cocele may lead to degeneration of germinal centers, interstitial fibrosis, 
and impaired spermatogenesis and testosterone production. Up to 15% 
of adult males with a varicocele are infertile. The goal in treatment of a 
varicocele is preservation and restoration of spermatogenesis. Because 
the majority of testicular volume is composed of seminiferous tubules, 
if the left testis is significantly smaller than the right, the clinician 
may presume that the varicocele has affected testicular growth. Typi­
cally, after varicocelectomy in an adolescent, the testis shows catch-­up 
growth. Surgical management does not guarantee paternity as an adult.
INGUINAL HERNIA
Hernias and hydroceles result from incomplete obliteration of the pro­
cessus vaginalis. Indirect inguinal hernias result from a patent processus 
vaginalis that allows bowel or omentum to pass through the internal 
inguinal ring (Fig. 24.11). Patients usually present with inguinal swell­
ing, scrotal swelling, or both. While swelling should reduce with gen­
tle pressure, a hernia that cannot be reduced is called an incarcerated 
hernia and is a surgical emergency, as the vascular supply of the her­
niated bowel may become compromised (Fig. 24.12). Physical signs of 
incarceration include inguinal or scrotal erythema, pain, signs of bowel 
obstruction, and inability to reduce the hernia. Infants with an incar­
cerated hernia have a 10% incidence of ipsilateral testicular infarction 
secondary to increased pressure on the spermatic cord.
If an incarcerated hernia is suspected, the child is hospitalized 
and sedated, and manual reduction of the hernia is attempted. Most 
Fig. 24.10  Left varicocele in an adolescent male. (From Kliegman RM, 
St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 
21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2832, Fig. 560.7.)
A
B
C
D
Intestinal
loop
Intestinal
loop
Ductus
deferens
Epididymis
Testis
Obliterated
portions of
processus
vaginalis
Obliterated
portion of
processus
vaginalis
Tunica
vaginalis
Tunica
vaginalis
Gubernaculum
Hydrocele
of cord
Hydrocele
of testis
Peritoneum
Scrotum
Abdominal
cavity
Unclosed
processus
vaginalis
Fig. 24.11  Diagrams of sagittal sections of the inguinal region. A, Incomplete indirect inguinal hernia, resulting 
from persistence of the proximal processus vaginalis. B, Indirect inguinal hernia into the scrotum, resulting from 
persistence of the entire processus vaginalis. Note the presence of an undescended testicle, which is a com­
monly associated malformation. C, Hydrocele of the cord, derived from an unobliterated portion of the proces­
sus vaginalis. D, Communicating hydrocele, resulting from peritoneal fluid passing through a patent processus 
vaginalis. (From Moore KL. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1993:299.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
417
CHAPTER 24  Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
incarcerated hernias can be reduced successfully and should be repaired 
promptly. Children with an easily reducible hernia should also undergo 
herniorrhaphy within a reasonable time to reduce the possibility of 
incarceration.
HYDROCELE
A hydrocele is an accumulation of fluid within the tunica vaginalis. 
Communicating hydroceles, defined by a patent processus vaginalis, 
are present in approximately 2% of newborn males, are more common 
in preterm infants, and tend to persist (see Fig. 24.11). The diameter of 
the patent processus vaginalis is much smaller than that seen with a her­
nia, allowing only peritoneal fluid to pass into the scrotum. Typically, 
affected males have painless scrotal swelling that progresses over the 
course of the day and resolves while sleeping or otherwise recumbent, 
as fluid returns to the peritoneal cavity. Noncommunicating hydroceles 
are characterized by the presence of an unobliterated portion of the 
processus vaginalis (see Fig. 24.11) and may be acquired following an 
inflammatory condition within the scrotum, such as testicular torsion, 
torsion of the appendix testis, epididymitis, or testicular tumor.
Physical examination reveals a smooth and nontender scrotal mass 
that is clear upon transillumination (Fig. 24.13). Because hydroceles 
can be associated with testicular neoplasms in postpubertal males, tes­
ticular examination should be performed. If the size of the hydrocele 
precludes adequate testicular examination, scrotal ultrasonography is 
advised. Most communicating hydroceles resolve by 1 year of age and 
can be managed expectantly; however, large and tense masses may be 
difficult to distinguish from hernias and may require ultrasonography. 
Large hydroceles or hydroceles persisting beyond the age of 2 years 
rarely regress spontaneously and may predispose to inguinal hernia.
A severe form of the hydrocele is the abdominoscrotal hydrocele, 
in which the hydrocele sac is tense with fluid and extends from the 
scrotum proximally through the inguinal canal into the abdominal 
cavity (Fig. 24.14). On examination, these hydroceles are palpable 
in the inguinal canal, and an abdominal mass is often present. These 
hydroceles do not resolve and may cause extrinsic testicular compres­
sion. Early repair is recommended.
TESTICULAR TUMORS
Although testicular and paratesticular tumors are uncommon, testicu­
lar cancer is the most common solid malignancy in postpubertal males 
between the ages of 15 and 35 years, with a bimodal age distribution 
reflecting this age range, and another peak in the first 2 years of life. Most 
testicular cancers are germ cell tumors, representing approximately 95% 
of testicular cancers, while the remaining 5% are stromal tumors derived 
from Leydig, Sertoli, and granulosa cells (Table 24.5). Risk factors for testic­
ular tumors include a history of cryptorchidism, a prior history of testicular 
cancer in the contralateral testicle, and a family history of testicular cancer. 
Gonadoblastoma is a complication of phenotypic males with disorders of 
sexual development (see Chapter 26).
Most patients with testicular tumors present with an incidentally 
noted nontender, hard mass that fails to transilluminate on examina­
tion. Pain is uncommon, although some patients may present with 
pain secondary to hemorrhage or infarction within the mass. Up to 
15% of testicular tumors are associated with a noncommunicating 
hydrocele, prompting affected patients to seek medical evaluation. 
Stromal tumors may elaborate hormones that can lead to precocious 
pseudopuberty, gynecomastia, galactorrhea, or other endocrinologic 
manifestations.
Scrotal ultrasonography should be performed to confirm the find­
ing of a testicular mass and may help delineate the type of testicular 
tumor (Fig. 24.15). Serum tumor markers, such as α-­fetoprotein and 
β-­human chorionic gonadotropin, should be evaluated before surgical 
intervention. Partial orchiectomy is typically performed for prepuber­
tal testis tumors with negative α-­fetoprotein; radical orchiectomy is 
Fig. 24.12  Incarcerated inguinal hernia. Kidney, ureter, and bladder study 
demonstrating abdominal bowel loops and bowel gas in the scrotum.
Fig. 24.13  Large hydrocele in a teenage male.
Note: the fusiform shaped testis in the hydrocele 
Fig. 24.14  Abdominoscrotal hydrocele.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
418
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
performed for postpubertal testis tumors and prepubertal testis tumors 
with elevated α-­fetoprotein, given their higher metastatic potential. 
After radical orchiectomy, abdominal and chest CT is obtained to eval­
uate the most common sites of metastatic disease, the retroperitoneum, 
and lungs.
Leukemia and lymphoma are the most common secondary malig­
nancies to affect the testis. These tumors can present bilaterally, and, 
because the blood-­testis barrier protects the intratesticular cells, the 
testis may be the site of residual tumor in children after chemotherapy. 
Paratesticular structures can give rise to various benign tumors, such 
as lipomas, leiomyomas, hemangiomas, and fibromas. Malignant para­
testicular tumors are rare; rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common 
malignant paratesticular tumor.
MECONIUM PERITONITIS
Antenatal peritonitis may result from intestinal perforation. Although 
the intestinal perforation may heal, the intraabdominal meconium may 
TABLE 24.5  World Health Organization Classification of Germ Cell Tumors: Male
Germ Cell Tumors
Sex Cord/Gonadal Stromal Tumors
Intratubular germ cell neoplasia, unclassified
Other types
Pure Forms
Leydig cell tumor
Malignant Leydig cell tumor
Sertoli cell tumor
Sertoli cell tumor lipid-­rich variant
Sclerosing Sertoli cell tumor
Large cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumor
Malignant Sertoli cell tumor
Granulosa cell tumor
Adult type granulosa cell tumor
Juvenile type granulosa cell tumor
Tumors of the thecoma/fibroma group
Thecoma
Fibroma
Sex cord/gonadal stromal tumor, incompletely differentiated
Sex cord/gonadal stromal tumor, mixed forms
Malignant sex cord/gonadal stromal tumor
Tumors containing both germ cell and sex cord/gonadal stromal elements
Gonadoblastoma
Germ cell–sex cord/gonadal stromal tumor, unclassified
Tumors of One Histologic Type
Seminoma
Seminoma with syncytiotrophoblastic cells
Spermatocytic seminoma
Spermatocytic seminoma with sarcoma
Embryonal carcinoma
Yolk sac tumor
Trophoblastic tumors
Choriocarcinoma
Trophoblastic neoplasms other than choriocarcinoma
Monophasic choriocarcinoma
Placental site trophoblastic tumor
Teratoma
Dermoid cyst
Monodermal teratoma
Teratoma with somatic type malignancies
Tumors of More Than One Histologic Type
Mixed embryonal carcinoma and teratoma
Mixed teratoma and seminoma
Choriocarcinoma and teratoma/embryonal carcinoma
Others
From Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Ginsburg D, et al. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed., Vol 2. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2015:2059, Box 63-­1.
A
B
Fig. 24.15  Testicular teratoma. A, Transverse grayscale sonogram of the right testicle shows a complex 
testicular mass with debris-­filled cystic foci and surrounding hyperechogenicity. B, A coned radiograph of 
the lower pelvis identifies a calcified right testicular lesion. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic 
Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:1198, Fig. 125.21. Courtesy Dr. Leslie E. Grissom.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
419
CHAPTER 24  Acute and Chronic Scrotal Swelling
track down the patent processus vaginalis into the scrotum, resulting 
in the formation of an inflammatory mass. This condition can mani­
fest as bilateral neonatal hydroceles, which eventually regress into firm, 
nodular masses involving either or both testicles. Scrotal sonography 
demonstrates multiple areas of echogenic foci suggestive of calcifica­
tion. In addition, a plain film of the scrotum shows calcification.
SCROTAL WALL SWELLING
Henoch-­Schönlein Purpura (Immunoglobulin A Vasculitis)
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura is a systemic vasculitis of unknown etiol­
ogy that involves the skin, gastrointestinal tract, joints, and kidneys. 
Most affected patients are younger than 7 years. Genitourinary mani­
festations may include glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 23), ureteritis, 
renal pelvic bleeding, and acute swelling of the scrotum and spermatic 
cord. Scrotal wall and testicular involvement has been reported in up 
to a third of affected patients.
Palpable purpura (the characteristic skin finding in Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura) often begins in the lower extremities and buttock 
region. Later, the rash may spread to the scrotum; on occasion, the rash 
may begin on the scrotum. If scrotal swelling and pain precede the 
development of the characteristic rash, the presentation may be diffi­
cult to distinguish from testicular torsion. However, as these conditions 
may coexist, if there is any uncertainty regarding the diagnosis, color 
Doppler ultrasonography should be performed.
Acute Idiopathic Scrotal Wall Edema
Acute idiopathic scrotal wall edema is an uncommon entity that 
accounts for up to 5% of acute scrotal swelling. The average patient is 
between 4 and 7 years of age and typically presents with the sudden 
onset of unilateral or bilateral scrotal wall edema and mild tenderness. 
The overlying skin is erythematous, and the edema may extend ante­
riorly onto the abdominal wall or posteriorly into the perineum. The 
testicles are easily palpable, normal in size, and nontender. The origin 
of this syndrome is unknown, but allergic causes have been implicated. 
Most cases spontaneously resolve within 48–72 hours.
Idiopathic Fat Necrosis
Idiopathic fat necrosis is an uncommon cause of acute painful swell­
ing of the scrotum, secondary to necrosis of the intrascrotal fat that 
is present in prepubertal males. Examination of the underlying testis 
may be hampered by inflammation within the scrotal wall. The eti­
ology is unknown but may be related to trauma with physical activ­
ity. Ultrasonography demonstrates hyperechoic intrascrotal masses 
with posterior shadowing and a hyperechoic striated scrotal wall with 
normal-­appearing testes and epididymis. Treatment is supportive.
Fournier Gangrene
Fournier gangrene of the scrotum usually affects adults but rarely can 
afflict infants and children. In children, it occurs primarily as a result of 
genital insect bites, as a complication of circumcision, or from extension 
of perianal skin abscesses. Other predisposing factors include diabetes 
mellitus, trauma, instrumentation, urethral stricture, and inguinal or 
perineal surgery. Symptoms of this life-­threatening infection include 
acute scrotal swelling with tenderness, erythema, skin necrosis, and 
systemic manifestations of fever, chills, and septicemia. The most com­
mon organisms identified include Staphylococcus aureus, Bacteroides 
fragilis, Escherichia coli, Clostridium perfringens, and streptococcal spe­
cies. Despite aggressive treatment, mortality rates approach 50%.
REFERRED PAIN
Pain in the scrotum without inflammatory signs or abnormalities on 
physical examination may be referred pain. Sensory innervation to 
the scrotum includes the genitofemoral and ilioinguinal nerves. Most 
common causes include distal ureteral stones and constipation.
   	 R E D  F L A G S
 • An approach to scrotal swelling and pain is noted in Figure 24.16.
 • Testicular torsion is a surgical emergency and acute scrotal pain 
should be evaluated promptly. Physical examination findings sug­
gesting testicular torsion include marked tenderness, high-­riding 
testis, and absent cremasteric reflex.
 • Partial or intermittent torsion can present with persistent arterial 
blood flow on ultrasonography.
 • A varicocele before puberty or on the right side is a red flag; abdom­
inal ultrasonography is indicated.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
420
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Neonate/early childhood
Adolescent/post pubertal
Painful
Nonemergent
Painless
Emergent
• Henoch-Schönlein purpura
• Insect bites
• Postnatal
testicular torsion
• Incarcerated
hernia
• Bacterial
epididymitis
• Fournier gangrene
Nonemergent
Emergent
• Prenatal testicular
torsion
• Testis tumor
• Reducible inguinal hernia
• Communicating hydrocele
• Meconium peritonitis
Painful
Age
Acute
Insidious
Nonemergent
Emergent
• Torsion of the appendix
testis/epididymis
• Testicular torsion
• Testicular
rupture/hematocele
• Penetrating scrotal
trauma
Nonemergent
Emergent
• Bacterial epididymitis
• Viral/noninfectious
epididymitis
• Insect bites
Painless
Nonemergent
Emergent
• Testis tumor
• Varicocele
• Hydrocele
• Epididymal
cyst/spermatocele
Fig. 24.16  Scrotal swelling algorithm.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
420.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Testicular Torsion
Baker LA, Sigman D, Mathews RI, et al. An analysis of clinical outcomes 
using color Doppler testicular ultrasound for testicular torsion. Pediatrics. 
2000;105:604.
Barada JH, Weingarten JL, Cromie WJ. Testicular salvage and age-­related delay 
in the presentation of testicular torsion. J Urol. 1989;142:746.
Barthold JS. Abnormalities of the testis and scrotum and their surgical 
management. In: McDougal WS, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, et al., 
eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology. 10th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
2012:642–645.
Chapman RH, Walton AJ. Torsion of the testis and its appendages. Br Med J. 
1972;5793:164.
Cornel EB, Karthaus HF. Manual detorsion of the twisted spermatic cord. BJU 
Int. 1999;83:672.
Cuckow PM, Frank JD. Torsion of the testis. BJU Int. 2000;86:349.
Eaton S, Cendron MA, Estrada CR, et al. Intermittent testicular torsion: diag­
nostic features and management outcomes. J Urol. 2005;174:1532H.
Joo JM, Yang SH, Kang TW, et al. Acute epididymitis in children: the role of 
the urine test. Korean J Urol. 2013;54(2):135–138.
Karmazyn B, Steinberg R, Kornreich L, et al. Clinical and sonographic criteria 
of acute scrotum in children: a retrospective study of 172 boys. Pediatr 
Radiol. 2005;35:302.
Lam WW, Yap TL, Jacobsen AS, et al. Colour Doppler ultrasonography replac­
ing surgical exploration for acute scrotum: myth or reality? Pediatr Radiol. 
2004;35:597.
Munden MM, Williams JL, Zhang W, et al. Intermittent testicular torsion in 
the pediatric patient: sonographic indicators of a difficult diagnosis. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol. 2013;201:912.
Nelson CP, Williams JF, Bloom DA. The cremasteric reflex: a useful but imper­
fect sign in testicular torsion. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1248.
Pinto KJ, Noe HN, Jerkins GR. Neonatal testicular torsion. J Urol. 
1997;158:1196.
Sessions AE, Rabinowitz R, Hulbert WC, et al. Testicular torsion: direction, 
degree, duration and disinformation. J Urol. 2003;82:899.
Van Glabeke E, Philippe-­Chomette P, Gall O, et al. Spermatic cord torsion in 
the newborn: role of surgical exploration. Arch Pediatr. 2000;7:1072.
Yazbeck S, Patriquin HB. Accuracy of Doppler sonography in the evaluation of 
acute conditions of the scrotum in children. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:1270.
Torsion of the Appendix Testis
Boettcher M, Bergholz R, Krebs TF, et al. Differentiation of epididymitis and 
appendix testis torsion by clinical and ultrasound signs in children. Urolo­
gy. 2013;82:899.
Epididymoorchitis
American Academy of Pediatrics. Mumps. In: Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, 
Jackson MA, et al., eds. Red Book: 2015 Report of the Committee on Infec­
tious Diseases. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 
2015:564–568.
Beard CM, Benson RC, Kelalis PP, et al. The incidence and outcome of mumps 
orchitis in Rochester, Minnesota, 1935 to 1974. Mayo Clin Proc. 1977;52:3.
Bukowski TP, Lewis AG, Reeves D, et al. Epididymitis in older boys: dysfunc­
tional voiding as an etiology. J Urol. 1995;154:762.
Gnann J. Chapter 369: Mumps. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil 
Medicine. 25th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2206–2208.
Merlini E, Rotundi F, Seymandi PL, et al. Acute epididymitis and urinary tract 
anomalies in children. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 1998;32:273.
Nikolaou M, Ikonomidis I, Lekakis I, et al. Amiodarone-­induced epididymitis: a 
case report and review of the literature. Int J Cardiol. 2007;121(1):e15–e16.
Santillanes G, Gausche-­Hill M, Lewis RJ. Are antibiotics necessary for pediat­
ric epididymitis? Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27:174.
Siegel A, Snyder H, Duckett JW. Epididymitis in infants and boys: under­
lying urogenital anomalies and efficacy of imaging modalities. J Urol. 
1987;138:1100.
Somekh E, Gorenstein A, Serour F. Acute epididymitis in boys: evidence of a 
post-­infectious etiology. J Urol. 2004;171:391.
Trauma
Buckley JC, McAninch JW. Use of ultrasonography for the diagnosis of testicu­
lar injuries in blunt scrotal trauma. J Urol. 2006;175(1):175–178.
Cubillos J, Reda EF, Gitlin J, et al. A conservative approach to testicular rup­
ture in adolescent boys. J Urol. 2010;184(4):1733–1738.
Lee SH, Bak CW, Choi MH, et al. Trauma to male genital organs: a 10-­
year review of 156 patients, including 118 treated by surgery. BJU Int. 
2008;101(2):211–215.
Wan J, Corvino TF, Greenfield SP, et al. Kidney and testicle injuries in team 
and individual sports: data from the National Pediatric Trauma Registry. J 
Urol. 2003;170(4 Pt 2):1528–1531; discussion 1531–1532.
Varicocele
Bogaert G, Orye C, De Win G. Pubertal screening and treatment for varicocele 
do not improve chance of paternity as adult. J Urol. 2013;189(6):2298–2303.
Chen SS, Chen LK. Risk factors for progressive deterioration of semen quality 
in patients with varicocele. Urology. 2012;79(1):128–132.
Diamond DA, Paltiel HJ, DiCanzio J, et al. Comparative assessment of pediatric 
testicular volume: orchidometer versus ultrasound. J Urol. 2000;164:1111.
Diamond DA, Zurakowski D, Atala A, et al. Is adolescent varicocele a progres­
sive disease process?. J Urol. 2004;172(4 Pt 2):1746–1748; discussion 1748.
Kass EJ, Stork BR, Steinert BW. Varicocele in adolescence induces left and 
right testicular volume loss. BJU Int. 2001;87:499.
Sayfan J, Siplovich L, Koltun L, et al. Varicocele treatment in pubertal boys 
prevents testicular growth arrest. J Urol. 1997;157:1456.
Thomas JC, Elder JS. Testicular growth arrest and adolescent varicocele: does 
varicocele size make a difference? J Urol. 2002;168:1689.
Vasavada S, Ross J, Nasrallah P, et al. Prepubertal varicoceles. Urology. 
1997;50:774.
Testicular Tumors
Agarwal PK, Palmer JS. Testicular and paratesticular neoplasms in prepubertal 
males. J Urol. 2006;176(3):875–881.
Pohl HG, Shukla AR, Metcalf PD, et al. Prepubertal testis tumors: actual preva­
lence rate of histological types. J Urol. 2004;172(6 Pt 1):2370–2372.
Ross JH. Prepubertal testicular tumors. Urology. 2009;74(1):94–99.
Ross JH, Kay R. Prepubertal testis tumors. Rev Urol. 2004;6(1):11–18.
Ross J, Kay R, Elder J. Testis sparing surgery for pediatric epidermoid cysts of 
the testis. J Urol. 1993;149:353.
Rushton HG, Belman AB, Sesterhenn I, et al. Testicular sparing surgery for 
prepubertal teratoma of the testis. J Urol. 1990;144:726.
Stevenson SM, Lowrance WT. Epidemiology and diagnosis of testis cancer. 
Urol Clin North Am. 2015;42(3):269–275.
Thomas JC, Ross JH, Kay R. Stromal testis tumors in children: a report from 
the prepubertal testis tumor registry. J Urol. 2001;166(6):2338–2340.
Other Diagnoses
Anzai AK. Fournier’s gangrene: a urologic emergency. Am Fam Physician. 
1995;52:1821.
Corman JM, Moody JA, Aronson WJ. Fournier’s gangrene in a modern 
surgical setting: improved survival with aggressive management. BJU Int. 
1999;84:85–88.
Dayanir YO, Akdilli A, Karaman CZ, et al. Epididymoorchitis mimicking 
testicular torsion in Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. Eur Radiol. 2001;11:2267.
Harkness G, Meikle G, Craw S, et al. Ultrasound appearance of scrotal fat 
necrosis in prepubertal boys. Pediatr Radiol. 2007;37(4):370–373.
Ioannides AS, Turnock R. An audit of the management of the acute scrotum in 
children with Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. J R Coll Surg Edinb. 2001;46:98.
Kaplan GW. Acute idiopathic scrotal edema. J Pediatr Surg. 1977;12:647.
Yeh ML, Chang CJ, Mu SC. Neonatal idiopathic scrotal hemorrhage: patient 
reports. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2000;39:493.
Diagnostic Strategies
Hawtrey CE. Assessment of acute scrotal symptoms and findings. A clinician’s 
dilemma. Urol Clin North Am. 1998;25:715.
Kadish HA, Bolte RG. A retrospective review of pediatric patients with epidid­
ymitis, testicular torsion, and torsion of testicular appendages. Pediatrics. 
1998;102:73.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
420.e2
Kass EJ, Lundak B. The acute scrotum. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1997;44:1251.
Lewis AG, Bukowski TP, Jarvis PD, et al. Evaluation of acute scrotum in the 
emergency department. J Pediatr Surg. 1995;30:277.
Marcozzi D, Suner S. The nontraumatic acute scrotum. Emerg Med Clin North 
Am. 2000;19:547.
Imaging
Allen TD, Elder JS. Shortcomings of color Doppler sonography in the diagno­
sis of testicular torsion. J Urol. 1995;154:1508.
Baker LA, Sigman D, Mathews RI, et al. An analysis of clinical outcomes 
using color Doppler testicular ultrasound for testicular torsion. Pediatrics. 
2000;105:604.
Dogra VS, Sessions A, Mevorach RA, et al. Reversal of diastolic plateau in 
partial testicular torsion. J Clin Ultrasound. 2001;29:105.
Kravchick S, Cytron S, Leibovici O, et al. Color Doppler sonography: its real 
role in the evaluation of children with highly suspected testicular torsion. 
Eur Radiol. 2001;11:1000.
Weber DM, Rosslein R, Fliegel C. Color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis 
of acute scrotum in boys. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2000;10:235.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
