Chapter Title One Line
Chapter Author
888
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Given the role of the lymphatic system in developing adaptive responses 
to numerous antigenic challenges and the rate at which the immune 
system is exposed to novel antigens early in life, enlarged lymph nodes 
are regularly encountered both incidentally and within the context of 
many childhood illnesses. The challenge for the clinician is determin­
ing when a change in the size or quality of a lymph node is physiologic 
or when such a change represents pathology. A thorough history, phys­
ical examination, and recognition of the anatomic drainage patterns of 
the lymphatic system will oftentimes sufficiently narrow the differential 
diagnosis of lymphadenopathy such that complicated or invasive diag­
nostic evaluations are unnecessary. It is equally important to consider 
other non–lymph node disorders in the differential diagnosis (parot­
ids, brachial cleft cysts, primary tumors).
MECHANISM OF LYMPHADENOPATHY
The lymphatic system is a network of vessels and tissues that collects 
excess fluid from the cellular interstitium and returns it to the periph­
eral circulation. This interstitial fluid is similar in composition to 
plasma, though it may contain additional proteins, pathogens, other 
antigens, and antigen-­presenting cells. The collected fluid, termed 
lymph, enters the lymphatic system via specialized lymphatic capil­
laries and passes into nearby lymph nodes via afferent lymphatic ves­
sels. The lymph nodes contain both B and T lymphocytes lying in a 
supportive framework within a connective tissue capsule (Fig. 48.1). 
Additional lymphocytes may enter lymph nodes from the peripheral 
venous circulation via postcapillary high endothelial venules. Anti­
gens, antigen-­presenting cells, and pathogens within the lymph inter­
act with the lymphocytes, allowing for the production of B-­ and/or 
T-­cell immune responses in an effort to clear the antigen or pathogen. 
Efferent lymphatic vessels then carry lymph and antigen-­sensitized 
lymphocytes from the nodes back to the peripheral circulation via the 
thoracic duct.
Enlargement of lymph nodes can come about via a variety of mech­
anisms. First, physiologic hyperplasia can occur as nodal and circu­
lating lymphocytes proliferate within nodes in response to antigenic 
stimulation. Second, bacteria that have been transported to the nodes 
may stimulate the recruitment of polymorphonuclear cells and the 
elaboration of inflammatory mediators that can lead to the edema, ery­
thema, and tenderness characteristic of bacterial lymphadenitis or to 
suppuration and abscess formation. Third, malignant cells may arise 
within the node itself and proliferate, causing enlargement, or arrive 
from distant cancerous sites and infiltrate the nodal tissue. Fourth, 
certain immune disorders (hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis) or 
immune reactions to medications can cause lymphadenopathy either 
directly or as part of a serum sickness–like reaction. Finally, in rare 
genetic storage diseases (e.g., Niemann-­Pick, Gaucher diseases), mac­
rophages laden with abnormally metabolized lipids may lodge within 
lymph nodes, causing enlargement.
The regional drainage pattern of each lymph node group is import­
ant in determining the cause of lymphadenopathy, particularly when 
localized to an individual node or contiguous group of nodes (Fig. 48.2 
and Tables 48.1 and 48.2). The cervical lymph nodes drain lymph from 
distinct areas of the head, neck, and throat and may enlarge if a local 
infection is present. Consequently, because otitis media and pharyngitis 
are common infections in children, head and neck lymphadenopathy 
is one of the more frequently encountered regional lymphadenopathy 
patterns in small children. The axillary nodes drain lymph from the 
arms, lateral breasts, and superficial chest and upper abdomen, and 
isolated enlargement of these nodes may suggest pathology in these 
areas. The inguinal nodes drain the lower extremities, genitourinary 
system, and perineum, which may indicate lower extremity pathology 
or the presence of a sexually transmitted infection in patients with an 
exposure history. Supraclavicular lymphadenopathy is a concerning 
finding and should prompt investigation for an underlying neoplasm, 
fungal infection, tuberculosis, or sarcoidosis. Generalized lymphad­
enopathy, defined as the presence of enlarged or abnormal lymph 
nodes in two or more noncontiguous lymph node groups (with or with­
out hepatosplenomegaly), is often indicative of a systemic response to 
an infectious or otherwise inflammatory process but may also indicate 
malignant proliferation of lymphocytes (Table 48.3).
History
History should be aimed at establishing the time course of the develop­
ment of lymphadenopathy, whether the lymphadenopathy is restricted 
to a particular anatomic region or is generalized, and if there are any 
associated signs, symptoms, or exposures that may suggest an etiology.
Lymphadenopathy that develops rapidly over several days is 
more suggestive of an acutely inflammatory, often infectious process, 
whereas more indolently developing lymphadenopathy may suggest 
malignancy, chronic disease, or an atypical infection. The sudden onset 
of unilateral inguinal adenopathy shortly following lower extremity 
trauma suggests an infection in the traumatized extremity. In contrast, 
progressive enlargement of multiple noncontiguous nodal groups over 
the course of weeks or months that is accompanied by weight loss, 
fevers, or night sweats suggests a systemic illness such as lymphoma or 
Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
Brett J. Bordini
48
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
889
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
tuberculosis. When establishing the time period over which the lymph­
adenopathy developed, clarifying both when the node was first noted 
to be abnormal and the last time the node was felt to be normal is essen­
tial, particularly if associated symptoms, overlying skin changes, and 
tenderness are absent, since more slowly developing lymphad­enopathy 
may not be noticed until the node or nodes are quite enlarged, or if 
lymphadenopathy was noted only incidentally when dressing, groom­
ing, or bathing.
The age of the child with lymphadenopathy is similarly important 
in the consideration of the cause (see Table 48.3). Neonatal lymphad­
enopathy is typically indicative of exposure to an infectious agent in 
utero, such as cytomegalovirus (CMV), syphilis, HIV, rubella, or toxo­
plasmosis, though may less frequently be associated with congenital 
malignancy, immune disorders, or storage diseases. In contrast, tod­
dlers and children with adenopathy tend to have either focal infections 
that drain into the affected nodal chain, or systemic viral infections, 
resulting in diffusely enlarged nodes. Adolescents may acquire expo­
sures that place them at risk for sexually transmitted infections and 
inguinal adenopathy. Just as exposure to certain infectious agents may 
vary with age, the risk of hematologic malignancy varies as well: Acute 
leukemias are more common in toddlers and young children, non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma is more common in school-­aged children, and 
Hodgkin lymphoma is more common in adolescents.
The past medical history and review of systems should be explored 
for conditions that may either cause lymphadenopathy directly or place 
the patient at increased risk for opportunistic infections, such as con­
genital or acquired immunodeficiency. The clinician should inquire 
about any signs or symptoms that would suggest an acute infectious 
process or more slowly progressive constitutional symptoms that may 
suggest malignancy or indolent infection. The quality of oral hygiene 
practices and dentition should be assessed as odontogenic infections 
may not readily be appreciated as a source of cervical lymphadenopa­
thy. The use of any prescription medications, over-­the-­counter med­
icines, or traditional remedies should be ascertained: In addition to 
identifying medications that may directly cause lymphadenopathy, this 
information may identify medications that may cause a serum sick­
ness–like reaction with resultant lymphadenopathy or that may be 
used to treat autoimmune or rheumatologic conditions that are associ­
ated with generalized lymphadenopathy (see Table 48.3).
After determining the timing and distribution of the lymphadenop­
athy and placing these findings within the context of the child’s age and 
past medical history, the clinician should inquire about any exposures 
that may have led to the development of lymphadenopathy, focusing in 
particular on diet, travel history, and contact with individuals, animals, 
Superficial
cervical
(post. group)
Occipital
Retro-auricular
Parotid
Buccal
Submental
Submandibular
Superficial cervical
(ant. group)
Jugulodigastric
node
Jugular tr.
Jugulo-omohyoid
node
Transverse
cervical nodes
Deep cervical
Transverse
cervical tr.
R. lymphatic
duct
Thoracic duct
A
B
Fig. 48.2  The superficial (A) and deep cervical (B) lymph nodes that drain the head and neck. Ant., anterior; 
post., posterior; R, right; superfic., superficial; tr., tributary. (From O’Rahilly RO. Gardner-­Gray-­O’Rahilly Anat­
omy: A Regional Study of Human Structure. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1986:719.)
Germinal
center
Cortex
Afferent
lymphatic
vessels
Trabecula
Artery
Vein
Capsule
Subcapsular
sinus
Paracortex
Medullary
cord
Medullary
sinus
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
Fig. 48.1  Diagrammatic representation of the structure of a lymph 
node. (From Faller DV. Diseases of the lymph nodes and spleen. In: 
Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medi­
cine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:979.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
890
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
or environments that may pose a risk for disease transmission. Contact 
with or consumption of raw or undercooked meats, particularly pork, 
lamb, and venison, may transmit Toxoplasma gondii, leading to toxo­
plasmosis. Similarly, contact with agricultural animals or ingestion of 
unpasteurized dairy products may place patients at risk for acquiring 
certain pathogens, such as Brucella species or Mycobacterium bovis; 
infection with either may lead to generalized lymphadenopathy. Poten­
tial exposures in the home environment should be assessed, including 
the risk of contaminated drinking water and whether there are concerns 
for mold exposure, particularly in immunocompromised patients. The 
presence of pets, either within the home or in the area, should be deter­
mined. Cats or kittens that may scratch the child and transmit Bar­
tonella henselae, the etiologic agent of cat-­scratch disease, are often 
omitted from the history unless such questions are specifically asked. 
Furthermore, some families may deny the presence of household pets 
but forget to mention that the child plays with a pet present in a barn 
or around the neighborhood. Travel history should determine whether 
the child is from or has been exposed to geographic areas associated 
with a higher risk for acquiring certain infections, such as tuberculo­
sis in endemically affected nations or histoplasmosis in the Ohio River 
valley. The clinician should inquire whether any family members or 
close contacts are ill or taking medications, whether any have recently 
traveled to or immigrated from other countries, and whether any have 
recently been incarcerated. Adolescents should be questioned about 
risk factors for HIV and sexually transmitted infections, such as syph­
ilis or lymphogranuloma venereum, which may cause generalized or 
inguinal lymphadenopathy, respectively.
The family history should also focus on potentially heritable condi­
tions, such as autoimmune or rheumatologic disorders, certain hema­
tologic and soft tissue malignancies, and storage diseases that may be 
associated with noninfectious forms of lymphadenopathy.
TABLE 48.1  Drainage Areas of Regional 
Nodes
Abdominal and Pelvic
Abdomen, lower extremity, pelvic organs
Axillary
Arm, breast, chest wall, hand, upper and lateral abdominal wall
Cervical
External ear; larynx; parotid; superficial tissues of the scalp, head, and neck; 
thyroid; tongue; trachea
Epitrochlear
Forearm, hand
Iliac
Bladder, lower abdomen, part of the genitalia, urethra
Inguinal
Gluteal region, lower anal canal, lower extremity, perineum, vulva and vagina 
in females, scrotum and penis in males, skin of the lower abdomen
Mediastinal
Thoracic viscera
Occipital
Posterior scalp
Popliteal
Knee joint, skin of the lateral lower leg and foot
Preauricular
Cheek, conjunctivae, eyelid, temporal scalp
Submaxillary/Submental
Buccal mucosa, gums, teeth, tongue
Supraclavicular
Abdomen, arms, head, lungs, mediastinum, neck, superficial thorax
Left supraclavicular adenopathy is usually due to an intraabdominal problem
Right supraclavicular adenopathy is usually due to an intrathoracic problem
TABLE 48.2  Sites of Regional 
Lymphadenopathy and Associated Diseases
Cervical
Oropharyngeal infection (viral, 
group A streptococcal, or 
staphylococcal)
Scalp infection (tinea)
Mycobacterial lymphadenitis 
(tuberculous and nontuberculous 
mycobacteria)
Viral infection (EBV, CMV, HHV-­6, 
measles)
Cat-­scratch disease
Kawasaki disease
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
in children (MIS-­C) associated 
with COVID-­19
Thyroid disease
Kimura disease
Rosai-­Dorfman (sinus histiocytosis)
Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, 
pharyngitis, cervical adenopathy 
(PFAPA) syndrome
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Unicentric Castleman disease
Anterior Auricular
Conjunctivitis or other eye infections
Oculoglandular tularemia, cat-­scratch 
disease, EBV, adenovirus
Posterior Auricular
Otitis media
Viral infection (especially rubella, 
parvovirus)
Supraclavicular
Malignancy or infection in the 
mediastinum (right)
Metastatic malignancy from 
abdomen (left)
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Epitrochlear
Hand infection, arm infection*
Lymphoma†
Sarcoidosis
Syphilis
EBV
HIV
Inguinal
Urinary tract infection
Sexually transmitted 
infection (especially syphilis 
or lymphogranuloma 
venereum)
Lower extremity suppurative 
infection
Plague
Hilar (Not Palpable, 
Found on Chest 
Radiograph or CT) (see 
Table 48.4)
Tuberculosis†
Histoplasmosis†
Blastomycosis†
Coccidioidomycosis†
Leukemia/lymphoma†
Hodgkin disease†
Metastatic malignancy*
Sarcoidosis†
Castleman disease
Axillary
Cat-­scratch disease
Arm infection
Malignancy of chest wall
Leukemia/lymphoma
Brucellosis
CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV-­6, human herpes­
virus 6.
*Unilateral.
†Bilateral.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
891
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
Physical Examination
Physical examination should assess general appearance and look for 
findings that may reveal the underlying cause of lymphadenopathy. 
Examination of the lymphatic system should establish the size, qual­
ity, and distribution of any abnormal lymph nodes and should assess 
for the presence of tenderness or changes in the overlying skin or sur­
rounding tissues.
Size
The threshold beyond which a particular node is considered enlarged 
varies by nodal group. In general, nodes over 1 cm in diameter are 
considered enlarged; exceptions include epitrochlear nodes >0.5 cm in 
diameter and inguinal nodes >1.5 cm in diameter.
Quality
The quality of the nodes often yields some clues as to the cause of the 
adenopathy. The clinician should assess consistency, mobility, shape, 
tenderness, and whether any changes to the overlying skin or soft tis­
sues are present. The following general patterns are worth noting:
 • Erythematous, tender, and warm: acute bacterial infection with 
suppurative adenitis
 • Tender, nonerythematous, and soft: viral infection or other sys­
temic infection
 • Firm, hard, rubbery, and nontender: lymphoma or other infiltrating 
tumor
 • Hard, matted, immobile, and nontender: primary or metastatic 
tumor; fibrotic changes following acute infection
Distribution
All areas in which lymphadenopathy is commonly present should be 
palpated, including the cervical, auricular, axillary, epitrochlear, ingui­
nal, and supraclavicular areas. If more than two noncontiguous nodal 
groups are abnormal, without evidence of distinct focal infections 
inciting the lymphadenopathy within each group, the lymphadenop­
athy is generalized.
Regional lymphadenopathy usually reflects pathologic processes 
within the lymphatic drainage distribution of that particular nodal 
chain (see Table 48.2). Several patterns of regional lymphadenopathy 
should prompt further evaluation. The presence of palpable supracla­
vicular nodes is often a red flag for a serious illness such as malignancy. 
Supraclavicular nodes that are palpated on the right side often reflect 
a mediastinal tumor or invasive mediastinal infection, such as histo­
plasmosis. Supraclavicular nodes on the left side are often the result 
of metastatic spread of an abdominal tumor. The presence of either 
type of node mandates an urgent evaluation, including a CBC with dif­
ferential; imaging with chest radiography, CT, MRI, or PET scan; and 
consideration of biopsy. Epitrochlear nodes, if unilateral, commonly 
indicate the hand or arm as a source of distal infection; however, palpa­
ble bilateral epitrochlear lymph nodes usually reflect systemic illness, 
such as syphilis, sarcoidosis, or lymphoma. Inguinal node enlargement 
is common and is usually caused by the frequent occurrence of minor 
trauma and infections in the lower extremities of children. Significantly 
enlarged inguinal nodes may also be present with sexually transmitted 
infections, such as syphilis, chlamydial urethritis, or lymphogranuloma 
venereum, or with urinary tract infection, lymphoma, or abdominal 
tumors.
Mediastinal adenopathy (or mass) may be detected incidentally, 
secondary to chest symptoms, or during the evaluation of peripheral 
but generalized lymphadenopathy. The differential diagnosis is noted 
in Table 48.4.
Evaluation and Management Strategies
Many previously healthy children with acute lymphadenopathy 
require few, if any, laboratory or imaging studies. No laboratory test­
ing may be required for well-­appearing children whose acute, local­
ized adenopathy can be attributed to an infection in the vicinity of 
the node; similarly, generalized lymphadenopathy clearly associated 
with a systemic viral infection may not require further evaluation. 
The differential diagnosis of lymphadenopathy is developed in a 
stepwise fashion, first by determining whether the lymphadenopathy 
is regional or generalized. Next, the time course of the lymphade­
nopathy should be defined as acute or chronic, the latter defined as 
being present for a period of more than 4 weeks. Finally, the qual­
ity of the nodes and the presence of any associated signs or symp­
toms should be ascertained, as the extent of evaluation is dictated by 
both the characteristics of the lymphadenopathy and the presence of 
TABLE 48.3  Differential Diagnosis of 
Generalized Lymphadenopathy
Neonate
Child
Adolescent
Common Causes
CMV
Nonspecific viral infections
Viral infections
HIV
EBV
EBV
Syphilis
CMV
CMV
Toxoplasmosis
HIV
HIV
Toxoplasmosis
Measles
Measles
Toxoplasmosis
Syphilis
Rare Causes
Chagas disease 
(congenital)
Congenital leukemia
Congenital tuberculosis
Reticuloendotheliosis
Metabolic storage 
disease
Histiocytic disorders
Listeria sepsis
Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/lymphoma
Tuberculosis (miliary)
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Macrophage activation 
syndrome
Hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis
Castleman disease (very rare 
in this age group)
Chronic granulomatous 
disease
Sinus histiocytosis (Rosai-­
Dorfman disease)
Kikuchi Fujimoto disease
Autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative 
disease (ALP)
Rickettsial infection
Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Drug reaction (immune)
Castleman disease
Rickettsial infection
CMV, cytomegalovirus; DRESS, drug reaction, eosinophilia, systemic 
symptoms; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (as 
Still disease); SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
892
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
associated signs and symptoms. Using this approach, a comprehen­
sive differential diagnosis and evaluation plan can then be developed 
(Figs. 48.3 and 48.4).
Regional Lymphadenopathy: General Evaluation Principles
The typical child with acute regional lymphadenopathy presents with 
enlarged nodes, commonly in the cervical region. A thorough history 
and careful physical examination should reveal whether nodes are 
definitely involved, as opposed to other non-­nodal structures, such as 
salivary glands. In many cases, no other abnormalities are found on 
examination, systemic signs are minimal, and no further evaluation is 
required. Acute cervical lymphadenopathy in the presence of upper 
respiratory infectious symptoms often requires only observation. In the 
child whose presenting features are only fever and an acutely inflamed 
unilateral cervical lymph node, bacterial lymphadenitis should be 
considered. Laboratory tests should include a CBC and differential as 
well as measurement of inflammatory markers such as the ESR, CRP, 
or procalcitonin level. A trial of oral antibiotics (with activity against 
mouth flora, streptococci, and staphylococci) may be considered; if the 
lymphadenopathy persists or worsens, intravenous antibiotics may be 
indicated, as should be consideration of diagnoses other than acute 
unilateral bacterial lymphadenitis, such as lymphadenitis from tuber­
culosis or atypical mycobacteria. In those instances, if clinical signs or 
exposure history are suggestive, a purified protein derivative (PPD) or 
interferon gamma release assay should be undertaken, and if the results 
are negative and symptoms improve on the intravenous antibiotics, it is 
reasonable to complete the antimicrobial course orally.
In contrast, if the lymphadenopathy continues or becomes frank 
lymphadenitis with erythema and tenderness despite antimicrobial 
therapy, further work-­up is indicated. Imaging the involved area is 
helpful but not always necessary. Although ultrasonography can reveal 
enlarged nodes or a fluid-­filled abscess or cyst, contrast-­enhanced CT 
of the area is the best method for defining the extent of inflamed nodes 
and whether an abscess is present (Fig. 48.5). If an abscess is found, 
incision and drainage, followed by appropriate bacterial and mycobac­
terial cultures and stains, are appropriate. If atypical mycobacteria are 
suspected on the basis of a borderline positive PPD or cross-­reacting 
gamma interferon release array result or clinical presentation, fine-­
needle aspiration or excisional biopsy is preferred because incision and 
drainage often lead to draining sinus tracts that are difficult to heal 
(Fig. 48.6). Enlarged nodes that do not recede in several weeks with 
appropriate antimicrobial therapy and without explanation (such as 
acute Epstein-­Barr virus [EBV] infection) should also raise the suspi­
cion of malignancy.
The presence of additional signs or symptoms should prompt 
consideration of alternate diagnoses. Acute cervical lymphadenopa­
thy accompanying pharyngitis in children older than 18 months may 
necessitate testing for group A streptococci. The additional presence of 
hepatomegaly or splenomegaly should raise suspicion of EBV-­related 
infectious mononucleosis, in which case a CBC with white blood 
cell differential (to identify lymphocytosis and atypical lymphocytes) 
(Table 48.5) and EBV titers (or a monospot heterophile antibody test in 
older children) may be helpful.
Supraclavicular adenopathy, acute cervical adenopathy accom­
panied by respiratory distress, or prolonged cervical adenopathy 
warrants anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the neck and/or 
chest, a CBC with white blood cell differential, and interferon gamma 
release assay or placement of PPD tuberculin skin test. CT with con­
trast is necessary in certain situations to fully delineate cervical ade­
nopathy that is excessively large or that impinges on the airway, or to 
determine whether mediastinal adenopathy is also present. Empiric 
glucocorticoid therapy, often considered in an attempt to reduce 
discomfort associated with inflamed nodes, usually in the head and 
neck area, should not be administered without definitively establish­
ing the etiology of lymphadenopathy, as such treatment can delay or 
obscure the diagnosis of hematologic malignancy, and prior gluco­
corticoid therapy in the setting of hematologic malignancy can por­
tend a higher risk classification and ineligibility for certain oncology 
treatment protocols. Exceptions may be considered in instances of 
impending critical airway obstruction secondary to severely enlarged 
cervical lymph nodes.
Generalized Lymphadenopathy: General Evaluation Principles
In the child with generalized lymphadenopathy, the cause may be 
infectious, immunologic, or malignant. Infectious causes, such as 
HIV, EBV, CMV, toxoplasmosis, and secondary syphilis, can gen­
erally be determined relatively quickly through serologic or nucleic 
acid–based testing. Noninfectious causes, such as systemic lupus ery­
thematosus, macrophage activation syndrome, hemophagocytic lym­
phohistiocytosis, and serum sickness, can also generally be excluded 
by a thorough history and specific laboratory studies. Drugs may 
cause serum sickness or produce hypersensitivity reactions, either 
of which may result in generalized lymphadenopathy. Medications 
associated with drug-­induced lymphadenopathy include allopurinol, 
atenolol, captopril, carbamazepine, gold, hydralazine, penicillins, 
phenytoin, primidone, procainamide, pyrimethamine, quinidine, 
sulfonamides, sulindac, and tetracyclines. If the generalized lymph­
adenopathy cannot be attributed to a definite cause, if the nodes fail 
to recede within several weeks, and especially if there are systemic 
symptoms, malignancy must be considered. An abnormal CBC 
demonstrating anemia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia, or radio­
logic evidence of mediastinal adenopathy or pleural disease is highly 
suggestive of malignancy. HIV, EBV, and CMV studies (culture, poly­
merase chain reaction [PCR], and serologic profiles) may be obtained 
TABLE 48.4  Differential Diagnosis of 
Mediastinal Masses
Anterior Mediastinum
Lymphoma
Thymic cyst
Thymic hyperplasia
Benign teratoma
Malignant germ-­cell tumor
Thymoma
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (from bone)
Middle Mediastinum
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Histoplasmosis
Sarcoidosis
Posterior Mediastinum
Neuroblastoma
Ganglioneuroma
Neurofibroma
Sarcoma
Duplication cyst
From Alexander S, Ferrando AA. Pediatric lymphoma. In: Orkin SH, 
et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and 
Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015;2:1627, Box 53-­2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
893
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
for some children. Because the diagnoses of leukemia (through bone 
marrow aspiration, biopsy), lymphoma (through bone marrow aspi­
ration, biopsy), systemic lupus erythematosus (through antinuclear 
antibody, double-­stranded DNA antibodies), and cat-­scratch disease 
(through biopsy and/or B. henselae serologic profile) require more 
invasive and expensive tests, the physician should first consider all 
aspects of the history and physical examination before ordering lab­
oratory studies. Because serious disseminated infections, such as 
tuberculosis and histoplasmosis, can manifest in a similar manner, 
fine-­needle aspiration or biopsy of an involved node or bone marrow 
aspiration is crucial. Excision of a node is preferred in some cases to 
obtain adequate tissue for pathologic study, stains, or cultures.
Small, nontender nodes
Associated URI, skin
or dental Infection
Generalized
(See Fig. 48.4)
Adenitis 
No
Yes
Warm, tender nodes
± Fever
± Erythema
Chronic >4 weeks
Signs and symptoms indicating
  possible malignancy:
  Supraclavicular location
  Fixed and/or matted quality
  Progressive, painless enlargement
  Signs of airway obstruction
  Prolonged constitutional symptoms
    (fevers, night sweats, weight loss)
LYMPHADENOPATHY
Location
Localized or regional
Acute onset
(<7 days)
Pharyngitis
Suppurative or
  abscess
Unilateral
Reactive
adenopathy
Consider:
Imaging
CBC
Blood culture
Incision and drainage
Aspiration
Staphylococcus
  aureus
Group A -hemolytic
  streptococcus
Anaerobes
Pasturella multocida
Yersinia pestis
LGV
Syphilis
Kawasaki disease
Group A -hemolytic
  streptococci
Adenovirus
EBV
CMV
HSV
HHV-6
Enterovirus
Tests for group A streptococci
  Rapid antigen detection test
  Throat culture, PCR
± CBC
± “Monospot”
± EBV titers
± Viral polymerase chain reaction
Sub-acute/
chronic onset
(>1-3 wk)
Consider:
CBC
ESR
CRP
PPD and/or interferon-
  gamma release
  assay for tuberculosis
Chest x-ray
Test for group
  A streptococci
PCR/serology for EBV,
  CMV, toxoplasmosis,
  B. henselae, HIV
Echocardiogram
EBV
CMV
Toxoplasmosis
M. tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacterium
S. aureus
Group A -hemolytic
  streptococci
Cat-scratch disease
Herpes simplex
Kawasaki disease
Kikachi-Fujimoto
  disease
CBC
CRP
ESR
LDH
Alkaline phosphatase
Uric acid
Imaging (chest x-ray/
  CT/PET-MRI)
Consider referral for
  biopsy and/or bone
  marrow studies
Hodgkin disease
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Thyroid cancer
Fig. 48.3  Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of regional lymphadenopathy. CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, 
Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LGV, 
lymphogranuloma venereum; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PET, position emission tomography; PPD, 
purified protein derivative (tuberculosis skin test); RPR, rapid plasma reagin; URI, upper respiratory infection; 
VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory. (Modified from Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pedi­
atric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:229.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
894
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Lymphadenopathy Patterns
Several patterns of lymphadenopathy and their underlying causes 
deserve special mention, due either to the frequency with which they 
are encountered in pediatric practice or to the potential severity of the 
underlying cause.
Infections of the oropharynx. Pharyngeal infection is the most 
common cause of regional lymphadenopathy in children (see Chapter 
2). Many of these pharyngeal infections are associated with cervical 
lymphadenopathy and are viral in origin. Frequent viral causes include 
adenovirus, parainfluenza, influenza, rhinovirus, coronaviruses 
Generalized lymphadenopathy
No
Yes
Signs and symptoms indicating
  possible malignancy:
  Supraclavicular location
  Fixed and/or matted quality
  Progressive, painless enlargement
  Signs of airway obstruction
  Prolonged constitutional symptoms
    (fevers, night sweats, weight loss)
Drug reaction
Consider:
CBC
CRP
ESR
Ferritin
ANA
VDRL/RPR
ANCA
PPD
Chest x-ray
Viral serology
HIV test
Lyme titers
CMV/EBV titers or PCR
Toxoplasma titers
± Imaging (ultrasound/CT)
± Biopsy
Systemic symptoms
± Rash
± Fever
± Hepatosplenomegaly
± Arthritis/arthralgia
History of drugs/medications
(e.g., phenytoin, phenobarbital,
carbamazepine, isoniazid,
aspirin, penicillin, tetracycline,
cephalosporins, sulfonamides)
CBC
CRP
ESR
LDH
Alkaline phosphatase
Uric acid
Imaging (chest x-ray/
  CT/PET-MRI)
Consider referral for
  biopsy and/or bone
  marrow studies
Hodgkin disease
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Thyroid cancer
Infectious
  Viral (EBV, CMV, HHV-6, parvovirus B19, HIV,
    HSV, rubella)
  Bacterial (syphilis, Lyme disease, Salmonella,
    brucellosis, disseminated tuberculosis)
  Other infections (Toxocara, histoplasmosis,
    malaria, toxoplasmosis)
Sinus histiocytosis
Immunologic (serum sickness, SLE, autoimmune
  lymphoproliferative syndrome, autoimmune
  hemolytic anemia, JIA-systemic onset)
Storage diseases (Gaucher, Niemann-Pick)
Sarcoidosis
HLH
MAS
Castleman disease
Fig. 48.4  Diagnostic algorithm for generalized lymphadenopathy. ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineu­
trophil cytoplasmic antibody; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus 6; 
HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus; JIA, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis; LDH, 
lactate dehydrogenase; MAS, macrophage activation syndrome; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PET, position 
emission tomography; PPD, purified protein derivative (tuberculosis skin test); RPR, rapid plasma reagin; SLE, 
systemic lupus erythematosus; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory. (Modified from Pomeranz AJ, 
Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:231.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
895
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
(including severe acute respiratory syndrome-­coronavirus 2 [SARS-­
CoV-­2]), and enterovirus. EBV and CMV also commonly cause 
exudative pharyngitis and cervical lymphadenopathy. The chief 
complaint usually includes pain with swallowing and with talking, as well 
as tender, enlarged lymph nodes in the neck. Systemic manifestations, 
such as fever, myalgia, chills, and rhinorrhea, may also be present. An 
examination of the throat typically reveals a symmetrically erythematous 
posterior oropharynx with enlarged tonsils that often contain exudates. 
Exudates can be seen with both viral and bacterial causes of pharyngitis 
and adenopathy, and thus do not reliably discriminate between the 
two causes. Herpes stomatitis with mucocutaneous involvement and 
herpes pharyngitis with oropharyngeal vesicles are also associated with 
bilaterally enlarged, tender, nonerythematous cervical nodes.
Bacterial infection of the pharynx is also commonly associated with 
enlarged, tender cervical lymph nodes. Strains of group A β-­hemolytic 
streptococci are the most common causes of such infections and are 
difficult to differentiate clinically from viral causes of pharyngitis and 
lymphadenopathy; thus, throat culture, PCR, or rapid antigen detec­
tion is necessary. An associated sandpapery rash and beefy-­red tonsils 
with palatal petechiae are not usually seen with viral pathogens and 
should make the examiner consider group A streptococci and toxin-­
mediated scarlet fever as a likely cause. Other bacteria can cause phar­
yngitis and cervical adenopathy, including non–group A streptococci 
and anaerobic organisms, such as Fusobacterium species. Anaerobic 
organisms can lead to painful oral gingivitis or stomatitis and phar­
yngitis (Vincent angina) that may progress to peritonsillar abscess. 
Asymmetry in the tonsils and surrounding tissues, as well as deviation 
of the uvula away from the affected side, may be seen with peritonsillar 
abscesses, along with unilateral tender, enlarged cervical lymph nodes 
ipsilateral to the abscess. Complications of acute bacterial pharyngitis 
may also include Lemierre syndrome, the findings of which include 
high fever and unilateral lateral neck swelling that may be confused 
with adenopathy. Lemierre syndrome is due to septic thrombosis of the 
internal jugular vein (and pulmonary septic emboli), usually caused by 
invasion of the bloodstream by Fusobacterium organisms, and should 
lead to prompt hospitalization, blood cultures, treatment with intrave­
nous antibiotics, and imaging of the internal jugular vein via Doppler 
flow ultrasonography or contrast-­enhanced CT.
Acute cervical lymphadenitis—inflammation of the cervical lymph 
nodes with tender enlargement—is most likely to occur with group A 
streptococcal or Staphylococcus aureus infection. There may or may not 
be a history of sore throat or pharyngeal inflammation on examination. 
Infection with other oral bacteria, including non–group A streptococci 
and anaerobes such as Fusobacterium or Arcanobacterium species, may 
also occur, presumably with the pharynx as the portal of entry. Other 
common sites for acute lymphadenitis are the submandibular nodes. 
Usually, these nodes quickly diminish in size after institution of appro­
priate antibiotic therapy, providing some degree of retrospective diag­
nosis while simultaneously being therapeutic.
Suppuration and spontaneous drainage of the nodes are less com­
mon than adenitis and are not typically seen in the setting of viral 
infections. Acute suppurative cervical adenitis can be seen in infections 
of the face and scalp and is usually caused by infection with group A 
streptococci or S. aureus. Management of suppuration includes incision 
T
T
Fig. 48.5  Suppurative lymphadenitis in a 5-­year-­old female with neck 
swelling and redness. Contrast-­enhanced CT image reveals a group of 
enlarged nodes in the right posterior triangle with central hypoattenuat­
ing necrosis (arrow). Also, note the enlarged tonsils (T) in this child with 
recurrent tonsillitis. (From Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and inflamma­
tion. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013;1:139.)
Fig. 48.6  Atypical mycobacterial infection frequently involves the sub­
mandibular triangle and preauricular regions. (From Rizzi MD, Wetmore 
RF, Potsic WP. Differential diagnosis of neck masses. In: Lesperance 
MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015:252, Fig. 19.14.)
TABLE 48.5  Differential Diagnosis of 
Atypical Lymphocytosis
Epstein-­Barr virus primary infection (infectious mononucleosis)
Cytomegalovirus primary infection (heterophile-­negative mononucleosis)*
Human herpesvirus 6 primary infection (roseola)
Primary HIV infection
Toxoplasmosis
Acute viral hepatitis
Rubella, mumps
Drug hypersensitivity reaction (e.g., phenytoin, sulfa) (DRESS)
*Cytomegalovirus is the most common cause of heterophile-­negative 
mononucleosis.
DRESS, drug reaction, eosinophilia, systemic symptoms.
From Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s 
Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Vol. 2. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1884, Table 138.8.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
896
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
and drainage or excision of the suppurative node. Gram stain and bac­
terial, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures of the drainage should be 
obtained. If there is concern for mycobacterial disease, a tuberculin 
skin test should be placed and/or interferon-­γ release assay should be 
performed. Total excision should be performed if atypical mycobac­
terial infection is suspected, because draining fistulas may form if a 
needle biopsy or partial resection is performed. Fine-­needle aspiration 
may reduce the risk of sinus formation.
Infections of the extremities. Bacterial infections of the skin and soft 
tissues are common causes of localized lymphadenopathy and adenitis 
and can lead to axillary or inguinal adenopathy if these infections 
originate in the extremities. Primarily caused by group A β-­hemolytic 
streptococci or S. aureus, these infections may drain into and inflame 
single or multiple regional lymph nodes. Any laceration or insect bite 
that becomes infected may yield adenopathy upstream in the nodal 
drainage basin of the infected site. Occasionally, penetrating injuries 
to the feet occurring through damp shoes or in wet areas may yield 
infections with other bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These 
penetrating infections usually manifest with cellulitis or osteomyelitis; 
lymphadenopathy is noted during the physical examination. The most 
common sites of infection include the foot or leg, leading to unilateral 
inguinal lymphadenitis, and the hand or arm, causing axillary 
lymphadenitis or unilateral inflammation of the epitrochlear nodes. 
Sporothrix schenckii, a fungus found in soil and on plant surfaces, can 
also produce regional lymphadenopathy after a minor penetrating 
injury, such as pricking a finger or toe on a rose thorn. Sporotrichosis 
presents as a small nontender nodule at the site of entry that over days 
to weeks spreads via lymphatic channels, producing ulcerating nodules 
along the lymphatic drainage pathway and either axillary or inguinal 
adenopathy, depending on the site of inoculation.
Epstein-­Barr virus infection. Infection with EBV is a common cause 
of both regional (bilateral cervical) and diffuse lymphadenopathy (see 
Chapter 2). This virus classically causes a mononucleosis syndrome 
in adolescents (Fig. 48.7), consisting of acute pharyngitis that may 
have a prolonged course, with tender and firm cervical adenopathy, 
malaise, fever, weight loss, and anorexia. Nearly half of patients will 
have generalized lymphadenopathy as well. More than 80% of patients 
have mild hepatitis (transaminitis) that is clinically silent but can be 
documented with liver enzyme studies; approximately 10% become 
jaundiced. Splenomegaly is present in more than 50% of patients and, 
in rare cases, progresses to splenic rupture. A small number of patients 
also have parapharyngeal and tonsillar lymphoid hyperplasia, which 
causes difficulty swallowing or breathing and can produce significant 
problems, leading to dehydration or airway obstruction. Small children 
with EBV infection often present with atypical symptoms or may be 
completely asymptomatic. In these children, fever and mild cervical 
adenopathy may be the major symptoms on presentation, or the child 
may be significantly ill with high fever and pharyngitis. In some, a 
nonspecific rash, appearing often after beginning empiric antibiotic 
therapy with penicillins, will suggest the diagnosis. Young children 
with acute EBV infection are more likely to have hepatosplenomegaly, 
rash, and eyelid edema than are young adults.
The diagnosis of EBV infection in older children focuses on the 
characteristic clinical syndrome and a relative lymphocytosis of 
40–50% seen in the differential white blood cell count, with up to 
20% atypical lymphocytes. Heterophile immunoglobulin M (IgM) 
antibodies, which are non-­EBV directed and agglutinate sheep and 
horse red blood cells, are found in more than 80% of young adults 
with EBV and are at maximal titer 3–4 weeks after infection. Hetero­
phile antibodies are rarely found in children younger than 5 years 
with EBV infections. In young children, antibody titers directed 
to specific EBV antigens are necessary to confirm the diagnosis 
(Table 48.6). Temporally, IgM and immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti­
bodies develop against the viral capsid antigen (VCA) first, followed 
by antibodies directed against early antigen (EA). Antibodies to 
nuclear antigens develop weeks later and, if present with EA IgG, 
are indicative of infection in the recent past. Approximately 20% of 
children present after the VCA IgM has already declined. In these 
children, VCA and EA IgG are present.
Organ transplant and other immunosuppressed patients may 
develop a lymphoproliferative syndrome due to EBV that presents 
with generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and fever. 
Diagnosis is based on the EBV viral load determined by PCR on blood.
Because group A streptococcal infection can present in a simi­
lar manner, or be present simultaneously with EBV infection, and 
because other viruses can cause pharyngitis and tender, enlarged 
cervical lymph nodes, differentiating these various causes of pharyn­
gitis and lymphadenopathy is important. Acute streptococcal phar­
yngitis can be identified on throat culture, PCR, or antigen testing 
and improves after institution of penicillin therapy; EBV infections 
do not improve with antibiotics, tend to result in a diffuse rash if 
treated with penicillins, and have a more prolonged clinical course. 
In addition, severe malaise and splenomegaly do not occur with 
most bacterial or viral causes of pharyngitis and cervical lymphade­
nopathy, and these findings should prompt the clinician to consider 
EBV infection. Similarly, most viral causes of cervical adenopathy 
and pharyngitis, with the exception of CMV, are not associated with 
the brisk atypical lymphocytosis commonly seen with EBV infec­
tions, and they are not usually associated with abnormal liver func­
tion results.
Cytomegalovirus infection. Infection with CMV in immuno­
competent children can result in a mononucleosis syndrome with 
atypical leukocytosis and lymphadenopathy. CMV mononucleosis is 
associated with fever and malaise similar to that seen in EBV; in contrast 
to EBV, CMV mononucleosis does not usually cause severe, exudative 
tonsillopharyngitis or the production of heterophile-­specific or EBV-­
specific antibodies. Women who are pregnant when they have primary 
CMV infections are at risk of delivering a child with congenital CMV 
infection through transplacental infection; approximately 10% of these 
neonates will have severe systemic findings. Lymphadenopathy may be 
present in congenital CMV but is not a common finding. Intrapartum 
transmission via cervical secretions or postpartum transmission via 
breast milk typically does not result in clinically apparent infection. 
Identifying CMV in the urine of the neonate in the first week of life 
confirms congenital infection.
7
14
21
28
Day of illness
0
25
50
75
100
% of patients with physical signs
Jaundice
Skin
rash
Periorbital
Pharyngitis, tonsillitis
Edema
Adenopathy
Splenomegaly
Fever
Palatal
enanthem
Fig. 48.7  The clinical course of acute Epstein-­Barr mononucleosis. 
Adenopathy occurs early in the infection and can persist for weeks. 
(Modified from Rapp CE, Hewston JF. Infectious mononucleosis and 
the Epstein-­Barr virus. Am J Dis Child. 1978;132:78.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
897
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
The diagnosis in older children is usually made serologically, in 
tests measuring both IgM and IgG antibodies directed to CMV. Simul­
taneous testing for EBV may reveal cross-­reactivity, with some patients 
with positive CMV titers also demonstrating low-­level positivity for 
EBV; a similar phenomenon may be seen in patients with EBV who 
demonstrate low-­level cross-­reactivity with CMV. Viral culture and 
nucleic acid amplification assays can also identify CMV from blood, 
throat swab, and urine specimens. Although CMV culture (especially 
from the urine) is frequently positive in children with CMV infection, 
many children, especially those in daycare, are silently infected and 
excrete CMV in the absence of clinical signs and symptoms. Therefore, 
CMV culture is less useful in the toddler age group.
Cat-­scratch disease. Cat-­scratch disease is caused by a small 
gram-­negative bacillus, B. henselae, which can also cause bacillary 
angiomatosis in patients with HIV infection. Cat-­scratch disease 
occurs several days after the scratch or bite of an infected cat or kitten. 
A papule at the site of the trauma usually develops, followed 1–3 
weeks later by regional lymphadenopathy; there is no lymphangitis. 
Most patients with cat-­scratch disease have a single enlarged, usually 
nonsuppurative lymph node. Nodes may be tender, particularly in 
the up to 30% of patients whose nodes suppurate. Axillary nodes 
are the most common to be enlarged, likely secondary to the upper 
extremities being the part of the body most frequently scratched or 
bitten. The next most common sites for adenopathy are the neck and 
jaw, followed by the inguinal region. Although single nodes are most 
commonly affected, regional adenopathy may also occur. Generalized 
lymphadenopathy is unusual in the immunocompetent host.
Approximately half the patients have low-­grade fever and mal­
aise, but a small number have high fevers (>39.5°C) and more severe 
systemic symptoms. In most patients, the swollen, inflamed nodes 
regress spontaneously within several weeks, though almost one-­third 
of patients progress to have purulent drainage that is culture negative 
by standard techniques. Uncommon complications include a sponta­
neously resolving encephalopathy, erythema nodosum, oculoglandular 
syndrome of Parinaud (in which B. henselae is inoculated into the eye 
and causes conjunctivitis and preauricular adenopathy), thrombocyto­
penia, hepatitis or splenitis with granulomas, transverse myelitis, and 
in rare cases osteolytic bone lesions. Other causes of oculoglandular 
syndrome include tularemia, adenoviruses, and enteroviruses.
The diagnosis is based on the history of contact with kittens or 
cats and the classic clinical manifestations; evaluation should include 
a careful search for an entrance site papule. Confirmatory testing is 
difficult, as B. henselae is a fastidious organism and is difficult to iso­
late via conventional culture techniques. Acute and convalescent anti­
body titers are typically employed, though the clinician should exercise 
caution in interpretation given the high rate of seroprevalence in the 
general population and the potential for cross-­reactivity with other 
infections. Pathologic samples of tissue from the involved node may 
provide further evidence if they demonstrate granulomas, central 
necrosis, and organisms on Warthin-­Starry silver stain. The decision to 
perform a biopsy is usually predicated on there being no clear history 
of a preceding contact with a cat or kitten or when the presentation is 
atypical and cannot be differentiated from other, more serious illnesses, 
such as mycobacterial adenitis.
Chronic granulomatous disease. Chronic granulomatous disease 
(see Chapter 54) comprises a group of rare inherited disorders of 
neutrophil function, characterized by recurrent pyogenic infections 
that are often accompanied by lymphadenopathy and/or abscess 
formation. Most cases are inherited in an X-­linked manner; the 
remining one-­third are autosomal recessive. Chronic granulomatous 
disease should be considered in a young child (often a male) who 
presents with recurrent fevers and infection, pneumonia, adenopathy, 
and abdominal pain. Family history often reveals another relative 
with the disease or includes a death from an infection in a young 
child. Common pathogens contain catalase and include S. aureus and 
Aspergillus species.
The diagnosis is established via neutrophil function tests, such as 
nitroblue tetrazolium testing, which demonstrate the defective neutro­
phil oxidation. Positive findings on neutrophil function tests are con­
firmed via molecular genetic analysis that demonstrates pathogenic 
variants in genes that encode subunits of phagocyte nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase: X-­linked disease 
is caused by pathogenic variants in CYBB; autosomal recessive disease 
is caused by pathogenic variants in CYBA, NCF1, NCF2, and NCF4.
TABLE 48.6  Antibodies to Epstein-­Barr Virus
Antibody 
Specificity
Time of Appearance 
in Infectious 
Mononucleosis
Percentage of EBV-­
Induced Mononucleosis 
Cases with Antibody
Persistence
Comments
Viral Capsid Antigens
IgM VCA
At clinical presentation
100
4–8 wk
Highly sensitive and specific major diagnostic utility
IgG VCA
At clinical presentation
100
Lifelong
High titer at presentation and lifelong persistence 
make IgG VCA more useful as epidemiologic tool 
than as diagnostic tool in individual cases
Early Antigens
Anti-­EA-­D
Peaks at 3–4 wk after onset
70
3–6 mo
Correlated with severe disease; also seen in 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Anti-EA-R
2 wk to several months after 
onset
Low
2 mo to >3 yr
Occasionally seen with unusually severe or protracted 
illness, also seen in African Burkitt lymphoma
Latent Antigen
EBV nuclear antigen
3–4 wk after onset
100
Lifelong
Late appearance helpful in diagnosis of heterophile-­
negative cases
EA, early antigen; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM immunoglobulin M; VCA, viral capsid antigen.
From Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:1884, Table 138.9.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
898
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Human immunodeficiency virus. Initial infection with HIV may 
manifest as a heterophile-­negative mononucleosis-­like acute retroviral 
syndrome consisting of diffuse lymphadenopathy, fever, sore throat, 
rash, myalgia, diarrhea, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and general 
malaise. Patients with HIV infection who are not diagnosed and treated 
go on to have weight loss or poor weight gain and acquire thrush and 
other opportunistic infections, such as pneumonia caused by 
Pneumocystis jirovecii; the presence of such infections should 
prompt consideration of congenital or acquired immunodeficiency 
(see Chapter 54). HIV-­infected children are also more likely 
than immunocompetent hosts to have other infectious causes of 
lymphadenopathy, such as tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterium, CMV, 
or fungi, or noninfectious causes, such as lymphoma or Kaposi sarcoma 
(human herpesvirus type 8 [HHV-­8]). Regional lymphadenopathy 
is not a common manifestation of HIV infection unless the regional 
adenopathy represents a distinct focal infection. The diagnosis of HIV 
infection is typically established via a rapid combined antibody/antigen 
immunoassay that detects antibodies to HIV-­1 and HIV-­2, as well as 
the p24 antigen present in early stages of HIV-­1 infection. Patients 
for whom this combined immunoassay is negative should not require 
further testing unless there is concern for very early infection or recent 
significant exposure, in which case HIV-­1 nucleic acid testing should 
be performed immediately and the immunoassay repeated after a short 
interval. Patients for whom the initial immunoassay is positive require 
further testing to determine whether infection is due to HIV-­1 or HIV-­
2. Negative or indeterminate results on this further testing should be 
followed by nucleic acid amplification testing for HIV-­1 or by repeating 
the testing algorithm if HIV-­2 is suspected.
Mycobacterial infections. Tubercular cervical adenitis is not 
common in the United States, though can be associated with ingestion 
of raw, contaminated milk and infection with M. bovis. Regional or 
diffuse lymphadenopathy caused by infection with Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis is also unusual in nonendemic nations; it is increasing in 
frequency in children in the United States as a result of an increase in 
the number of adults actively infected with tuberculosis. This increase 
is attributable to several issues, including immigration from endemic 
areas, reduction in tuberculosis control programs, the likelihood 
of HIV-­infected individuals to have a high mycobacterial burden, 
noncompliance by infected individuals with multidrug treatment 
regimens, and drug resistance by the organism. Most adenitis caused 
by mycobacteria in the United States is caused by atypical strains that 
are not serious pathogens in the immunocompetent host.
Several historical and clinical criteria can be used to differentiate 
tuberculous adenitis from atypical mycobacterial infections. Most chil­
dren with tuberculosis have a history of exposure to an adult with active 
tuberculosis. Infection with atypical mycobacteria is more common in 
the southern parts of the United States. Children with tuberculous ade­
nitis may have hilar lymphadenopathy because the lungs are usually 
the source of primary infection. Evidence of extralymphatic disease 
is also common in children with tuberculosis; such disease includes 
pneumonia, pleural effusions, bone marrow suppression, liver function 
abnormalities, and disseminated (miliary) disease. Miliary tuberculo­
sis may manifest with diffuse lymphadenopathy and should be con­
sidered if pulmonary infiltrates and systemic symptoms are present. 
Such extralymphatic disease and diffuse lymphadenopathy are rare in 
immunocompetent children with adenitis caused by atypical mycobac­
teria but may occur in the setting of HIV infection.
The most common mycobacterial infection in children in the United 
States is the infection of the lymph nodes with the atypical mycobac­
teria, primarily Mycobacterium avium-­intracellulare complex, Myco­
bacterium kansasii, Mycobacterium scrofulaceum, and Mycobacterium 
marinum. The involved lymph nodes are usually tender, unilateral, and 
cervical in most infections, presumably because the organism enters 
via the oropharynx. Most frequently, a previously healthy child pre­
sents with a mass that is really unilateral lymphadenitis or adenopa­
thy in the cervical, submandibular, or submaxillary region (Figs. 48.6 
and 48.8). Although fever may be present, other significant systemic 
symptoms are usually not present. In a small number of patients, the 
affected node spontaneously ruptures and drains before the visit to 
the physician. The drainage is not usually grossly purulent and may 
be a clue that atypical mycobacteria are the cause of the infected node. 
Regional adenopathy may also be seen after immunization with bacille 
Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) vaccine.
The gold standard for diagnosis of lymphadenitis caused by atypi­
cal mycobacteria is acid-­fast staining and culture of the excised node. 
Incision and drainage of these nodes may lead to chronically draining 
sinus tracts, which may leave scars; thus, this method is contrain­
dicated. The usual scenario involves a young, preschool-­aged child 
with an enlarged cervical node (or nodes) that responds poorly to 
antibiotics. The child has no history of contact with cats and is oth­
erwise well. A tuberculin skin test often yields 5–9 mm of induration 
because atypical mycobacteria have antigens cross-­reactive to those of 
tuberculosis. This amount of induration is considered indeterminate 
for tuberculosis in low-­risk patients and suggests that the adenop­
athy is caused by an atypical mycobacterium. Interferon-­γ release 
assays will be positive for M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, and some atyp­
ical mycobacterium (M. marinum, M. kansasii) but will be negative 
for BCG and infection with M. avium-intracellulare complex. Grad­
ual resolution of lymphadenitis sometimes occurs in children with 
atypical mycobacterial infections. Excisional biopsy is not necessary 
if the diagnosis is made presumptively from skin test results of <10 
mm induration, if other infections are ruled out, if resolution occurs, 
Fig. 48.8  Nontuberculous mycobacterial infection in a 10-­year-­old male 
with left neck swelling. Axial contrast-­enhanced CT image shows a 
cluster of enlarged nodes in the left neck containing low-­attenuation 
necrotic centers (arrow). (From Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and 
inflammation. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 
12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013;1:139.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
899
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
and if the child is at low risk for infection with M. tuberculosis (see 
Chapter 3). If the node does not improve, continues to enlarge, or 
spontaneously drains, excision is recommended and is usually cura­
tive. Fine-­needle aspiration (for culture and acid-­fast staining) may 
also be used if the node is in an area where excision is impractical.
Toxoplasmosis. Toxoplasma gondii is a protozoan organism that 
is a parasite of cats. Many other animals, including humans, can 
be incidentally and chronically infected hosts in which the parasite 
cannot complete its life cycle. Human acquisition of toxoplasmosis can 
result from contact with cat feces or soil that contains oocysts, which 
infect the host upon ingestion. Alternatively, the ingestion of tissue 
cyst-­containing raw or undercooked meat, particularly lamb or pork, 
may lead to infection. Adults in the United States are more likely to be 
infected from ingestion of raw meat than from contact with oocysts 
in cat feces or soil. Finally, infection can be transmitted to the fetus, 
especially when a pregnant woman is acutely infected with toxoplasmosis. 
Although many fetal infections are asymptomatic, transplacental 
infection with toxoplasmosis can result in severe neurologic damage, 
chorioretinitis, aseptic meningitis, and significant systemic illness 
manifesting with the classic triad of hepatosplenomegaly, intracranial 
calcifications, and hydrocephalus. Although lymphadenopathy can occur 
in the newborn with congenital toxoplasmosis, it is a more common 
symptom of acute toxoplasmosis in older children and young adults.
The most common symptoms in children who acquire toxoplas­
mosis are lymphadenopathy, fever, malaise, myalgia, and pharyngitis. 
Most commonly affected are the anterior and posterior cervical and 
axillary nodes, which may be tender; involvement is usually bilateral. 
The lymph node enlargement seen in toxoplasmosis is caused by retic­
ular hyperplasia and inflammation. Most laboratory results are normal, 
but the white blood cell count may show an absolute lymphocytosis 
with atypical lymphocytes, which can cause confusion with EBV, HIV, 
or CMV mononucleosis.
The diagnosis is made primarily with serologic studies. Various diag­
nostic techniques can be used on the patient’s serum, including indirect 
immunofluorescence, complement fixation, and enzyme-­linked immu­
nosorbent assay. A fourfold rise in IgG titer or the presence of IgM anti­
bodies is diagnostic. In neonatal infections, tests measuring IgM have 
become more sensitive and specific. If biopsy is performed, actual par­
asite forms can sometimes be demonstrated. Antigen tests and cultures 
that grow the parasite are also available but primarily on an investiga­
tional level.
Syphilis. Syphilis, caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum, is 
common in the United States (see Chapter 21). The natural course of 
noncongenital syphilis includes three major clinical manifestations:
 • Primary syphilis, in which the individual develops a painless chan­
cre at the site of inoculation
 • Secondary syphilis, in which the organism disseminates hematog­
enously to many organs
 • Tertiary syphilis, in which gummatous lesions develop in end 
organs, such as the brain, heart, and bones
Lymphadenopathy can be seen as one of the manifestations of syphi­
lis in several situations. In primary syphilis, in which the inoculation site 
is usually the genital area, regional lymphadenopathy with painless, firm 
nodes occurs at the time that a chancre is observed. Inguinal adenopathy 
in an adolescent who is sexually active mandates further examination 
and work-­up for sexually transmitted infections such as syphilis. In sec­
ondary syphilis, the organism has disseminated, with multiple organs 
involved. The classic manifestations are protean and usually include non­
vesicular rashes and systemic symptoms that may include fever, malaise, 
anorexia, and weight loss. Lymphadenopathy, regional or generalized, is 
common and often includes epitrochlear nodes.
Pregnant women with syphilis who are untreated readily trans­
mit the disease to the fetus, causing congenital syphilis, often with 
significant sequelae. Infants with congenital syphilis may also have 
generalized lymphadenopathy, although this finding is less common 
than other systemic symptoms, such as hepatosplenomegaly, snuffles, 
and periosteal reactive disease.
The diagnosis has been complicated by the inability to grow the 
organism in vitro. Dark-­field examination of exudate from a chancre 
or other superficial lesion, nasal discharge, or placental tissue shows 
numerous spirochetes, but dark-­field methods are often unavailable to 
routine laboratories. The organism can be detected via nucleic acid–
based testing, though such assays have not been approved for clinical 
use; serologic assays continue to be the primary mode of diagnosis. 
Nontreponemal serologic studies rely on host production of antibod­
ies to nonspecific lipoidal host tissue antigens that arise as a result of 
infection with the spirochete. These tests include the Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory (VDRL) test, the serologic test for syphilis, and 
the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test. Levels of these antibodies decline 
after adequate treatment and are useful in confirming eradication of the 
infection. False-­positive reactions can occur, particularly in individu­
als with connective tissue disorders or mononucleosis. False-­negative 
results can be seen in early primary syphilis, in latent infection, late in 
congenital syphilis, or in the presence of high antibody concentrations, 
in which case retesting a diluted specimen can produce a true-­positive 
result. In contrast to nontreponemal assays, the fluorescent treponemal 
antibody absorption test (FTA-­ABS) measures antibodies directed spe­
cifically to T. pallidum and can be used as a confirmatory test in indi­
viduals with positive results on nontreponemal tests. These antibodies 
usually remain present for the life of the infected individual, even if 
the patient receives adequate therapy. Thus, in contrast to nontrepo­
nemal tests, the FTA-­ABS has little use in monitoring the efficacy of 
treatment.
Acute leukemia, lymphoma, and other malignancies. Lymphade­
no­pathy is frequently among the presenting findings in patients 
with leukemia or lymphoma. Enlarged lymph nodes may be noted 
in an isolated, regional, or generalized distribution, with or without 
classic systemic symptoms, such as fever, malaise, night sweats, 
weight loss, and anorexia. Malignant nodes are usually firm, rubbery, 
fixed, and nontender, and may be matted. Unlike many of the acute 
lymphadenopathies caused by infectious agents, most lymph nodes that 
are malignant increase in size gradually. Additional findings suggestive 
of malignancy include age older than 10 years, size >2.5 cm, duration 
>6 weeks (and increasing in size), and supraclavicular location.
Approximately 50% of children with acute lymphoblastic leu­
kemia have adenopathy at the time of diagnosis. Nodal disease may 
be either generalized or localized to regional nodal groups, often the 
cervical chains. Nodal disease is frequently accompanied by other 
signs and symptoms, including fevers, malaise, weight loss, pallor, 
bone pain, petechiae and bruising, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. 
The CBC usually demonstrates anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocy­
tosis or leukopenia, circulating blasts, or some combination thereof. 
Some patients may have normal peripheral blood laboratory results 
on initial evaluation. Acute myelogenous leukemia is less common in 
children but may manifest in a similar manner. Bone marrow biopsy 
and aspiration must be performed, and the findings are diagnostic.
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma is a relatively common childhood malig­
nancy and often manifests with mediastinal or pleural disease. Ade­
nopathy in the supraclavicular, cervical, or axillary regions is usually 
present and may occur in the absence of chest involvement. Systemic 
symptoms are variable at the time of diagnosis. Lymph nodes, as in 
other malignancies, tend to be firm, nontender, and rubbery, and their 
size may increase relatively rapidly over several weeks. Because lym­
phoblastic lymphoma may represent a variant of acute lymphoblas­
tic leukemia, the signs and symptoms of leukemia and lymphoma 
may merge. Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma of B-­cell origin (Burkitt and 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
900
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
non-­Burkitt lymphoma) in children in the United States usually orig­
inates in an intraabdominal site, and regional adenopathy, if present, 
is then in the inguinal or iliac regions. The African variety of Burkitt 
lymphoma often manifests as an expanding jaw mass.
Hodgkin disease often presents with painless cervical or supracla­
vicular lymphadenopathy in older school-­aged children and adolescents. 
Nodes are firmer than those seen in patients whose nodes are enlarged in 
reaction to infections. In a small number of children with Hodgkin dis­
ease, the size of the nodes may wax and wane for several months before 
a definitive diagnosis is made. Supraclavicular nodes usually indicate 
intrathoracic disease, which is present in 60–70% of patients at the time 
of diagnosis. Axillary or inguinal nodes may also be the sites of present­
ing lymphadenopathy. Approximately 30% of patients with Hodgkin dis­
ease have systemic symptoms at presentation, including fatigue, weight 
loss, fevers, night sweats, and poor appetite. Some patients with Hodgkin 
disease also have unusual symptoms, such as pruritus, hemolytic anemia, 
and chest pain after alcohol ingestion. Such systemic symptoms with 
lymphadenopathy are red flags for immediate work-­up for malignancy. 
Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of involved nodes and/or bone marrow 
aspiration, if the tumor has spread to the bone marrow.
Disseminated neuroblastoma may manifest as diffuse adenopa­
thy in younger children. Such children often have primary adrenal or 
paraspinal masses with bone metastasis and have nonspecific systemic 
symptoms, abdominal mass, bone pain, and, sometimes, symptoms of 
spinal cord compression. Other tumors, such as rhabdomyosarcoma 
and thyroid cancer, manifest in rare cases with lymphadenopathy 
caused by local or disseminated metastasis.
Ulceroglandular disorders. Ulceroglandular (lymphocutaneous) 
disorders usually involve an initial injury or bite to an extremity with a 
resulting cutaneous lesion (ulcer, eschar, or papule) and enlarged regional 
nodes, with or without lymphangitis (Table 48.7). In some, the cutaneous 
lesion is secondary to hematogenous spread; in these circumstances the 
lymph node enlargement may then be generalized (e.g., monkeypox).
Kimura disease. Kimura disease is characterized by the development 
of benign, nontender subcutaneous nodules in the head and neck with 
associated regional lymphadenopathy, blood and tissue eosinophilia, 
and elevations in serum immunoglobulin E. Lesions typically appear 
in adolescence or early adulthood; the condition is more common in 
biological males of Asian descent. Biopsies should be performed to 
rule out malignancy. Histologic specimens show massive eosinophilic 
infiltration of the nodules and affected lymph nodes. Up to 60% of 
affected patients may develop kidney disease, oftentimes nephrotic 
syndrome. Treatment modalities include surgery, radiation therapy, 
and glucocorticoids, though are typically reserved for patients with 
functional or aesthetic impairments secondary to the lesions.
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis). 
Kikuchi disease is a rare, usually self-­limiting disease with onset in 
late childhood through early adolescence, usually presenting as firm 
unilateral posterior cervical adenitis, fever, malaise, elevated ESR, 
atypical lymphocytosis, and leukopenia. Nodes are often as large 
as 3 cm, though some can be larger. Nodes are painful or tender in 
approximately 50% of cases, may be multiple in number, and must be 
differentiated from lymphoma. Node involvement may occasionally be 
bilateral or present in locations other than the cervical region, such as 
in the axillary or supraclavicular regions.
The etiology is presumed to be secondary to an abnormal immune 
response; diagnosis is established via lymph node biopsy. Histologic fea­
tures include necrosis with karyorrhexis (i.e., fragmentation of the nucleus 
with breakup of chromatin), a histiocytic infiltrate, crescentic plasmacyt­
oid monocytes, and an absence of neutrophils. The disease is self-­limiting 
and usually spontaneously resolves within 6 months, although relapses 
may occur. Therapy with systemic steroids is reserved for cases with 
severe symptoms. Autoimmune diseases have been associated with Kiku­
chi disease, most commonly systemic lupus erythematosus.
Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-­
Dorfman disease). This rare non-­Langerhans histiocytosis typically 
presents with massive, bilateral, painless, and mobile cervical 
lymphadenopathy with associated fever, leukocytosis, and elevated 
ESR; polyclonal elevation of IgG may be present. Night sweats and 
weight loss are common; autoimmune hemolytic anemia is a less 
common associated finding.
Other nodal chains may be involved. Extranodal disease occurs in 
40% of cases; the most common sites are the skin, followed by the nasal 
cavity and sinuses, palate, orbit, bone (lytic lesions), and central nervous 
system. Patients presenting with features suggestive of Rosai-­Dorfman 
disease (RDD) should undergo a comprehensive evaluation aimed 
at identifying conditions that may predispose to RDD and excluding 
alternate diagnoses such as malignancy or hemophagocytic lympho­
histiocytosis (see Chapter 54), as well as establishing the extent of any 
extranodal involvement. Predisposing conditions include a family his­
tory (pathogenic variants in SLC29A3 and TNFRSF have been associated 
with RDD), concurrent lymphoma, autoimmune disease (in particular, 
systemic lupus erythematosus and juvenile idiopathic arthritis), and 
elevated IgG4 levels. Diagnosis requires biopsy: histology demonstrates 
pale S100+, CD68+, and CD1a− histiocytes containing engulfed lympho­
cytes. These histologic findings, in conjunction with expected clinical 
features, are diagnostic. Spontaneous remission may occur after a pro­
longed course, though most patients benefit from treatment, which may 
include glucocorticoids, surgical resection, immunomodulators such as 
sirolimus, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.
Castleman disease (angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia). 
Castleman disease is an uncommon lymphoproliferative disease usually 
seen in adolescents or young adults. Enlargement of a single node, most 
often in the mediastinum or abdomen, is the most common localized 
presentation. Some patients may have fever, night sweats, weight loss, 
and fatigue. Management includes surgery and/or radiation therapy.
Multicentric Castleman disease is a systemic lymphoproliferative 
disorder that causes lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fever, ane­
mia, overexpression of interleukin-­6 (IL-­6), and polyclonal hypergam­
maglobulinemia. Multicentric Castleman disease is classified as being 
associated with human herpesvirus-­8 infection or as being idiopathic; 
TABLE 48.7  Ulceroglandular Disorders
Anthrax
Tularemia
Herpes simplex
Pasteurella multocida (dog or cat bite)
Rickettsialpox
Tick-­borne lymphadenopathy syndrome
Mediterranean spotted fever
African tick bite fever
Typhus
Cat-­scratch disease
BCG immunization
Spirillary rat-­bite fever
Plague
Nocardiosis
Actinomycosis
Cutaneous diphtheria
Cutaneous coccidioidomycosis
Cutaneous histoplasmosis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
Cutaneous tetanus
Monkeypox
BCG, bacille Calmette-­Guérin.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
901
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
rarely, some patients with idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease 
develop a potentially life-­threatening variant characterized by throm­
bocytopenia, anasarca, fevers, reticulin myelofibrosis, and organomeg­
aly (TAFRO syndrome). Treatment options include glucocorticoids, 
chemotherapy, and immunomodulating therapy directed against 
CD20 or the IL-­6 pathway.
Kawasaki disease. Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 53) is a medium-­
vessel vasculitis of childhood of uncertain etiology. The hallmark of 
Kawasaki disease is a high, unremitting, and prolonged fever of 5 or 
more days’ duration in the presence of specific associated symptoms; 
diagnostic criteria for classic Kawasaki disease include four or more 
of the following: cervical lymphadenopathy that is typically >1.5 cm in 
diameter and unilateral; a polymorphous rash; bilateral nonexudative 
bulbar conjunctivitis; extremity changes (acutely, palmar erythema or 
swelling of the hands and feet; subacutely, periungual peeling of the 
fingers and toes), and changes in the lips or oral cavity (e.g., redness, lip 
cracking, strawberry tongue, mucosal injection).
Mimics of Kawasaki disease include certain viral infections such 
as adenovirus, though the identification of a specific viral pathogen 
in the setting of findings strongly consistent with Kawasaki disease 
does not preclude the possibility that the virus induced an aberrant 
host response resulting in Kawasaki disease. Features of Kawasaki dis­
ease are also shared with multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children (MIS-­C) associated with COVID-­19 infection. Estimated 
to affect <1% of children infected with SARS-­CoV-­2, MIS-­C typically 
presents with prolonged fevers of approximately 5 days’ duration, 
prominent gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, vomiting, 
or diarrhea), rash, altered sensorium, mucous membrane changes, and 
conjunctivitis. Lymphadenopathy is a less frequent presenting symp­
tom and is found in approximately 15% of cases. Some patients with 
MIS-­C present critically ill, with findings suggestive of toxic shock syn­
drome, and have hypotension, myocardial dysfunction, serositis, and 
multisystem organ involvement; coagulation abnormalities may also 
present (see Chapter 53).
MIMICS OF HEAD AND NECK LYMPHADENOPATHY: 
HEAD AND NECK MASSES
Given the density of anatomic structures within the head and neck and 
the frequency with which these structures may be confused for enlarged 
lymph nodes, congenital and acquired lesions of these head and neck 
structures, many of which are benign, may mimic lymphadenopathy and 
deserve consideration. Primary among these structures and lesions are 
the salivary glands, including the parotid gland, as well the thyroid gland, 
branchial cleft cysts, hemangiomas, cystic hygromas, and non-­nodal soft 
tissue malignancy. History and physical examination should provide suf­
ficient information to arrive at an appropriate differential diagnosis and 
evaluation strategy of these mimics. Important factors in distinguishing 
lymphadenopathy from non-­nodal congenital or acquired lesions of the 
head and neck include the age of the child, anatomic position, presence 
of signs of inflammation, associated symptoms, and the time course of 
the development of symptoms (Figs. 48.9 and 48.10).
Consider:
Free T4, TSH
Thyroid scan
Imaging (CT/ultrasound)
± Aspiration
Thyroglossal duct cyst
Dermoid cyst
Thymic cyst
Goiter
  Congenital hyperthyroidism
  Defect in thyroid hormone
    synthesis
  Maternal goitrogens
  lodide deficiency
Teratoma
Laryngocele
Imaging
  Ultrasound
  CT/MRI
Anterior midline or
paramedian
Location
Physical findings
Congenital
Perform H and P
NECK MASSES
Acquired
Any location
Soft, spongy
Red/purplish color
Transilluminates
Within the belly of the
  sternocleidomastoid
Firm/solid
Anterior triangle
  Postauricular
  Angle of the mandible
  Anterior border of
    sternocleidomastoid
± Fistula
See Fig. 48-10
Imaging
  Ultrasound
  CT/MRI
Branchial
cleft cyst
Congenital muscular
torticollis
Cystic hygroma
Hemangioma
Fig. 48.9  Diagnostic algorithm for congenital neck masses. H and P, history and physical examination; T4, thy­
roxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. (Modified from Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pediatric 
Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:9.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
902
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Salivary Gland Lesions
Enlargement and inflammation of the salivary glands may be mistaken 
for lymphadenopathy and most frequently affect the parotid glands 
in children. Infectious etiologies include acute suppurative sialadeni­
tis, which is typically caused by S. aureus, as well as viral mumps or 
HIV-­related parotitis. Noninfectious inflammatory conditions may 
be primary, part of a systemic inflammatory disorder, or related to 
obstruction (i.e., sialolithiasis). Diagnosis involves distinguishing the 
involved salivary gland from adjacent structures such as submandib­
ular lymph nodes, identifying findings on physical examination that 
suggest salivary gland involvement (such as the expression of pus into 
the oral cavity from the salivary duct upon massaging an acutely sup­
purative gland or the inability to express normal saliva from the duct 
when obstructed), and obtaining imaging (CT, MRI, or ultrasound) 
and fine-­needle aspiration as needed, particularly if there is concern 
for solid malignancy.
Thyroid Lesions
Diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland, or goiter, may present at 
any age, including in neonates. Goiter is typically readily distinguished 
from cervical lymphadenopathy by virtue of its midline location and, 
in older children able to follow commands, its mobility upon mimick­
ing a swallow during physical examination. Congenital goiter may be 
due to inborn defects in thyroid hormone biosynthesis, developmental 
anomaly, or exposure to maternal antithyroid antibodies or antithyroid 
medications given for maternal hyperthyroidism. In older children 
and adolescents in areas of the world with adequate iodine supple­
mentation, goiter is typically due to autoimmune thyroiditis; how­
ever, iodine-­deficiency goiter is the most common cause worldwide. 
Acquired goiter is associated with hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, 
or a euthyroid state. A diffusely enlarged thyroid gland without nod­
ules should be investigated with determination of the free thyroxine 
and thyroid-­stimulating hormone levels, assessment for the presence of 
NECK MASSES
Acquired
Location
Physical findings
Lateral neck
Obscuring angle of
the mandible
Lymph node
involvement
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
MRI
Hypothyroid
Euthyroid
Hyperthyroid
Graves
  disease
Autoimmune
  thyroiditis
Free T4, TSH
Antithyroid
  antibodies
± Thyroid scan,
  Imaging (ultrasound/CT)
Rhabdomyo-
  sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Pendred
  syndrome
Simple colloid
  goiter
Autoimmune
  thyroiditis
Thyroglossal
  duct cyst
Autoimmune
  thyroiditis
Endemic goiter
  (iodine
  deficiency)
Goitrogenic
  drugs
Defect in thyroid
  hormone
  synthesis
Thyroglossal
  duct cyst
Salivary calculus
Collagen vascular disease
Recurrent emesis (bulimia)
Cystic fibrosis
Recurrent idiopathic parotitis
Mucocele
Tumor
No
Midline
Moves with swallowing
Goiter
Parotid gland
enlargement
Inflammation
present
(warm, tender)
Thyroid scan
Ultrasound
± Fine-needle
  aspiration
  or biopsy
Acute parotid
gland infection
Branchial
cleft cyst
Benign
  adenoma
Carcinoma
Lymphadenitis
Lymphadenopathy
Nonsuppurative
  Mumps
  Coxsackie A
  HIV
Suppurative
  S. aureus
Hard, solitary,
rapidly growing
nodule
Enlarging and persistent
  cervical mass with
  any of the following:
Persistent drainage from
  nose or ear that is
  refractory to therapy
Horner syndrome
Iris heterochromia
“Raccoon eyes”
  (periorbital ecchymosis)
Fig. 48.10  Diagnostic algorithm for acquired neck masses. T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. 
(Modified from Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2016:11.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
903
CHAPTER 48  Lymphadenopathy and Neck Masses
antithyroid antibodies, and consideration of ultrasound imaging (see 
Fig. 48.10). Isolated thyroid nodules may be more difficult to distin­
guish from lymphadenopathy, suggest benign adenoma or carcinoma, 
and should be investigated with a thyroid scan, ultrasound, and either 
fine-­needle aspiration or biopsy to obtain histologic diagnosis.
Developmental Anomalies and Soft Tissue Tumors
Infantile hemangioma (lymphangioma) is a venous malformation 
that typically enlarges to the point of being noticed within the first 
year of life. Superficial lesions are often readily distinguished by their 
red, blue, or violaceous appearance and by being blanchable. Deeper 
lesions may be mistaken for an enlarged lymph node if overlying skin 
changes are not overt, requiring ultrasonography to establish the diag­
nosis. Isolated lesions tend to spontaneously regress in early childhood, 
though lesions that are large or that have negative functional or aes­
thetic sequelae may be treated, oftentimes with enteral propranolol. 
Multiple head and neck hemangiomas may be associated with PHACE 
(posterior fossa anomalies, hemangioma, arterial anomalies, cardiac 
anomalies, and eye anomalies) syndrome (see Chapter 37).
Cystic hygroma typically presents as a large translucent soft tis­
sue mass in the lateral neck, axilla, or chest wall that is often detected 
on prenatal ultrasound or noted at the time of or shortly after birth. 
Though a malformation of lymphatic vessels, the lesion is rarely con­
fused for lymphadenopathy unless small. Cystic hygroma is associated 
with chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 21, Turner syn­
drome, and Noonan syndrome in approximately 50% of cases.
Branchial cleft cysts make up approximately 20% of congenital 
neck masses and often remain asymptomatic until late childhood, 
when they become infected, typically by oropharyngeal flora or sin­
opulmonary pathogens. Given that the majority are located anterior to 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle, an acutely inflamed cyst may be con­
fused with a suppurative lymph node and the two can be distinguished 
via CT, MRI, or fluoroscopic studies (Figs. 48.11 and 48.12).
Thyroglossal duct cysts are distinguished by their midline position 
in the anterior neck and are rarely confused with lymphadenopathy 
(Fig. 48.13). Most remain asymptomatic though may be diagnosed 
after developing secondary bacterial infection in the context of an 
upper respiratory tract infection. Thyroid studies and imaging should 
be obtained; surgical resection is typically advised.
Rare soft tissue masses of the head and neck include congenital cer­
vicofacial teratoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. The former may involve 
the orbit, nasopharynx, oropharynx, tongue, palate, or anterior neck, 
and, if interfering with in utero swallowing, may be associated with 
pulmonary hypoplasia and fetal hydrops and require fetal surgery to 
correct. The latter may be confused with congenital muscular torti­
collis and may be difficult to distinguish on ultrasonography or even 
MRI. Gadolinium administration with MRI will reveal heterogeneous 
enhancement, allowing for presumptive diagnosis as well as surgical 
planning.
Meckel’s
cartilage
Stapes
Styloid process
III
II
I
IV
V
Styloid
ligament
Fig. 48.11  Skeletal derivatives of the branchial arches. (From Flint PW, 
Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head & 
Neck Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010:2583, Fig. 181.10.)
Fig. 48.12  First branchial derivatives present as a pit or a mass near 
the angle of the mandible (arrow). They frequently originate in or near 
the external canal and, during their course, involve the facial nerve. 
(From Rizzi MD, Wetmore RF, Potsic WP. Differential diagnosis of neck 
masses. In: Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:248, Fig. 19.3.)
Fig. 48.13  Thyroglossal duct cysts are often found in the midline of the 
neck at or near the hyoid bone. (From Rizzi MD, Wetmore RF, Potsic WP. 
Differential diagnosis of neck masses. In: Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings 
Pediatric Otolaryngology. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:248, Fig. 19.5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
904
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Lymphadenopathy is a common manifestation of many childhood ill­
nesses. Most often, regional adenopathy is associated with a bacterial 
infection in the vicinity of the node or with viral pharyngitis. General­
ized adenopathy does not always indicate a serious underlying disease. 
Adenopathy usually resolves either spontaneously or after appropriate 
antibiotic therapy. When adenopathy is accompanied by weight loss, 
recurrent fevers, night sweats, or other systemic signs or symptoms, 
a more serious cause must be vigorously sought. The presence of 
supraclavicular nodes is usually a red flag for serious illness such as 
malignancy. Adenopathy associated with hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
or an abdominal mass must be quickly investigated. Furthermore, if 
the adenopathy does not diminish or resolve after antibiotic therapy 
or after 3 weeks, a more thorough evaluation is necessary. A chest 
x-ray must be performed for children with peripheral lymphadenop­
athy who are suspected of having a malignancy to look for mediasti­
nal nodes. In children with known immunodeficiency, the cause of the 
adenopathy may be far more serious. These children are more prone to 
opportunistic infections; malignancies also occur at a higher frequency 
in immunosuppressed children than in the general population. Several 
conditions may mimic head and neck lymphadenopathy, including sal­
ivary gland and thyroid disorders, as well as developmental anomalies 
such as branchial cleft cysts, hemangiomas, or cystic hygromas.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
904.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General References
Grossman M, Shiramizu B. Evaluation of lymphadenopathy in children. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 1994;6:68.
Kelly CS, Kelly Jr RE. Lymphadenopathy in children. Pediatr Clin N Am. 
1998;45:875.
Medication-­Related Causes of Lymphadenopathy
Gru AA, O’Malley DP. Autoimmune and medication-­induced 
lymphadenopathies. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2018;35(1):34–43.
Cervical Adenopathy
Alvarez A, Schreiber J. Lemierre’s syndrome in adolescent children—anaerobic 
sepsis with internal jugular vein thrombophlebitis following pharyngitis. 
Pediatrics. 1995;96:354.
Peters TR, Edwards KM. Cervical lymphadenopathy and adenitis. Pediatr Rev. 
2000;21:399.
Epstein-Barr Viral Infections
Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 24-­1994. N Engl J 
Med. 1994;330:1739.
Cohen JI. Epstein-­Barr virus infection. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:481.
Cat-­Scratch Disease
Bass JW, Freitas BC, Freitas AD, et al. Prospective randomized double blind 
placebo-­controlled evaluation of azithromycin for treatment of cat-­scratch 
diseases. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17:447.
Bass JW, Vincent JM, Person DA. The expanding spectrum of Bartonella 
infections: II. Cat scratch disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1997;16:163.
Schutze GE. Diagnosis and treatment of Bartonella henselae infections. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J. 2000;19:1185.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Nag D, Dey S, Nandi A, et al. Etiological study of lymphadenopathy in HIV-­
infected patients in a tertiary care hospital. J Cytol. 2016;33(2):66–70.
Toxoplasmosis
Maldonado YA, Read JS. AAP Committee on Infectious Diseases. Diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention of congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States. 
Pediatrics. 2017;139(2):e20163860.
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases 
treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep). 
2015;64(No. RR-­3):1–137.
Other Disorders
Abla O, Jacobsen E, Picarsic J, et al. Consensus recommendations for the 
diagnosis and clinical management of Rosai-­Dorfman-­Destombes disease. 
Blood. 2018;131(26):2877–2890.
Alamo L, Beck-­Popovic M, Gudinchet F, et al. Congenital tumors: imaging 
when life just begins. Insights Imaging. 2011;2(3):297–308.
Bower M, Newsom-­Davis T, Naresh K, et al. Clinical features and outcome 
in HIV-­associated multicentric Castleman’s disease. J Clin Oncol. 
2011;29:2481–2486.
Lee BC, Patel R. Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease: a 15-­year analysis at a children’s 
hospital in United States. Clin Pediatr. 2013;52(1):92–95.
Leroy S, Moshous D, Cassar O, et al. Multicentric Castleman disease in 
an HHV-­8-­infected child born to consanguineous parents. Pediatrics. 
2012;129(1):e199–e203.
Muskardin TW, Peterson BA, Molitor JA. Castleman disease and associated 
autoimmune disease. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012;24:76–83.
Srkalovic G, Marijanovic I, Srkalovic MB, et al. TAFRO syndrome: new 
subtype of idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 
2017;17(2):81–84.
Unadkat RJ, Khubchandani SR, Gurjar AS. Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease. Pediatr 
Infect Dis. 2015;7:13–16.
Weitzman S, Jaffe R. Uncommon histiocytic disorders: the non-­Langerhans cell 
histiocytoses. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005;45:256–264.
Zhu F, Zhang J, Xing X, et al. Rosai-­Dorfman disease: a retrospective analysis 
of 13 cases. Am J Med Sci. 2013;345:200–210.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
