740
ALTERED MENTAL STATUS
Altered mental status (AMS) refers to a broad range of nonspecific 
symptoms indicating a change in brain function from a patient’s baseline 
and can include confusion, alteration in consciousness, disorientation, 
decreased awareness, amnesia, and change in behavior. Accurate diagno­
sis and management rely on rapidly characterizing the change in mental 
status and prioritizing the identification of life-­threatening causes. AMS 
can be divided into hyperactive states (increased psychomotor activity, 
labile mood, behavioral disturbances) and hypoactive states (decreased 
psychomotor activity, alteration in consciousness). Hypoactive states 
often correspond to a decrease in level of consciousness, which must be 
managed as a life-­threatening emergency until proven otherwise.
Altered level of consciousness refers to decreases in arousal and 
responsiveness to the environment. Intact consciousness requires two 
components: wakefulness and awareness both of self and of the envi­
ronment. Abnormal states of consciousness present along a spectrum 
and range from lethargy to obtundation to stupor and finally coma 
(Table 41.1). Coma is the lack of any awareness of self and environment 
despite painful or other external stimulation. Delirium, in contrast, fol­
lows a fluctuating course of alertness and attention; waxing and waning 
periods of irritability, agitation, lack of contact with the environment, 
disorientation, and confusion may be observed. Periods of lucidity may 
alternate with the delirious state, and patients may proceed rapidly 
from delirium to lethargy or coma. Both delirium and coma represent 
final common pathways of multiple processes that lead to global central 
nervous system (CNS) failure. Any alteration in the level of conscious­
ness, whether delirium, lethargy, obtundation, stupor, or coma, must be 
managed as a life-­threatening emergency until proven otherwise.
ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Arousal and awareness form the foundation for normal cognitive 
function and consciousness. Arousal is determined in the brainstem’s 
ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), which is also known as 
the “sleep center” of the brain. Awareness and behavior are generated 
in the cortex of the bilateral cerebral hemispheres. The cortex is the 
central processing center that interprets neuronal input and generates 
awareness. Diffuse injury to the cerebral hemispheres, injury to the 
ARAS, or both create an alteration in consciousness. Because the ARAS 
is located near several brainstem reflexes, injury to the ARAS is often 
accompanied by dysfunction of these reflexes including altered pupil­
lary light reflex (controlled by cranial nerves II and III) and altered eye 
movement reflexes (oculocephalic and oculovestibular reflexes, which 
are controlled by cranial nerves III, VI, and VIII and the medial lon­
gitudinal fasciculus). Conversely, intact pupillary light, oculocephalic, 
and oculovestibular reflexes suggest dysfunction of both cerebral 
hemispheres. ARAS dysfunction is usually a result of structural causes, 
while diffuse cerebral dysfunction is usually caused by medical causes 
such as toxic or metabolic encephalopathies.
Classification Systems
Standardized language is necessary to properly diagnose and treat alter­
ations in consciousness because terms such as lethargy, obtundation, 
stupor, and coma are qualitative descriptions. Rating scales permit dif­
ferent observers to follow the progression of the patient’s mental status 
over time and facilitate effective communication of clinical informa­
tion. The most widely used grading system is the Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS) (Table 41.2), which has been modified for children younger 
than 5 years of age based on their age-­appropriate developmental 
abilities (Table 41.3). This 15-­point scale evaluates three areas of CNS 
function: eye opening, verbal response, and motor response. A score of 
15 indicates full function, whereas a score of 3 indicates no function. 
The first area of assessment is eye opening, in which the arousability 
and alertness of the patient are evaluated. Spontaneous eye opening 
indicates intact arousal mechanisms but does not imply awareness. 
The second area, verbal response, requires a high degree of integra­
tion within the CNS. Oriented responses indicate awareness of person, 
place, and time. The third area, motor functioning, reflects mentation 
as well as the integrity of the major CNS pathways. For purposes of 
gauging global brain function, the best motor response from any limb 
is taken as the score. Variation in response from one side of the body 
to the other is indicative of an asymmetric brain lesion. Spinal cord 
lesions resulting in paralysis or significant orthopedic injuries to the 
extremities prevent evaluation of the motor portion of the GCS.
The GCS can provide a general assessment of consciousness but 
is not intended to take the place of a complete neurologic evaluation 
(Table 41.4). The GCS is an objective measure of the patient’s level 
of consciousness and should be used serially over time to monitor 
improvement or worsening of consciousness. Interventions are often 
based on the score; for example, most patients with a score of 8 or less 
should undergo endotracheal intubation. Deterioration of a patient’s 
score by 2 or more points indicates a need for urgent re-­evaluation 
of the patient and the possible need for further interventions such as 
endotracheal intubation and diagnostic studies such as a brain CT scan.
The GCS has also been shown to correlate with prognosis in patients 
presenting with decreased levels of consciousness. In traumatic brain 
injury, it may take days to weeks for patients with initial scores of 3–5 
to become conscious as opposed to a few days in patients with scores 
of ≥6. Children presenting after near-­drowning with an initial score of 
≥6 have good outcomes. Patients presenting with a score of ≤5 have a 
high probability of mortality or profound neurologic sequelae. A score 
of 3 on transfer to an intensive care unit after near-­drowning has been 
associated with a nearly 100% rate of poor outcome.
Although the GCS is a widely applied tool for assessment, it does 
not assess brainstem function and fails to discriminate between low 
Altered Mental Status
Tracey H. Liljestrom
41
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
741
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
scores in intubated patients. The Full Outline of Unresponsiveness 
(FOUR) Scale is another tool to assess consciousness and evaluates 
eye response, motor response, brainstem reflexes, and respiratory 
effort on a 4-­point scale. The FOUR score eye and motor responses 
are defined similarly to the GCS (see Table 41.2). The assessment of 
brainstem response focuses on the pupillary and corneal reflexes. The 
respiratory assessment includes ways to score for an intubated patient 
along with respiratory effort. Because the FOUR score includes brain­
stem responses and differentiates between intubated and nonintubated 
patients, this scale is better able to discriminate between patients with 
a GCS score of 3. Regardless of the scoring system used, reporting the 
score for each element can improve the precision of the assessment of 
the level of consciousness to guide management decisions.
Other scales have been developed to measure the level of conscious­
ness in specific disease states, such as poisonings and hepatic failure. 
The Reed classification of coma has been used in the setting of poison­
ing or intoxication (Table 41.5) and is used to evaluate increasing depths 
of coma encountered with CNS-­depressant drugs. The cardiovascular 
system is included in this classification because toxic ingestions may 
depress myocardial contractility or cause vasodilation. Neurologic 
function in a patient with hepatic encephalopathy is staged according 
to the scoring system of symptoms, signs, and EEG (Table 41.6).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis in AMS is extensive. When AMS is asso­
ciated with decreased level of consciousness, the differential can be 
broadly categorized as structural brain disease, nonstructural or med­
ical disease, and psychogenic causes. Structural etiologies can result in 
either focal or nonfocal neurologic signs and include traumatic head 
injuries, hydrocephalus, tumors, intracranial hemorrhages, and cere­
bral vascular accidents. Nonstructural etiologies usually are associated 
with nonfocal neurologic exams and result in a decreased level of 
consciousness through diffuse neuronal injury. Nonstructural etiolo­
gies include infections, metabolic encephalopathies, toxic ingestion, 
hypoxic-­ischemic events, inflammatory brain diseases, and seizures 
(Table 41.7). The age of the patient can help the clinician differentiate 
the likely causes of coma, although there is considerable overlap (Table 
41.8). Patients with delirium must be differentiated from an acute psy­
chotic event (Table 41.9) (see Chapter 31). In addition, in patients who 
are awake but presenting with AMS, performing an appropriate mental 
status exam may help evaluate the degree of impairment and potential 
etiology (Table 41.10). The mental status exam is most abnormal with 
medical (encephalopathy, encephalitis) causes of altered behavior and 
mental status. In primary psychiatric disorders, the neurologic exam is 
nonfocal and level of wakefulness often remains intact despite changes in 
behavior, orientation, and/or responses.
Simultaneous Diagnosis and Management Approach
Many causes of AMS are life-­threatening medical emergencies. Rapid 
assessment and diagnosis are therefore crucial and must happen simul­
taneously alongside management of identified life-­threatening etiol­
ogies. The approach to the child with AMS can be divided into four 
parts: (1) stabilization, (2) rapid clinical assessment, (3) reversal of 
immediately treatable toxic or metabolic causes, and (4) detailed inves­
tigation including determination of the level of CNS function and of 
the cause of the coma (Fig. 41.1).
Stabilization
Initial stabilization for all patients includes assessment of the patient’s 
airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs). The first step in manage­
ment is evaluating the patient’s airway and responding appropriately 
to ensure patency. This may involve positioning, suctioning, or intu­
bating. This is closely tied to the assessment of breathing and the respi­
ratory drive via auscultation, observation, respiratory rate, and pulse 
oximeter. Obtunded, stuporous, or comatose patients usually require 
intubation unless their mental status is improving or can be readily 
reversed. Intubation in these patients allows the airway to be secured, 
treatment of hypoventilation or hypoxia (which may be contributing 
to the patient’s AMS), and protection of the airway if a gag reflex is 
not present. Manipulation of the neck, particularly extension, should 
be avoided when an airway is being stabilized or secured, unless the 
cervical spine has already been cleared via history or imaging.
After a patient’s airway and breathing are stabilized, the next step 
in management is assessment and stabilization of circulation. Initial 
assessment includes heart rate, blood pressure, presence and volume 
of peripheral pulses, capillary refill time, and adequacy of end-­organ 
perfusion. Shock is defined as inadequate supply of oxygen to meet 
metabolic needs in the body’s tissues. If shock leads to hypoperfusion 
of the brain, AMS and decreased levels of consciousness result (see 
Chapter 10). Assessment of vital signs may also suggest the presence 
of increased intracranial pressure (bradycardia, hypertension, irregular 
respirations) or a toxidrome.
Rapid Clinical Assessment
After initial stabilization of the airway, breathing, and circulation, atten­
tion should turn to rapid clinical assessment with the goal of quickly 
identifying life-­threatening and reversible causes of AMS. The rapid clin­
ical assessment should include a focused history from available friends, 
family, witnesses, first responders, and the medical record as applicable, 
and a focused physical exam with a targeted neurologic examination.
Rapid History
Initially, history gathering should focus on rapid detection of possi­
ble life-­threatening causes of AMS. Pertinent questions include recent 
TABLE 41.1  States of Altered 
Consciousness or Unresponsiveness
Coma: a state of unarousable unresponsiveness; even strong exteroceptive 
stimuli fail to elicit recognizable psychologic responses; unresponsive to pain
Stupor: spontaneous unarousability interruptible only by vigorous, direct 
external stimulation; responsive only to pain
Hypersomnia, pathologic drowsiness, obtundation: terms applied to an 
increase above the patient’s normal sleep/wake ratio, often accompanied 
during wakefulness by reduced attention and interest in the environment; 
responsive to pain and other stimuli
Delirium: an acute or subacute reduction in awareness, attention, ori­
entation, and perception (“clouding of consciousness”), fluctuating and 
accompanied by abnormal sleep/wake patterns and often psychomotor 
disturbances, which can be hypo-­ or hyperactive
Syncope: brief loss of consciousness caused by global failure of cerebrovas­
cular perfusion
Dementia: a sustained or permanent multidimensional or global decline in 
cognitive functions
Vegetative state: a sustained, complete loss of cognition, with sleep/wake 
cycles and other autonomic functions remaining relatively intact; can either 
follow acute, severe bilateral cerebral damage or develop gradually as the 
end stage of a progressive dementia
Locked-­in state: preservation of intellectual activity accompanied by severe 
or total incapacity to express voluntary responses as a result of damage 
to or dysfunction of descending motor pathways in the brain or peripheral 
motor nerves; most, but not all, such patients can use vertical eye move­
ments to signal by code
Modified from Plum F. Neurology/disturbances of consciousness and 
arousal. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Text­
book of Medicine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2049.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 41.2  Glasgow Coma Scale Versus Full Outline of Unresponsiveness Score
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
Full Outline of Unresponsiveness (FOUR)
Eye Opening:
Eye Response:
1
Does not open eyes
4
Eyelids open and comply with verbal stimuli
2
Opens eyes in response to noxious stimuli
3
Eyelids open but not tracking
3
Opens eyes in response to voice
2
Eyelids closed but open to loud noise
4
Opens eyes spontaneously
1
Eyelids closed but open to noxious stimuli
0
Eyelids remain closed
Verbal Response:
Motor Response:
1
No verbal response
4
Thumbs up, fist or peace sign
2
Incomprehensible sounds
3
Localize to pain
3
Inappropriate words
2
Flexion to pain
4
Confused and disoriented fluid speech
1
Extension to pain
5
Oriented with normal speech
0
No response to pain or myoclonus
Motor Response:
Brainstem Reflexes:
1
No movements
4
Pupil and corneal reflexes present
2
Extension to noxious stimuli
3
One pupil wide and fixed
3
Flexion to noxious stimuli
2
Pupil or corneal reflex absent
4
Withdrawal to pain
1
Pupil and corneal reflexes absent
5
Localizes to pain
0
Absent pupil, corneal, and cough reflex
6
Obeys commands
Respirations:
4
Regular breathing pattern
3
Cheyne-­Stokes respirations
2
Irregular breathing
1
Intubated but breathing above the vent
0
Breathing at vent rate or apnea
TOTAL SCORE 3–15
TOTAL SCORE 0–16
TABLE 41.3  Pediatric Glasgow Coma Scale
Activity
Best Response
Score
Eye opening
Spontaneously
4
To speech
3
To pain
2
None
1
Verbal
Oriented
5
Words
4
Vocal sounds
3
Cries
2
None
1
Motor
Obeys commands
5
Localizes pain
4
Flexion to pain
3
Extension to pain
2
None
1
Normal Total Score Based on Age
Birth–6 mo
9
7–12 mo
11
1–2 yr
12
2–5 yr
13
>5 yr
14
Modified from Simpson D, Reilly P. Pediatric coma scale. Lancet. 1982;2:450.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
743
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
history preceding the change in mental status, timing of onset and pro­
gression of AMS, and the patient’s medical history such as diabetes, sei­
zures, substance abuse, or immunocompromise. Questions regarding 
any traumatic injuries over the previous few days should be asked, and 
even if trauma is denied, concern for nonaccidental trauma should be 
raised if the story is inconsistent or nonspecific for the presenting clini­
cal scenario. History should also include fevers or other signs or symp­
toms of infection as well as signs of increased intracranial pressure such 
as vomiting, ptosis, and headaches. Infants with rising increased intra­
cranial pressure may present with irritability, lethargy, increasing head 
circumference, and poor feeding. A dietary history in infants presenting 
with a depressed level of consciousness is paramount and may raise sus­
picion of hypoglycemia (from fasting or emesis) or hyponatremia (from 
ingestion of free water). Exposure to drugs or toxins should be suspected 
in any patient with a sudden onset of unexplained symptoms (coma, sei­
zures) or a gradual onset of symptoms preceded by a period of confu­
sion or delirium. The caregivers should be asked directly about possible 
access to medications, recreational drugs, and environmental toxins.
Rapid Physical Exam
After quickly collecting the available historical information, the next 
phase in management is completing a focused physical exam including 
a rapid neurologic assessment, which should take no more than a few 
minutes.
General Physical Exam
The general physical exam should include assessment of vital signs 
with emphasis on the cardiovascular, respiratory, and head and neck 
exams as well as a general assessment. Special attention should be paid 
to identify any physical exam findings that may suggest a specific tox­
idrome. The absence of a history of trauma or physical findings sug­
gestive of a rapidly progressive intracranial process does not preclude a 
traumatic or an anatomic cause of coma. Traumatic injuries can result 
in life-­threatening illnesses at any age, including in newborns. The 
head and neck should be carefully inspected, and the skull palpated for 
evidence of trauma (Table 41.11). In infants, a bulging fontanel sug­
gests raised intracranial pressure, which may have various causes. A 
TABLE 41.4  The Neurologic Examination in Coma
	1.	Guarantee vital functions.
	2.	Feel the scalp for hematomas (overlying fracture lines); be sure the neck is not fractured; test gently for stiff neck.
	3.	Test language. Test arousability by words, loud sounds, noxious stimuli. If vocalizations occur, check quickly for appropriate phrases, actual words, and presence 
or absence of aphasia.
	4.	Perform a neuro-­ophthalmologic examination.
Funduscopy (if difficult, can be deferred until patient is stabilized)
Papilledema (increased intracranial or venous sinus pressure)
Hemorrhages (subarachnoid hemorrhage; hypertensive encephalopathy; hypoxic-­hypercarbic encephalopathy)
Pupils
Light reaction: Use bright flashlight and, if necessary, a magnifying glass to be certain of findings. Absence means potentially fatal deep sedative poisoning or 
acute or chronic structural brainstem damage.
Equality: 15% of normal patients have mild anisocoria, but new or >2 mm dilatation means parasympathetic (third nerve) palsy.
Extraocular movements: Absence acutely means deep drug poisoning, severe brainstem damage, polyneuropathy, or botulism.
Dysconjugate deviation: At rest, this means an acute third, fourth, or sixth nerve palsy or internuclear ophthalmoplegia. Tonic conjugate deviation toward a paralytic arm 
and leg means forebrain seizures or a contralateral pontine destructive lesion; such deviation away from the paralytic arm and leg means forebrain gaze paralysis.
Spontaneous eye movements: In comatose patients, nystagmus, bobbing, and independently moving eyes all mean brainstem damage.
Oculocephalic (away from direction of head turning) or oculovestibular (toward cold caloric irrigation) responses: Absence of responses means drug overdose or 
severe brainstem disease; dysconjugate responses with equal pupils mean internuclear ophthalmoplegia; responses with unequal pupils mean third nerve disease.
	5.	Examine the motor systems.
Strength
Unilateral weakness or motionlessness of arm and leg means contralateral supraspinal upper motor neuron lesion, most often cerebral; if of arm, leg, and face, 
contralateral cerebral lesion. Occasionally, arm and leg weakness reflects contralateral brainstem lesion.
Weakness or motionlessness of all four extremities implies metabolic disease; less likely is brainstem disease (tone and reflexes increased) or peripheral disease 
(tone and reflexes decreased).
Attempt to Elicit Reflex Posturing
Arm flexed, leg extended: contralateral deep cerebral-­thalamic lesion
Arm and leg extended: thalamic or mesencephalic lesion
Arms extended and legs flexed or flaccid: pontine lesion
Legs flexed, arms flaccid: pontomedullary or spinal lesion
Compare side-­to-­side reflexes and examine plantar responses.
	6.	Seek seizure activity or abnormal movements: (1) generalized, (2) focal, (3) multifocal, and (4) myoclonic.
Control (1) immediately, (2) and (3) deliberately; if (4) is present, treat underlying disease.
Acute tremor, asterixis, multifocal myoclonus: Seek metabolic cause.
	7.	Inspect breathing.
Regular hyperpnea: metabolic acidosis; pulmonary infarction; congestive failure or alveolar infiltration; sepsis; salicylism; hepatic coma
Cyclically irregular (Cheyne-­Stokes): low cardiac output plus bilateral cerebral or upper brainstem dysfunction
Irregular gasping, slow or weak: lower, brainstem dysfunction (including hypoglycemia, drug effects); less often, peripheral ventilatory paralysis
	8.	Proceed with laboratory tests and emergency management as described in text.
Modified from Plum F. Neurology/sustained impairments of consciousness. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of 
Medicine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2057.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
744
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
bulging fontanel in the absence of a febrile illness should raise the sus­
picion of trauma, including abusive head trauma. Retinal hemorrhages 
are often present on funduscopic examination in children with abusive 
head trauma. In addition to abusive head trauma, a child may have a 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malfor­
mation) or hydrocephalus without any of the aforementioned signs or 
symptoms of raised intracranial pressure. An ear exam should be per­
formed to evaluate hemotympanum. Hemotympanum, clear drainage 
from the nose or ear, Battle sign (bruising behind the ear), and raccoon 
eyes may indicate a basilar skull fracture (see Table 41.11).
Hyperventilation can be observed in midbrain structural lesions 
but also in toxic-­metabolic encephalopathies as a primary response 
to stimulation of the respiratory center (salicylates, theophylline, 
hyperammonemia, hepatic coma) or as a compensatory response to 
a metabolic acidosis. This pattern is also seen with raised intracranial 
hypertension. Hypoventilation with a normal rhythm, particularly if 
associated with a symmetrically depressed motor examination, usually 
implies global CNS depression secondary to drug ingestion such as 
opioids or benzodiazepines (Fig. 41.2).
Neurologic Exam
After completing a brief general physical exam and noting impaired 
consciousness, a rapid neurologic assessment is required. Level of 
consciousness should be assessed using a validated scoring system such 
at the GCS or FOUR scores. In children with altered level of conscious­
ness, the neurologic assessment should focus on identifying lateralizing 
or focal findings, assessing for signs of increased intracranial pressure, 
and recognizing brainstem dysfunction. Intrinsic to this assessment 
is differentiating between bilateral cerebral hemisphere dysfunction, 
ARAS dysfunction, or both. Bilateral cerebral hemisphere involvement 
may be further divided into unilateral lesions with mass effect versus 
diffuse bilateral injury. If the ARAS is affected, additional evidence of 
brainstem dysfunction is usually present.
Motor System and Focal Findings
The presence of focal findings can be determined by comparison of either 
side of the child’s body. Careful attention should be paid to asymmetry of 
tone and movement between extremities, asymmetry of the face either at 
rest or with movement, and asymmetry of reflexes, such as the pupillary 
and deep tendon reflexes. Examination of the motor system includes 
observation first of body position, then spontaneous movements, and 
finally response to noxious stimuli (Fig. 41.3). Throughout the exam, the 
examiner should note asymmetry between sides and muscle tone.
A normal body position usually denotes an intact brainstem, as do 
spontaneous, nonposturing movements. Hemiparesis or hemiplegia 
implies a structural lesion in the contralateral hemisphere or subcor­
tical region or an ipsilateral spinal cord injury. The presence of hyper­
tonia or hyperreflexia suggests previous corticospinal tract disease 
or an acute brainstem injury at the midbrain-­pontine level. It can also 
be observed in patients with severe metabolic derangements, such as 
hepatic coma, hypoglycemia, anoxia, and uremia. Hypotonia implies 
bilateral hemispheric dysfunction or a medullary or spinal cord lesion. 
In patients with severe depression of brain function, motor function 
can be assessed only after the application of a noxious stimulus, such as 
a sternal rub or increasing subungual pressure to the fingernails or toe­
nails. If the response to a noxious stimulus includes verbalization, eye 
opening, or a normal motor response (e.g., localization of the stimulus, 
withdrawal of the limb, or movement away from the stimulus), this 
indicates that the ascending sensory pathways to the cerebral hemi­
spheres are intact, and descending motor pathways are functioning.
Signs of Increased Intracranial Pressure
Indications of clinically significant intracranial hypertension can be 
assessed through the pupillary responses (Fig. 41.4), vital signs, and 
motor responses (Tables 41.12 and 41.13). The cranial vault contains 
brain, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and an increase in volume in 
one area necessitates a decrease in volume in another area. This increase 
in volume may occur secondary to space-­occupying lesions, edema, 
intracranial hemorrhage, or hydrocephalus. The volume compensation 
mechanisms within the cranial vault are limited, and if volume cannot 
TABLE 41.5  Reed Classification of Coma
Grade 0*
Asleep
Can be aroused
Will answer questions
Grade 1*
Comatose
Withdraws from painful stimuli
Intact reflexes
Grade 2*
Comatose
Does not withdraw from painful stimuli
No respiratory, circulatory depression
Intact reflexes
Grade 3†
Comatose
Reflexes absent 
No respiratory, circulatory depression
Grade 4†
Comatose
Reflexes absent 
Respiratory or circulatory problems
*Good prognosis.
†Very serious, may need measures to enhance elimination.
Modified from Ellenhorn MJ, Barceloux DE. Medical Toxicology: Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Human Poisoning. New York: Elsevier Science; 1988:17.
TABLE 41.6  Stages of Hepatic Encephalopathy
 
I
II
III
IV
Symptoms
Periods of lethargy, euphoria; 
reversal of day-­night sleeping; 
may be alert
Drowsiness, inappropriate 
behavior, agitation, wide 
mood swings, disorientation
Stupor but arousable; confused, 
incoherent speech
Coma:
IVa responds to noxious stimuli;
IVb no response
Signs
Trouble drawing figures, performing 
mental tasks
Asterixis, fetor hepaticus, 
incontinence
Asterixis, hyperreflexia, extensor 
reflexes, rigidity
Areflexia, no asterixis, flaccidity
EEG
Normal
Generalized slowing, Q waves Markedly abnormal triphasic waves
Markedly abnormal bilateral slowing, 
delta waves, electrocortical silence
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2135, Table 391.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
745
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
TABLE 41.7  Etiologic Classification of Altered Mental Status in Children
Infectious
Metabolic/
Systemic
Toxic*
Traumatic*
Anatomic
Hypoxic-­
Ischemic
Epileptic
Vascular
Inflammatory
Psychologic
Viral
Aseptic menin­
gitis*
Encephalitis*
? Reye syndrome
? Hemorrhagic 
shock and 
encephalopathy 
syndrome
Postinfectious 
encephalomy­
elitis
Systemic infec­
tion with shock
Bacterial
Meningitis*
Brain abscess
Epidural empy­
ema
Subdural empy­
ema
Systemic infec­
tion with shock
Toxic shock 
syndrome
Rickettsial 
infection
Fungal
Fungal meningitis
Fungal brain 
abscess
Protozoan
Meningitis
Abscess
Postimmunization 
encephalopathy
Hypoglycemia*
Inborn errors of metab­
olism*
Hyperammonemia
Hepatic failure
Renal diseases
Uremic encephalopathy
Hypertensive encepha­
lopathy
Dialysis encephalopa­
thy (dysequilibrium 
syndrome)
Hyperosmolar states
Hypernatremia
Hyperglycemia–diabe­
tes mellitus*
Hypo-­osmolar states
Hyponatremia*
Rapid decrease in 
osmolality in hyperos­
molar states
Adrenal insufficiency
Hyperthyroidism and 
hypothyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hypomagnesemia
Hypophosphatemia
Hypercapnia
Hypoxia*
Shock*
Vitamin deficiency and 
toxicity states
Nicotinic acid
Pantothenic acid
Pyridoxine
Thiamine
Vitamin B12
Sympathomimetics
Anticholinergics
Phenothiazines
PCP
LSD
Marijuana
Cocaine
Heavy metals (lead, 
arsenic, mercury)
Salicylates
Organophosphates 
and carbamates
Antihistamines
Industrial solvents 
(inhaled)
Alcohols
Opioids
Sedative-­hypnotics
Barbiturates
Carbon monoxide
Tricyclic antidepres­
sants
Carbamazepine
Cyanide
Methaqualone
Burn encephalop­
athy
Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhib­
itors
Serotonin-­
norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitor
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
Penicillins
Carbapenems
Methotrexate
Valproate
Vigabatrin
Levetiracetam
Cyclosporine
Tacrolimus
Concussion*
Cerebral contusion
Epidural hematoma
Subdural hematoma
Brainstem
Epidural contusion
Diffuse axonal shear 
injury
Cerebral edema*
Intraparenchymal 
hemorrhage
Intraventricular hem­
orrhage (neonate)*
Obstructive hydro­
cephalus
Post-­traumatic 
seizure
Fat embolism
Tumor
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus 
with shunt 
malfunction
Subdural hema­
toma
Epidural hema­
toma
Brain abscess
Subdural empy­
ema
Epidural empyema
Cerebral edema
Intracranial 
hemorrhage
Cerebrovascular 
accident/stroke
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrhyth­
mia
Severe shock
Near-­drowning
Neonatal 
asphyxia*
Hypoxemic respi­
ratory failure
Carbon monoxide 
poisoning
Cyanide toxicity
Anaphylaxis
Asthma
Postictal state*
Status epilepti­
cus*
Absence status
Complex partial 
seizure
Epilepsy-
encephalopa­
thy syndromes
Embolism
Spontaneous 
intraparenchy­
mal hemor­
rhage
Subarachnoid 
hemorrhage
Venous sinus 
thrombosis
Vasculitis
Lupus erythema­
tosus
Hypertensive 
encephalop­
athy
Acute 
confusional 
migraine*
Autoimmune 
encephalitis
ADEM
NMO
Multiple sclerosis
Rasmussen enceph­
alitis
Neurosarcoidosis
Hashimoto encepha­
lopathy
HLH
Conversion disor­
ders*
Catatonia
Intensive care unit 
delirium
Psychogenic nonepi­
leptic seizures
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
746
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 41.7  Etiologic Classification of Altered Mental Status in Children—cont’d
Infectious
Metabolic/
Systemic
Toxic*
Traumatic*
Anatomic
Hypoxic-­
Ischemic
Epileptic
Vascular
Inflammatory
Psychologic
Intussusception 
encephalopathy
Methemoglobinemia
Acidosis
Alkalosis
Porphyria
Reye syndrome
Mitochondrial encepha­
lopathies
*Common.
ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; NMO, neuromyelitis optica; PCP, phenylcyclohexyl piperidine (phen­
cyclidine HCl).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
747
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
TABLE 41.8  Common Causes of Altered Mental Status by Age
Neonate
Infant
Child
Adolescent
Hypoglycemia
Meningitis
Meningitis
Meningitis
Birth asphyxia
Bacterial
Bacterial
Bacterial
Congenital anomalies of the central 
nervous system
Viral
Trauma
Viral
Encephalitis
Viral
Encephalitis
Systemic infection with shock
Abuse/shaken baby syndrome
Trauma
Intentional ingestion
Cardiogenic shock
Asphyxia
Ingestion
Recreational drug/alcohol use
Congenital infection
Brief resolved unexplained event
Reye syndrome
Suicide gesture or attempt
Bacterial meningitis
Intentional suffocation
Systemic infection with shock
Often involves multiple agents
Inborn errors of metabolism
Systemic infection with shock
Seizure
Trauma
Hypocalcemia
Ingestion
Near-­drowning
Seizures
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Inborn errors of metabolism
Hypoglycemia
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Seizures
Hypoglycemia
Intussusception
Systemic infection with shock
Birth trauma
Hyponatremia
Acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis
Toxic shock syndrome
Hypocalcemia
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Reye syndrome
Encephalitis
Spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage
Postimmunization encephalopathy
Psychologic
Hemorrhagic shock and encephalopathy 
syndrome
Lupus
Intussusception encephalopathy
Seizures
TABLE 41.9  Special Problems in the Differential Diagnosis of Delirium*
Clinical Feature Delirium
Dementias
Schizophrenia
Depression
Course
Acute onset; hours, days, or more
Insidious onset†; months or years; 
progressive
Insidious onset, 6 mo or more; 
acute psychotic phases
Insidious onset, at least 2 wk, 
often months
Attention
Markedly impaired attention and 
arousal
Normal early; impairment later
Normal to mild impairment
Mild impairment
Fluctuation
Prominent in attention arousal; 
disturbed day/night cycle
Prominent fluctuations absent; lesser 
disturbances in day/night cycle
Absent
Absent
Perception
Misperceptions; hallucinations, 
usually visual, fleeting; param­
nesia
Perceptual abnormalities much less 
prominent‡; paramnesia
Hallucinations, auditory with 
personal reference
May have mood-­congruent 
hallucinations
Speech and 
language
Abnormal clarity, speed, and 
coherence; disjointed and dysar­
thric; misnaming; characteristic 
dysgraphia
Early anomia; empty speech; abnormal 
comprehension
Disorganized, with a bizarre 
theme
Decreased amount of speech
Other cognition
Disorientation to time, place; 
recent memory and visuospatial 
abnormalities
Disorientation to time, place; multiple 
other higher cognitive deficits
Disorientation to person; 
concrete interpretations
Mental slowing; indecisive­
ness; memory retrieval 
difficulty
Behavior
Lethargy or delirium; nonsystem­
atized delusions; emotional 
lability
Disinterested; disengaged; disinhib­
ited; delusions and other psychiatric 
symptoms
Systematized delusions; para­
noia; bizarre behavior
Depressed mood; anhedonia; 
lack of energy; sleep and 
appetite disturbances
EEG
Diffuse slowing; low-­voltage fast 
activity; specific patterns
Normal early; mild slowing later
Normal
Normal
*The characteristics listed are the usual ones and are not exclusive.
†Patients with vascular dementia may have an abrupt decline in cognition.
‡Patients with dementia with diffuse cortical Lewy bodies often have a fluctuating mental status and hallucinations.
From Mendez MF, Padilla CR. Delirium. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2016:32, Table 4.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
748
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
be decreased in another area, intracranial pressure increases. The first 
signs of increasing intracranial pressure are often headache and vom­
iting followed by decreased consciousness, which is then followed by 
posturing, and finally vital sign changes followed by death. Sixth cranial 
nerve palsy or inability to abduct the eye can be an early sign of increased 
intracranial pressure caused by stretching of the sixth cranial nerve. Pap­
illedema is also associated with increased intracranial pressure but takes 
≥12 hours to develop and therefore may be absent in acute increased 
intracranial pressure. As intracranial pressure continues to increase, it 
eventually leads to brain herniation and the vital sign changes of Cush­
ing triad: hypertension, bradycardia, and irregularities of respiration.
Brain herniation can occur at several different locations. The most 
common type of herniation is transtentorial herniation, which can be 
divided into uncal and central herniation. Uncal herniation occurs when 
the uncus (the inner part of the temporal lobe) herniates over the tento­
rium. This puts pressure on the midbrain, which contains the third cra­
nial nerve. Pressure on the third cranial nerve impairs its parasympathetic 
fibers, leading to ipsilateral pupillary dilatation. Therefore, a unilaterally 
fixed and dilated pupil in a patient who is not awake represents uncal 
herniation. Central herniation occurs when central brain structures 
(diencephalon and temporal lobes) herniate through the tentorium cer­
ebelli. Pressure on the hypothalamus at first causes small reactive pupils, 
which then progress to pupils that are fixed at midposition. Other types 
of herniation include subfalcine herniation, in which the cingulate gyrus 
herniates under the falx cerebri and presents with unilateral or bilateral 
weakness and can progress to central herniation. Tonsillar herniation 
or foramen magnum herniation results from the cerebellar tonsils being 
forced through the foramen magnum causing compression on the medulla 
oblongata and the cervical spinal cord leading to downbeat nystagmus, 
bradycardia, bradypnea, and hypertension. These signs can sometimes be 
worsened with neck flexion and improved with neck extension.
Brainstem Functioning
Brainstem function is evaluated by observing the child’s respiratory 
pattern, pupillary reflexes, corneal reflexes, and eye movement reflexes. 
Dysfunction of brainstem reflexes implies disruption of the ARAS and 
is a red flag indicating a serious and life-­threatening disease process.
Breathing Patterns
Significant brainstem dysfunction is usually associated with an abnor­
mal breathing pattern (see Fig. 41.2). Cheyne-­Stokes respiration is 
a pattern of breathing in which periods of hyperpnea alternate with 
shorter apneic phases, observed in the presence of bilateral hemi­
spheric or diencephalic dysfunction. It may also precede transtento­
rial herniation. The hyperpneic periods have a characteristic smooth, 
crescendo-­decrescendo pattern. Central neurogenic hyperventilation 
is encountered with midbrain dysfunction; patients with this problem 
are tachypneic and hyperpneic. Apneustic breathing is associated with 
damage in the middle to lower pontine region. This pattern is charac­
terized by a prolonged pause at full inspiration. Clusters of breaths sepa­
rated by periods of apnea may be observed in patients with low pontine 
to upper medullary lesions, whereas medullary lesions result in ataxic 
or irregular breathing, slow regular breathing, or agonal respiration.
Pupillary Light Reflexes
Pupillary light reflexes are generally preserved in metabolic enceph­
alopathy, whereas their absence strongly suggests a structural lesion. 
The only exception to the latter is certain drug effects, particularly with 
potent anticholinergic compounds, such as glutethimide, atropine, 
or scopolamine, which produce fixed and dilated pupils. The balance 
between sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation, which results 
in pupillary dilatation and constriction, normally determines pupillary 
size and reactivity. A unilaterally dilated and fixed pupil is a sign of 
uncal herniation with entrapment of the oculomotor nerve. Parasym­
pathetic fibers innervating the eye accompany the oculomotor nerve. 
Sympathetic fibers originate from at least four hypothalamic nuclei so 
that diencephalic dysfunction results in small, reactive pupils. Hypo­
thalamic damage often results in ipsilateral miosis associated with 
Horner syndrome (miosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis).
Injury to nuclei located in the midbrain disrupts both sympathetic 
and parasympathetic pathways, resulting in midsized, fixed pupils. 
Damage to the midbrain tectal regions also produces midposition or 
slightly large, fixed pupils. In contrast to nuclear damage, however, 
accommodation may be intact, so that pupillary size fluctuates spon­
taneously. Pontine lesions, principally hemorrhage, interfere with 
descending sympathetic fibers, causing symmetrically small pupils for 
which a magnifying glass may be needed to detect a light reflex. Lateral 
medullary lesions may also produce Horner syndrome, whereas cen­
tral herniation results in fixed, dilated pupils. Figure 41.4 summarizes 
pupillary findings in comatose patients.
TABLE 41.10  MMC (Mini-­Mental State 
Examination for Children)
Function
Tests
Score
Orientation
Name, surname, age, sex
0-­1-­2-­3-­4
Name of parents, state, city, place
0-­1-­2-­3-­4
Age, month, day of month, day of week
0-­1-­2-­3-­4
Object naming
Pen, watch, glasses
0-­1-­2-­3
Digit span—
forward
5-­3
0-­1-­2-­3-­4
4-­7-­2
5-­9-­3-­1
2-­7-­5-­9-­4
Digit span—
backward
3-­6
0-­1-­2-­3
2-­9-­5
4-­1-­9-­7
Recall
Pen, watch, glasses
0-­1-­2-­3
Naming body 
parts
Naming body part indicated by the 
examiner: hand, foot, knee, nose, ear
0-­1-­2-­3-­4-­5
Command
“Take the paper in your right hand, 
fold it in half, and put it on the floor” 
(“Pegue o papel com a mão, dobre-­o 
ao meio e coloque-­o no chão”)
0-­1-­2-­3
Verbal string 
repetition
“No ifs, ands, or buts” (“Nem aquí, nem 
lá, nem acolá”)
0-­1
Reading
“Read this and do what it says” (”Close 
your eyes”)
0-­1
Writing
“Write your name”
0-­1
Constructional 
praxis
“Copy the drawings. Do it as best you 
can” (vertical line at age 3 yr, cross at 
age 4 yr, circle at age 5 yr, square at 
age 6 yr, and diamond at age 7 yr)
0-­1
Maximum total score
37
Adapted version of the MMSE (Mini-­Mental State Examination).
From Moura R, Andrade PMO, Fontes PLB, et al. Mini-­Mental State 
Exam for Children (MMC) in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy. 
Dement Neuropsychol. 2017;11(3):287–296. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC5674673/table/t5/?report=objectonly
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
749
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
Eye Movement Reflexes
Evaluation of eye movements is helpful in differentiating hemispheric from 
brainstem causes of coma. Frontal regions of the cerebral hemispheres are 
responsible for voluntary eye movements, the quick phase of nystagmus, 
and control over brainstem reflexes that determine eye movements. Bilat­
eral hemispheric depression may result in roving eye movements if brain­
stem function is intact. Because stimulation of a frontal gaze center causes 
conjugate deviation of the eyes to the opposite side, tonic lateral deviation 
of the eyes implies a seizure emanating from the contralateral hemisphere. 
Eye deviation may also result from an ipsilateral hemispheric injury with 
unopposed stimulation from the undamaged hemisphere or from a con­
tralateral pontine lesion. The degree of eye deviation is usually more dra­
matic with hemispheric damage than with brainstem damage.
Not improved
ABC
Diagnosis
Treatment
Examination
Imaging
Disposition
Patient presents with depressed consciousness
Assess airway, breathing, circulation
Administer:
Dextrose if hypoglycemic
Naloxone if opioid toxicity suspected
Thiamine if malnourished
Complete physical
and neurologic examinations
Secure airway if not improved
Administer antibiotics if infection suspected
CT + CTA
Measure glucose
Obtain IV access
Maintain SpO2~97%
Initiate cardiac monitoring
Obtain ECG, portable CXR, POC labs
Consult specialist
Treat cause
Provide neuroprotective care
Structural cause
No structural cause 
Differential diagnosis: 
- Toxic - labs, antidote/dialysis?
- Seizure - EEG, anticonvulsant?
- PRES - MRI, antihypertensive?
- Infection - LP, antibiotics?
- Nutrition - thiamine, glucose?
- Endocrine - thyroid studies, steroids?
Treat and observe
Improved
Admit to ICU
CT
No brainstem signs
Brainstem signs
Fig. 41.1  Algorithm for diagnostic and management approach to depressed consciousness and coma. ABC, 
airway, breathing, circulation; CTA, computed tomography angiography; CXR, chest x-­ray; ICU, intensive care 
unit; IV, intravenous; LP, lumbar puncture; POC, point of care; PRES, posterior reversible encephalopathy syn­
drome; Spo2, oxygen saturation. (From Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, eds. Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine Concepts and Clinical Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:130, Fig. 13.2.)
TABLE 41.11  Signs of Head Trauma 
Possibly Associated with Intracranial Disease
General
Signs of Basilar Skull 
Fracture
Lacerations
Hemotympanum
Hematomas
CSF rhinorrhea
Ecchymosis
CSF otorrhea
Swelling
“Raccoon eyes”
Palpable crepitations
Battle sign
Step-­off of skull
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
750
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
If the patient’s eyes are not moving, then reflex eye movements are 
tested by the oculocephalic and oculovestibular responses (Fig. 41.5). 
These maneuvers involve the same major neuronal pathways. Afferent 
fibers from the labyrinth, cerebellum, and cervical muscles reach the 
vestibular nuclei (cranial nerve VIII) in the medulla. Fibers from the 
vestibular nuclei then course to the ipsilateral abducens nuclei (cranial 
nerve VI). Fibers from the abducens nuclei then decussate in the mid-­
pons and ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus to reach the con­
tralateral oculomotor nuclei (cranial nerve III). Intact reflexes indicate 
the absence of cortical input on an intact brainstem.
The oculocephalic reflex is elicited by rotating the child’s head from 
side to side and observing the eye movements. This reflex should not be 
checked unless a cervical spine injury has been ruled out. If brainstem 
function is intact, the eyes deviate in a direction opposite to the head 
movement. Both left and right lateral rotation should be tested. This 
reflex is then tested in a vertical plane by rapidly flexing and extending 
the neck. A positive response is upward gaze when the neck is flexed 
and downward deviation when the head is extended.
The oculovestibular reflex is tested by instilling ice water into the 
ear canal. The ear canal must be visualized to ensure that there is no 
obstruction and that the tympanic membrane is intact. The head is then 
placed at a 30-­degree angle from the horizontal so that the semicircular 
canal is vertical, and up to 120 mL of ice water is then injected slowly 
into the external ear canal over a few minutes through an angiocatheter. 
After a minimum of 5 minutes, the other ear may be tested; this interval 
allows time for the oculovestibular system to re-­equilibrate. A positive 
response in an awake patient is nystagmus with the slow component 
toward the irrigated ear and the fast component away from the stimu­
lus. With bilateral hemispheric depression, the fast phase of nystagmus 
dissipates, and the eyes are tonically deviated toward the irrigated ear.
Both the oculocephalic and oculovestibular reflexes are absent in 
patients with low brainstem lesions because neurotransmission between 
One minute
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 41.2  Abnormal respiratory patterns. A, Cheyne-­Stokes respiration. B, Central neurogenic hyperventila­
tion. C, Apneusis. D, Cluster breathing. E, Ataxic breathing. Shaded areas show location of brain pathology 
associated with abnormal respiratory pattern.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 41.3  Motor response to noxious stimuli. A, Localization. B, Decor­
ticate posturing. C, Decerebrate posturing. D, Opisthotonos posturing.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
751
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
the vestibular and abducens nuclei is interrupted. In patients with 
damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus, the ipsilateral eye fails to 
adduct on irrigation of the contralateral ear canal. However, the oppo­
site eye abducts normally. With a lesion in the left medial longitudinal 
fasciculus, the right eye abducts, but the left eye does not, in response 
to irrigating the right ear canal. This reaction is caused by disruption 
of fibers between the abducens and the contralateral oculomotor nuclei 
(see Fig. 41.5).
Corneal Reflex
In addition to assessing ocular motility, the examiner should test the cor­
neal reflex and determine the presence or absence of a blink. The absence 
of a blink in response to a loud noise or bright light implies dysfunc­
tion of the pontine reticular formation secondary to either metabolic 
or structural causes. Unilateral absence of a blink implies a facial nerve 
lesion. The afferent limb of the corneal reflex is carried by the trigemi­
nal nerve (cranial nerve V). The normal effector response involves both 
upward deviation of the eye (oculomotor nerve) and closure of the eyelid 
(facial nerve). A normal reflex suggests that the integrity of pathways 
between the midbrain and the pons has not been violated.
Body Position
In patients with decreased level of consciousness, the body’s position in 
response to noxious stimuli can indicate hemispheric verses brainstem 
dysfunction. Decorticate posturing occurs when the upper extrem­
ities are held flexed at the elbow, wrist, and fingers and implies hemi­
spheric dysfunction with an intact brainstem. Decerebrate posturing 
occurs when arms are internally rotated and adducted at the shoulder, 
extended at the elbow, pronated at the forearm, and flexed at the fingers 
(see Fig. 41.3). Opisthotonos with clenched teeth is a severe form of 
decerebration. Decerebrate posturing usually suggests brainstem com­
pression or a severe structural injury to the midbrain-­pontine region. 
It can also occur in association with severe metabolic diseases, such as 
hepatic coma, anoxia, and hypoglycemia. Less commonly, decerebrate 
Small reactive
DIENCEPHALIC
Small reactive
III NERVE (UNCAL)
Dilated, fixed
PONS
Pinpoint
MIDBRAIN
Midposition, fixed
TECTAL
Large “fixed,” hippus
METABOLIC
Fig. 41.4  Pupils in comatose patients.
TABLE 41.12  Signs of Incipient Downward 
Herniation
Central
Uncal
Arousal
Impaired early, before other 
signs
Impaired late, usually with 
other signs
Breathing
Sighs, yawns, sometimes 
Cheyne-­Stokes respiration
No early change
Pupils
First, small reactive (hypo­
thalamus); then one or both 
approach midposition
Ipsilateral pupil dilates, 
followed by somatic third 
nerve paralysis
Oculocephalic 
responses
Initially sluggish, later tonic 
conjugate
Unilateral third nerve 
paralysis
Motor signs
Early hemiparesis opposite 
to hemispheric lesion 
followed late by ipsilateral 
motor paresis and extensor 
plantar response
Motor signs late, sometimes 
ipsilateral to lesion
From Plum F. Neurology/sustained impairments of consciousness. In: 
Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medi­
cine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2050.
TABLE 41.13  Characteristics of 
Supratentorial Lesions Leading to Coma
Initiating symptoms usually cerebral-­focal: aphasia; focal seizures; contra­
lateral hemiparesis, sensory change, or neglect; frontal lobe behavioral 
changes; headache
Dysfunction moves rostral to caudal: e.g., focal motor → bilateral motor → 
altered level of arousal
Abnormal signs usually confined to a single or an adjacent anatomic level (not diffuse)
Brainstem functions spared unless herniation develops
From Plum F. Neurology/sustained impairments of consciousness. In: 
Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medi­
cine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2050.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
752
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
posture may represent delayed cortical demyelination after a hypoxic-­
ischemic injury. Pontomedullary or spinal cord damage is associated 
with a flaccid response to noxious stimulation.
Determining the Level of CNS Dysfunction
The origin of coma (hemispheric vs brainstem) and its cause (met­
abolic vs structural) can be elucidated by synthesizing the findings 
from examining pupillary size and reactivity, eye movements, motor 
responses, and respiratory pattern. Putting together the elements 
of the neurologic exam can help distinguish between global bilat­
eral hemispheric dysfunction more likely to be caused by toxic-­
metabolic insults versus structural insults as well as suggest the level 
of CNS dysfunction (Table 41.14). Focality or asymmetry in the 
neurologic exam, signs of increased intracranial pressure, and signs 
of brainstem involvement all suggest a structural cause to the AMS.
Absent or asymmetric corneal reflexes or abnormal oculocephalic 
or oculovestibular reflexes suggest serious brainstem involvement. Nor­
mal brainstem responses combined with withdrawal to pain suggest a 
supratentorial abnormality. Roving but conjugate eye movements sug­
gest an intact brainstem, whereas vertical malalignment suggests the 
brainstem is affected. Asymmetric pupils in an altered patient indicate 
herniation from increased intracranial pressure.
Reversal of Immediately Treatable Toxic or Metabolic 
Causes
If the etiology for altered consciousness is not immediately apparent 
from the rapid clinical assessment, emphasis should shift to a system­
atic review of the reversible causes. A blood glucose level should be 
obtained as soon as possible on all children presenting with AMS. 
Hypoglycemia is a medical emergency that must be treated immedi­
ately because sustained hypoglycemia may result in permanent neu­
rologic damage. Hypoglycemia in an altered child can be treated with 
intravenous dextrose, glucagon injection, or glucose gel applied to 
the oral mucosa. If obtaining a blood glucose level is delayed for any 
reason, empiric treatment for hypoglycemia should be given. In the 
absence of a central line, the percent dextrose solution used may vary; 
however, the absolute dose of glucose remains the same. Depending on 
the underlying etiology of the hypoglycemia, some patients will require 
a continuous infusion of glucose and electrolytes to prevent rebound 
hypoglycemia after the dextrose bolus. Regardless, any child found to 
Brainstem
intact
MLF
(bilateral)
Low
brainstem
lesion
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Hot H2O
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Hot H2O
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Cold H2O
Hot H2O
Fig. 41.5  Ocular reflexes. MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
753
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
have hypoglycemia will need close monitoring of their blood glucose 
levels until stabilized (see Chapter 57).
Reversible ingestions should be considered next. Naloxone should 
be administered to children who have marked depression of con­
sciousness without an obvious cause, particularly if hypoventilation is 
observed and opioid ingestion is suspected. Miosis is not a necessary 
finding because ingestion of multiple agents, including narcotics, may 
not result in small, constricted pupils. Organophosphates, clonidine, 
Lomotil, cholinesterase inhibitors (for myasthenia gravis), and val­
proate may cause miosis. Meperidine does not produce miosis. Dis­
eases producing miosis include cluster headaches, Horner syndrome, 
Lyme disease, and uveitis. Large ingestions of narcotics may necessitate 
larger single doses of naloxone because of the competitive nature of 
its antagonistic effect. Even if initial improvement is noted, patients 
may require multiple doses or even a continuous infusion of naloxone 
because its half-­life is shorter than that of many opioids. Benzodiaze­
pine ingestion can also cause depressed levels of consciousness and can 
be reversed with flumazenil. Flumazenil, a specific competitive antag­
onist of benzodiazepines, should only be given if acute benzodiazepine 
overdose is suspected as administration of flumazenil to a patient with 
chronic benzodiazepine use or who has ingested multiple agents such 
as tricyclic antidepressants, which may precipitate seizures.
When there are clinical signs or symptoms of infection present, the 
patient should be evaluated for signs of sepsis as well as CNS infection 
such as meningitis, encephalitis, or a parameningeal infection. Sepsis 
is a medical emergency; blood cultures should be obtained, and antibi­
otics started within an hour of recognition. If meningitis or encepha­
litis is suspected, a lumbar puncture should be performed, an opening 
pressure obtained, and CSF sent for Gram stain, culture, protein, glu­
cose, and rapid identification of pathogens by polymerase chain reac­
tion (PCR). Contraindications to a lumbar puncture are listed in Table 
41.15. Antibiotics should not be delayed in order to perform a lum­
bar puncture. Suspicion for meningitis or encephalitis increases with 
the presence of a fever, bulging fontanel, nuchal rigidity, and Kernig 
or Brudzinski signs. Prior administration of antibiotics does not affect 
meningeal irritation. Most (85%) children with meningitis have AMS 
(53% lethargic, 22% stuporous, 10% comatose). If a contraindication 
to a lumbar puncture exists or if CSF is unable to be obtained, the 
child should be stabilized, receive empirical antimicrobial therapy, 
and undergo head CT imaging. The patient should undergo lumbar 
puncture as soon as it is no longer contraindicated. If a patient presents 
with sudden nuchal rigidity not preceded by a prodromal illness, a sub­
arachnoid hemorrhage should be suspected, and a CT scan performed 
before the lumbar puncture.
If history is concerning for seizures and the physical exam reveals 
concern for ongoing seizure, such as continued rhythmic jerking of 
extremities or tonic deviation of the eyes, then a benzodiazepine such 
as intravenous lorazepam or intranasal midazolam should be given 
empirically and the patient monitored for effects.
If signs of increased intracranial pressure are present, treatment 
should be initiated with raising the head of the bed 30 degrees and 
hypertonic saline or mannitol should be given. If signs of imminent 
herniation are present, hyperventilation either manually through a 
bag-­mask or with a ventilator in intubated patients can be initiated as 
a temporizing intervention until more definitive treatment is available. 
Emergent head CT and neurosurgical consultation should be obtained. 
In addition to an elevated head position, other neuroprotective prin­
ciples include avoiding constrictive items around the neck; avoiding 
hypoxia or hyperoxia; avoiding hypotension, hypoglycemia, hypergly­
cemia, and hyperthermia; and preventing and treating seizures.
Reasons to obtain an emergent head CT include focal neurologic 
findings, concern for trauma, or other signs or symptoms consistent 
with a structural cause of AMS. If the cause of AMS continues to 
remain unknown and particularly if the exam is consistent with non­
structural causes, initial laboratory investigation should be obtained 
including CBC, electrolytes, magnesium, calcium, and phosphorus, 
BUN, creatinine, liver function tests including serum bilirubin and 
ammonia, lactic acid, arterial or venous blood gas, urine and serum 
toxicology screens, urine analysis with urine ketones and urine reduc­
ing substances, and appropriate cultures (blood, urine, CSF).
TABLE 41.14  Neurologic Findings That Help 
to Localize Site of Structural Brain Disease by 
Location of Lesion
Bilateral hemi­
spheric
Spontaneous eye movements (roving, dipping,* ping-­
pong, nystagmoid jerks)
Upward or downward eye deviation
Intact oculovestibular reflexes
Intact pupillary and corneal reflexes
Variable motor responses
Adventitious limb movements (subtle manifestations 
of seizures, myoclonus, asterixis)
Brainstem displace­
ment from a hemi­
spheric mass
Anisocoria or unilateral fixed and dilated pupil (pre­
dominant lateral displacement)
Midposition fixed pupils (predominant downward 
displacement)
Extensor or flexor posturing
Central hyperventilation (diencephalic)
Brainstem dis­
placement from a 
cerebellar mass
Direction-­changing or vertical nystagmus from the 
cerebellar lesion
Ocular bobbing†
Absent corneal reflexes with intact pupillary reflexes
Extensor or flexor posturing
Facial or abducens nerve palsy
Skew deviation (vertical misalignment of eyes)
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Intrinsic brainstem 
lesion
Vertical nystagmus or bobbing
Miosis (with pontine lesions)
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Variable pupillary and corneal reflexes (can both be 
absent)
Absent oculocephalic and oculovestibular responses
Extensor or flexor posturing
Ataxic breathing (pontomedullary damage)
*Slow eye movement down followed by rapid return up to the mid­
plane.
†Rapid eye movement up followed by slow return down to the mid­
plane.
From Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, et al. Diagnosis of reversible 
causes of coma. Lancet. 2014;382:2064–2076.
TABLE 41.15  Contraindications to Lumbar 
Puncture
Clinically important cardiorespiratory compromise in a neonate or young infant
Signs of raised intracranial pressure (pupillary changes, ptosis, hypertension, 
bradycardia, posturing, cranial nerve VI palsy, retinal changes)
Skin or soft tissue infection overlying area where lumbar puncture is to be 
performed
Focal neurologic findings
Suspected brain abscess (illness duration longer than expected for meningi­
tis; focality)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
754
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
DETAILED INVESTIGATION
Once the patient has been stabilized and life-­threatening causes of AMS 
have been excluded, the coma can be considered stable if (1) focal neu­
rologic findings are not present, (2) there is no evidence of significant 
brainstem dysfunction, (3) intracranial pressure is not raised, (4) there 
is no evidence of head trauma or CNS infection, and (5) the child does 
not have a rapidly reversible toxic or metabolic cause. At this point a 
detailed physical examination and expanded laboratory evaluation can 
be undertaken to confirm the level of CNS function and the cause of 
the coma.
Further history should be reviewed that was not able to be obtained 
earlier including detailed family history, social history, and further 
exposures including sources of carbon monoxide, animal exposures or 
bites, travel history, toxins or medications in the house, and pill counts 
if applicable. Collateral information should be reviewed if not avail­
able earlier. A detailed physical examination may provide further clues 
to the cause of the coma (Table 41.16), and careful attention should 
be paid to ensure full exposure and a thorough physical exam. If not 
already performed, attention should be paid to the skin, thyroid, and 
abdominal exam. In addition to the neurologic exam described previ­
ously focused on emergent findings, further detailed neurologic exam­
ination should also be performed.
Once further history is gathered and a detailed physical exam is per­
formed, further laboratory and electrophysiology studies and imaging 
may be warranted based on the clinical scenario (Tables 41.17 and 41.18). 
In addition to the labs mentioned previously, second-­line studies may 
include thyroid function tests; cortisol; carboxyhemoglobin; coagula­
tion studies; ammonia; lactic acid; inflammatory markers; and antibody 
testing. An osmolal gap, as well as an anion gap, should be calculated. 
The osmolal gap is the difference between the measured and calculated 
serum osmolality (normal is <5–10 mOsm/kg H2O) (Table 41.19). Both 
serum and urine toxicology screens should be sent when suspecting 
ingestions; however, the results must be interpreted cautiously. Because 
toxicology screens are not standardized, a “negative” result does not rule 
out an undetermined ingestion and clinicians should be familiar with 
what is tested on their local toxicology screens. Screening for certain 
agents, such as methanol and ethylene glycol, needs to be requested spe­
cifically. Depending on the compound, both false negatives and false 
positives may be a concern. ECG should be considered particularly if 
concerned for electrolyte derangement or intoxication in order to assess 
for cardiac conduction abnormalities. Other laboratory testing may 
include heavy metal levels, porphyria testing, and testing for inborn 
errors of metabolism (plasma amino acids, plasma carnitine, plasma 
pyruvate, urinary amino acids, and urinary organic acids and acylcarni­
tine profile). In infants and young children, a positive stool guaiac may 
suggest intussusception, which can occasionally present with decreased 
level of consciousness (encephalopathy), and further work-­up with 
abdominal ultrasound for confirmation should be pursued.
Further infectious work-­up may include fungal and mycobacterial 
cultures and antigen or serologic studies for specific infectious etiol­
ogies such as enterovirus, herpes simplex virus, Epstein-­Barr virus 
(EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), HIV, Borrelia burgdorferi, Bartonella 
henselae, Rickettsia, arboviral encephalitides, rabies, cryptosporid­
ium, mycobacterium tuberculous, syphilis, histoplasmosis, and myco­
plasma. In the appropriate endemic areas or in returning travelers, the 
clinician should also consider testing for dengue, malaria, Japanese 
encephalitis, viral hemorrhagic fevers, and parasitic meningitis, par­
ticularly if eosinophils are present in the CSF (≥10 eosinophils/mL3 or 
pleocytosis with ≥10% eosinophils).
For patients who remain altered without a clear etiology, lumbar 
puncture should be performed if not done already. CSF should be sent 
for cell count and differential, glucose, protein, Gram stain, bacterial 
culture, and herpes simplex virus PCR. Other CSF testing should be 
obtained based on risk factors and clinical scenario. In immunocom­
promised patients, fungal and mycobacterial cultures should be sent as 
well as additional testing for cryptococcal antigen, histoplasma anti­
gen, human herpes virus 6, and CMV. Multiplex or individual PCR and 
antibody testing of the CSF for bacterial and viral pathogens should be 
considered.
If concerned for an autoimmune process, the appropriate antibod­
ies such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) and antineutrophil cytoplas­
mic antibodies (ANCAs) should be obtained, and complement levels 
and autoimmune antibody testing of the CSF should be performed.
If not already performed, brain imaging should be considered. Head 
imaging should only be obtained after the patient has been stabilized 
and the risks of transporting an acutely ill child for the study have been 
weighed against the diagnostic benefit. CT scan offers the quickest 
modality for head imaging and the modality of choice when concerned 
for a structural cause of coma. Head CT will reveal intracranial bleed­
ing, hydrocephalus, cerebral edema, herniation, and abnormal fluid 
collections. Limitations of head CT scan include exposure to radiation, 
limited evaluation of the posterior fossa, and decreased sensitivity to 
changes in the brain parenchyma. If the etiology of the altered level 
of consciousness is not found on head CT, an MRI of the brain should 
be obtained, which is more sensitive for acute stroke, demyelination, 
lesions in the posterior fossa, epileptic foci, and changes associated 
with infectious or autoimmune encephalitis. Limits of an MRI include 
longer imaging time, which often necessitates sedation of infants and 
young children. If there is concern for stroke, sinus venous thrombo­
sis, or other vascular abnormality, appropriate vascular imaging should 
be obtained such as CT or magnetic resonance angiography and/or 
venography (MRA and MRV, respectively). For otherwise stable neo­
nates and young infants, head ultrasound can be obtained as an initial 
head imaging modality and can be used to identify intracranial hemor­
rhage, subdural collections, edema, and signs of increased intracranial 
pressure.
Other important investigations include EEG monitoring over time 
to detect nonconvulsive status epilepticus in patients with decreased 
level of consciousness. EEG is indicated if there is concern for sec­
ondary seizures due to trauma, structural lesions, encephalitis, or 
encephalopathy. If there is concern for catatonia, consultation with 
psychiatry should be obtained and a trial of lorazepam with monitoring 
for improvement in mental status can be considered (see Chapter 31).
TRAUMA
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) accounts for approximately half of the 
incidence of childhood coma and is the leading cause of pediatric 
trauma death. Falls and motor vehicle crashes account for the most 
common mechanisms of injury, and the risk of TBI tends to increase 
throughout childhood. Severe TBI can lead to AMS through a vari­
ety of mechanisms including diffuse axonal injury, brain contusion, 
intraparenchymal brain hemorrhage, subdural hemorrhage, epidural 
hemorrhage, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. The mechanism of brain 
injury is caused both by the primary injury and by secondary injury 
caused by edema, hypoxia, hypoperfusion, increased intracranial pres­
sure, and metabolic derangements such as acidosis and hypoglycemia. 
After initial stabilization, a patient presenting with any known trauma 
and AMS should have a head CT and the appropriate neurosurgical 
consultation and intervention. Even without a clear history of trauma, 
TBI should be suspected in patients presenting with AMS and other 
signs of trauma including bruising, lacerations, fractures, raccoon eyes, 
Battle sign (bruising posterior to the ear), and hemotympanum.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
755
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
TABLE 41.16  Physical Examination and Diagnosis of Coma
System
Sign
Disorder
Skin
Dry
Dehydration, myxedema, adrenal insufficiency, anticholinergic poisoning
Moist, sweating
Syncope, hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism
Pigment
Addison disease, porphyria
Nevi
Tuberous sclerosis with seizures
Petechiae
Bacteremia, bacterial endocarditis, idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura
Ecchymosis
Coagulopathy, intracranial hemorrhage
Cyanosis
Hypoxia, congenital heart disease with cerebral embolism, methemoglobinemia
Pallor
Shock, hemorrhage, severe anemia
Erythema
Carbon monoxide, atropine, or mercury intoxication: toxic shock syndrome, heat stroke
Butterfly rash
Lupus erythematosus, tuberous sclerosis, dermatomyositis
Desquamation
Vitamin A intoxication, scarlatina, Kawasaki disease
Jaundice
Hepatic disease, hemolytic anemia
Nail changes
Splinter hemorrhage–endocarditis
Candida infection, hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease
Periungual fibroma (tuberous sclerosis)
Breath odor
Fruity
Diabetic ketoacidosis; amyl nitrate, alcohol, isopropyl alcohol poisoning
Feculent
Hepatic encephalopathy
Garlic
Selenium toxicity, arsenic poisoning, organophosphate poisoning
Almonds
Cyanide poisoning
Wintergreen
Methyl salicylate poisoning
Ammoniacal
Uremia
Acrid (pearl-­like)
Paraldehyde, chloral hydrate poisoning
Scalp
Contusions
Trauma
Vasodilation
Sagittal sinus thrombosis
Eyes
Chemosis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Periorbital ecchymosis
Blow-­out orbital fracture
Subhyaloid hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Vasospasm (retina)
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Miosis
Opioids, organophosphates, clonidine, Horner syndrome
Mydriasis
Anticholinergic agents, antihistamines
Retinal hemorrhages
Trauma, child abuse
Ears
Hemorrhage
Basilar skull fracture
Purulent otitis media
Brain abscess, lateral sinus thrombosis
Nose
Cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea
Basilar skull fracture
Mouth
Bitten tongue and buccal mucosa
Seizure disorder
Pigmentation
Addison disease
Lead lines
Plumbism (lead intoxication)
Neck
Rigid
Meningitis, pneumonia, subarachnoid hemorrhage, encephalitis
Thyroid
Enlarged
Myxedema, thyrotoxicosis, Hashimoto encephalopathy
Heart
Murmur
Subacute endocarditis, brain abscess
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
Leukemia, hepatic failure, heart failure
Splenomegaly
Leukemia, lymphoma, hepatic failure
Extremities
Fracture
Trauma, fat embolism
Ecchymosis
Trauma, hemorrhagic diathesis, shock, vasculitis
Osler nodes
Endocarditis
Muscle rigidity
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, serotonin syndrome
Modified from Tait VF, Dean JM, Hanley DF. Evaluation of the comatose child. In: Rogers MC, ed. Textbook of Pediatric Intensive Care. 2nd ed. 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1992:741.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
756
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Most pediatric patients presenting with head injury will have minor 
injuries. Patients with AMS or loss of consciousness do not fall within 
the low-­risk category and require further observation and head imag­
ing. In addition to the more severe forms of TBI, mild TBI can also 
lead to AMS in the form of confusion, disorientation, or lethargy. In 
mild injury (GCS score 13–15), the neurologic exam is nonfocal, and 
there are no physical exam findings concerning for skull fracture. The 
definition of mild TBI includes one or more of the following: confu­
sion or disorientation; post-­traumatic amnesia for <24 hours; loss of 
consciousness for <30 minutes; transient seizure or focal neurologic 
signs or symptoms; and GCS score 13–15 at 30 minutes or longer after 
the injury. Concussion is defined as trauma-­induced brain dysfunc­
tion without structural injury on neuroimaging and symptoms include 
headache, dizziness, confusion, drowsiness, nausea, amnesia, irritabil­
ity, and transient loss of consciousness.
Infants with head trauma may have evidence of intracranial hyper­
tension: bulging fontanel, decerebrate posturing, and tachypnea. The 
clinical picture in a young infant may be confused with meningitis. In 
the absence of a febrile illness, trauma should be suspected, and the 
patient should be treated as if there is a rapidly progressive intracranial 
process. Infants are at increased risk for abusive head trauma, formerly 
referred to as shaken baby syndrome or nonaccidental trauma. The 
first 2 years of life present a high-­risk period with an estimated inci­
dence of 16–33 cases/100,000 children affected. Injury occurs by many 
different mechanisms including blunt force, acceleration/deceleration, 
penetrating trauma, or asphyxiation. Infants with abusive head trauma 
often present with nonspecific concerns and without clear history of 
trauma. Presenting symptoms can include lethargy (77%), respiratory 
depression or seizure (43–50%), developmental delay (12%), or non­
specific findings such as irritability, decreased oral intake, and vomit­
ing (15%). The key to diagnosis is to maintain a high index of suspicion 
(see Chapter 30).
PRIMARY BRAIN DISEASES
Diseases that primarily affect the brain leading to AMS can be divided 
into those causing structural lesions and those causing diffuse injury to 
the brain. Overlap does occur: A CNS infection may cause both diffuse 
disease and structural damage such as encephalitis or meningitis com­
plicated by a brain abscess.
Structural Brain Disease
Various forms of primary structural brain diseases can lead to AMS. 
Symptoms associated with structural brain disease vary depending 
on the location of the lesion. If level of consciousness is affected, then 
either the bilateral cerebral hemisphere or ARAS is involved as dis­
cussed earlier. In space-­occupying structural lesions, this most com­
monly occurs through increased intracranial pressure. Such lesions 
include intracranial hemorrhages, tumors, hydrocephalus, and vascu­
lar abnormalities. Structural brain lesions can also cause more subtle 
changes in mental status such as behavior changes depending on their 
location within the brain.
Intracranial Hemorrhage and Thrombosis
The vast majority of intracranial hemorrhages in children result from 
TBI, but more rare causes include hemorrhagic conversion of ischemic 
stroke, ruptured aneurysms, vascular malformations, brain tumors, 
CNS infections, vasculitis, vasculopathies, and moyamoya disease. The 
risk of intracranial hemorrhage is increased in the context of bleeding 
disorders and evaluation for a congenital or acquired bleeding disorder 
should be undertaken in patients with otherwise unexplained intracra­
nial bleeding.
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are the most dangerous 
vascular malformation with approximately 50% of children having 
hemorrhage as their initial presentation. Other symptoms can include 
seizure or focal neurologic deficit. Brain AVMs most often present with 
intraparenchymal bleeding but can also cause intraventricular or sub­
arachnoid bleeding depending on the location of the AVM. Cavernous 
malformations (cavernous angiomas or cavernomas) can also present 
with hemorrhage, seizures, and progressive neurologic deficits and can 
be sporadic or familial. Diagnosis is usually made on neuroimaging 
including angiography.
Ischemic stroke is rare in children and is most often related to an 
underlying pathology that increases the risk of stroke. Such pathologies 
include congenital heart disease, prothrombotic clotting disorders, sickle 
cell disease, leukemias and lymphomas, infection, trauma, and certain 
genetic predispositions. Ischemic stroke most often presents with focal 
neurologic findings and is much less likely to present with decreased 
level of consciousness than hemorrhagic strokes. In the minority of 
ischemic strokes, decreased level of consciousness may be seen as an 
effect of the predisposing condition, location within the brainstem, or 
secondary effects of large strokes such as edema (see Chapter 37).
In addition to arterial thrombosis, cerebral sinus venous thrombo­
sis (CSVT) can also cause AMS. Risk factors include genetic conditions 
predisposing to thrombophilia, oral contraceptives, malignancy, infec­
tion, and head injury. In childhood, CSVT has its highest incidence 
TABLE 41.17  Laboratory Evaluation of 
Metabolic Brain Disease
Test
Reason for Test
Immediate
Glucose
Hypoglycemia, DKA, hyperosmolar coma
Na+
Sodium dysregulation, osmolar abnor­
malities
Electrolytes
Electrolyte imbalances, including Mg2+
Ca2+
Hypercalcemia or hypocalcemia
BUN
Uremia
Arterial blood pH, Pco2, Po2, 
oxygen saturation
Acidosis, alkalosis, hypoxia, CO, or 
methemoglobin
Lumbar puncture
Infection, hemorrhage, meningeal carci­
nomatosis
CBC with differential
Infection, anemia
Later
Liver function tests, ammonia 
level
Hepatic encephalopathy, Reye syndrome, 
urea cycle defect
Lactic acid
Sepsis, inborn errors of metabolism
Drug levels
Overdose
Blood and CSF culture
Sepsis, encephalitis, meningitis
Hormone levels including TFTs 
and cortisol
Myxedema coma, thyroid storm, adrenal 
crisis
Coagulation profile
Intravascular coagulation, coagulation 
disorders
EEG
Seizure disorder
CO, carbon monoxide; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DKA, diabetic ketoaci­
dosis; Pco2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; Po2, partial pressure of 
oxygen; TFTs, thyroid function tests.
Modified from Plum F. Neurology/sustained impairments of conscious­
ness. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook 
of Medicine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2053.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
757
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
in the neonatal period, presenting with diffuse brain injury leading to 
decreased level of consciousness and seizures. Neonatal risk factors 
include perinatal complications including birth hypoxia and maternal 
infection, dehydration, and head and neck disorders. Older children 
may have a wider variability in presentation with headache being the 
most common symptom. More severe presentations can lead to venous 
infarction and hemorrhage, which can result in seizures, focal defi­
cits, and encephalopathy leading to confusion and decreased level of 
consciousness.
INTRACRANIAL TUMOR
Intracranial tumors, including both malignant and nonmalignant 
tumors, can present with subacute changes in mental status both from 
increased intracranial pressure and from effects at the location of the 
tumor itself. Mechanisms for acute AMS in the context of a CNS tumor 
include intracranial bleeding and seizures. Primary malignant CNS 
tumors are the second most common type of childhood malignancies 
and the leading cause of cancer mortality in children. The most com­
mon symptoms of CNS tumors are consistent with increased intracra­
nial pressure and focal findings that are dependent on the location of 
the tumor. In infants and young children this includes macrocephaly, 
irritability, bulging fontanel, splayed sutures, and developmental delay. 
For older children, headache, ataxia, behavioral changes, and decreased 
school performance can be seen. Nausea and vomiting occur at all ages. 
Neuroimaging is required for diagnosis and is indicated in any patient 
presenting with decreased level of consciousness with signs or symp­
toms of increased intracranial pressure or focal neurologic signs.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus can also lead to AMS, both acutely and more slowly 
depending on the timing of onset of the hydrocephalus. Obstructive 
hydrocephalus refers to accumulation of CSF secondary to blockage 
within the ventricular system and is the most common form of hydro­
cephalus seen in children. Communicating hydrocephalus refers to 
decreased absorption of CSF in the subarachnoid space. Both forms 
of hydrocephalus most commonly present with signs of increased 
intracranial pressure. Changes in mental status may include behavioral 
changes such as irritability, aggressive behavior, indifference, and, in 
TABLE 41.18  Neuroimaging and Electrophysiologic Techniques and Findings in Disorders of 
Consciousness
Technique
Measurement
Strengths
Limitations
Vegetative State
Minimally 
Conscious State
Comatose
FDG-­PET
Metabolic
Relatively direct measure 
of neuronal energy use 
(glucose uptake)
Ionizing (limited 
repeated measures)
Voxel-­based: hypome­
tabolism in lateral and 
medial frontoparietal 
cortices
Metabolic dysfunction 
in left hemisphere
fMRI
CBF
High-­resolution structural 
imaging of gray-­white 
matter (DTI) and 
functional imaging 
(spectroscopy, resting, 
passive, and active CBF 
paradigms)
Sensitive to movement 
artifacts requiring 
sedation/anesthesia
Incompatible with fer­
romagnetic material 
(deprivation, pumps, 
electrodes)
Activation fMRI: low-­
level cortical activa­
tion DMN—partially 
preserved
Activation fMRI: near-­ 
normal high-­level 
cortical activation
EEG/ERPs
Electrical
Repeatable, portable, and 
inexpensive
Muscle, eye, and dysau­
tonomia artifacts
Challenging source 
reconstruction
EEG: slow-­wave activity 
through night and 
periods of REM sleep
ERP-­poor outcome 
with absence of a 
cortical response 
to electrical stim­
ulation of median 
nerves
EEG-­TMS
Electrical
Stereotaxic stimulation 
connectivity studies
Stimulation areas are 
limited by muscle 
artifacts
TMS triggers a simple, 
local EEG response 
similar to deep sleep/
anesthesia
Complex activations in 
distant cortical areas
CBF, cerebral blood flow; DMN, default model network; DTI, diffuse tensor imaging; ERPs, event-­related potentials; FDG,18F-­fluorodeoxyghicose; 
fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; REM, rapid eye movement; TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation.
From Parrillo JE, Dellinger RP. Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and Management in the Adult. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.
TABLE 41.19  Toxins and Disease States 
Causing Elevated Anion and/or Osmolal Gaps
Anion Gap
Osmolal Gap
Ethanol
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Methanol
Toluene
Acetone
Iron
Propylene glycol
Isoniazid
Ethyl ether
Salicylates
Isopropyl alcohol
Paraldehyde
Mannitol
Strychnine
Trichloromethane
Renal failure
Renal failure
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Lactic acidosis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
758
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
young children, developmental delay. As the hydrocephalus progresses, 
lethargy and drowsiness may be seen as pressure is placed on the mid­
brain and brainstem. Physical exam in infants may reveal macroceph­
aly, frontal bossing, and prominent scalp veins. Neurologic exam may 
reveal spasticity secondary to stretching of the fibers from the motor 
cortex, extraocular muscle paresis secondary to compression of the 
third or sixth cranial nerves, and in severe cases inability to gaze upward 
leading to the sclera being visible caudal to the iris (“setting-­sun” sign). 
Diagnosis is made with neuroimaging revealing ventriculomegaly in 
the context of increased intracranial pressure. Ventriculomegaly with­
out increased intracranial pressure is more likely to represent reduced 
brain volume in the proper clinical setting. Etiologies of hydrocephalus 
are diverse and include both congenital and acquired causes. Shunt 
malfunction remains high on the differential for children with a his­
tory of hydrocephalus and shunt placement who present with signs of 
increased intracranial pressure, particularly AMS.
Nonstructural or Medical Primary Brain Disease
Seizures
In generalized and focal seizures with altered awareness (previously 
complex partial seizures), the seizure itself presents with altered 
awareness and decreased responsiveness. This is followed by a postic­
tal period characterized by decreased level of consciousness. In Todd 
paralysis, the postictal period is associated with focal neurologic defi­
cits that resolve spontaneously with recovery from the postictal period. 
While seizures are most often short-­lived, status epilepticus (ongoing 
or frequent seizure activity) can cause prolonged altered level of con­
sciousness. Particularly in the setting of nonconvulsive status epilepticus, 
diagnosis may be delayed. Children younger than 2 years of age are very 
unlikely to present with tonic-­clonic and absence seizures and more 
likely to present with sudden loss of muscle tone (focal or generalized), 
posturing, abrupt change in behavior, and clonic jerking of extremi­
ties or eyelids. Seizures in neonates can be subtle and a high index of 
suspicion must be maintained for infants with abnormal movements. 
Mimics of seizures vary depending on the age of the patient. In neo­
nates, jitteriness (whether benign or associated with drug withdrawal, 
hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, or hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy), 
benign neonatal sleep myoclonus, and apnea may all be mistaken for 
seizure and often require EEG to differentiate. The differential in older 
infants includes breath-­holding spells, Sandifer syndrome, dystonia, 
and sleep-­related rhythmic movement disorders. With the exception 
of hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopa­
thy, these mimics are not associated with prolonged periods of AMS. 
AMS in infants with concern for seizure indicates a serious under­
lying pathology. The differential in older children includes migraine 
syndromes, psychogenic nonepileptic seizures, syncope, movement 
disorders, and sleep disorders. EEG monitoring can help distinguish 
epileptic seizures from other events in difficult-­to-­distinguish cases. 
Prolonged altered level of consciousness in these patients is a red flag 
for more severe underlying pathology and should prompt a thorough 
work-­up as indicated earlier (see Chapter 39).
Central Nervous System Infections
CNS infection represents the most common cause of nontraumatic 
decreased level of consciousness, accounting for approximately a third 
of nontraumatic cases. Children presenting with decreased level of 
consciousness without a clear etiology should undergo lumbar punc­
ture with CSF studies to evaluate for infection unless a contraindication 
to a lumbar puncture exists. CNS infections range from meningitis, 
encephalitis, and brain abscesses to empyema of the epidural or sub­
dural spaces. In some patients, a combination of these may be present. 
CSF studies may be falsely reassuring in infections that do not commu­
nicate with the CSF such as in an intraparenchymal brain abscess or 
epidural abscess or in encephalitis. Intracranial abscesses often require 
neuroimaging with contrast for diagnosis. Causative pathogens of CNS 
infections are broad and include numerous viruses, bacteria, fungus, 
and protozoa (see Chapter 42). While CNS infection should remain at 
the top of the differential for patients presenting with fever and AMS, 
the less common causes include drug ingestions that cause hyperther­
mia (amphetamines, cocaine, salicylates, selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors, anticholinergics), heat stroke, and autoimmune-­mediated 
disorders.
Inflammatory Diseases of the Central Nervous System
A variety of immune-­mediated and inflammatory disorders can affect 
the CNS and cause AMS. These include autoimmune encephalitis, 
demyelinating disease, and CNS vasculitis. All of these disorders are 
rare but important to recognize as early detection and treatment in 
many can reduce morbidity and mortality.
Autoimmune encephalitis is a common cause of encephalitis 
and AMS characterized by brain inflammation mediated by autoan­
tibodies most commonly against cell-­surface antigens of neurons or 
intracellular proteins. Common presenting symptoms include new-­
onset subacute behavioral changes, psychiatric disturbances, cognitive 
decline, seizures, abnormal movements, and, as the disease progresses, 
decreased level of consciousness and coma. Some autoimmune enceph­
alitis syndromes are associated with specific triggers including tumors 
(paraneoplastic) or preceding infections, although childhood-­onset 
autoimmune encephalitis is less likely than adult onset to be associated 
with an underlying tumor.
Anti-­NMDA (N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate) receptor encephalitis is the 
most common autoimmune encephalitis in children and adolescents. 
A prodrome of headache, fever, and viral-­like symptoms progress 
over a few days to psychiatric symptoms (anxiety, bizarre behavior, 
hallucinations, delusions, disorganized thinking), insomnia, memory 
deficits, seizures, dyskinesias, and language dysfunction, which can 
progress to decreased level of consciousness and coma sometimes 
associated with catatonic features and autonomic instability. Although 
anti-­NMDA receptor encephalitis has been described in children as 
young as 8 months of age, the incidence is higher in adolescence and 
has been associated with underlying teratomas as well as preceding 
herpes simplex virus (HSV) encephalitis. While half of patients will 
have a normal MRI, the other half will have a transient nonspecific T2 
or fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal hyperintensities 
in multiple cortical and subcortical areas. EEG most commonly shows 
focal and diffuse slowing with variable epileptiform activity. Diagnosis 
is confirmed with detection of anti-­NMDA receptor antibodies in the 
CSF. Anti-­NMDA receptor antibodies can also be detected in serum 
with lower sensitivity.
Many other autoantibodies have been described in children with 
autoimmune encephalitis with variable clinical presentations (Table 
41.20). The differential for autoimmune encephalitis includes infection 
encephalitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), angiitis 
of the CNS, toxic-­metabolic disturbances, CNS tumors, primary psy­
chiatric disease, seizure disorders, inborn errors of metabolism, and 
mitochondrial cytopathies. Neurologic findings, even if subtle, in 
patients presenting with psychiatric symptoms should be considered 
a red flag and prompt further investigation, including for autoimmune 
encephalitis (see Chapter 31). Autoimmune encephalitis should be 
considered in patients with a history of a viral encephalitis who present 
with a recurrence of encephalitis because viral encephalitis has been 
associated with later development of autoantibodies and autoimmune 
encephalitis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
759
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
Certain demyelinating disorders can also lead to encephalopathy 
and AMS. ADEM is an autoimmune disorder mediated through auto­
antibodies to myelin as well as T-­cell-­mediated damage. Immune dys­
function is often triggered by an antecedent infection, most often viral, 
with many pathogens being implicated as possible triggers including 
coronavirus, coxsackievirus, CMV, EBV, HSV, HIV, influenza, measles, 
rubella, varicella zoster, West Nile virus, B. burgdorferi, chlamydia, 
mycoplasma, rickettsia, and β-­hemolytic Streptococcus. ADEM pre­
dominantly affects children ages 5–8 years and has a male predomi­
nance. Neurologic symptoms typically present 4–13 days after the initial 
triggering infection and include irritability, confusion, decreased level 
of consciousness, hemiparesis, cerebellar ataxia, optic neuritis, myelop­
athy, and seizures. At presentation, patients often have fever, headache, 
vomiting, and meningismus followed by the progression of neurologic 
findings. In severe cases, encephalopathy, difficult-­to-­control seizures, 
and/or respiratory failure from paralysis of the diaphragm may neces­
sitate intensive care admission and mechanical ventilation. ADEM 
is a self-­limited disorder with resolution of symptoms in 2–4 weeks. 
Diagnosis is aided with neuroimaging with MRI showing large (>1–2 
cm) tumefactive T2 lesions of similar age with variable enhancement 
in either the brain or spine. CSF may be normal or may show signs of 
inflammation with CSF pleocytosis usually <100 cells/mL or increased 
protein. The criteria for diagnosis include the first multifocal episode 
of CNS demyelinating disease with encephalopathy that cannot be 
explained by other etiologies with absence of new clinical or MRI find­
ings 3 months or more after onset.
The differential for demyelinating encephalopathies includes neu­
romyelitis optica (NMO) and pediatric multiple sclerosis. NMO can 
occasionally present with encephalopathy similar to that seen in ADEM, 
although it more commonly presents with optic neuritis, transverse 
myelitis, or focal brainstem findings. Diagnosis requires signs of optic 
neuritis, longitudinal lesions of the spinal cord involving at least three 
vertebral segments, brain imaging not meeting criteria for multiple 
sclerosis, and the detection of aquaporin-­4 (AQP4)-­immunoglobulin 
G (IgG) serum antibodies. Brain imaging in a patient with NMO will 
typically have less defined hemispheric lesions.
Pediatric multiple sclerosis (MS) is defined as onset of MS prior to 
age 18 years with demyelinating lesions separated over time and space. 
TABLE 41.20  Summary of Inflammatory Brain Disorders
Disorder
Associated Antibody
Signs and Symptoms
Key Findings
Antibody-­
mediated 
autoimmune 
encepha­
litis
Anti-­NMDA receptor 
encephalitis
Anti-­NMDAR
Psychiatric disturbance
Movement disorders
Cognitive decline
Speech dysfunction
Seizures
Movement disorders
Anti-­NMDAR antibodies
Associated with teratomas and preceding 
HSV encephalitis
Anti-­GABAAR enceph­
alitis
Anti-­GABAAR
Refractory seizures
Confusion
Behavioral changes
Movement disorders
MRI with multifocal, extensive cortical and 
subcortical T2 hyperintensities
Anti-­GABABR enceph­
alitis
Anti-­GABABR
Seizures
Memory loss
Confusion
Limbic encephalitis
MRI normal or with increased signal in 
medial temporal lobes
Anti-­GlyR enceph­
alitis
Anti-­Gly receptor
Stiff-­person syndrome
Limbic encephalitis
Seizures
Movement disorders
Brainstem involvement
MRI is normal or with nonspecific findings
Anti-­mGlu R5 recep­
tor encephalitis
Anti-­mGlu R5
Confusion
Psychiatric disturbance
Encephalopathy
Associated with Hodgkin lymphoma
Anti-­dopamine D2 
receptor enceph­
alitis
Anti-­D2 receptor antibodies
Lethargy
Dystonia
Parkinsonism
Psychiatric disturbance
MRI with increased signal in basal ganglion
Demye­
linating 
disorders
ADEM
Anti-­MOG
Polyfocal neurologic deficits
Encephalopathy
MRI with large white matter lesions
No new clinical symptoms or MRI changes 
for 3 mo
NMO
Anti-­AQP4
Anti-­MOG
Optic neuritis
Myelitis
Less likely to cause encephalopathy
Spinal cord lesions involving at least three 
vertebral segments
Multiple sclerosis
n/a
At least two monofocal or polyfocal neuro­
logic deficits separated in time and space
Less likely to cause encephalopathy
Oligoclonal bands in the CSF
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
760
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
In children, MS is most likely to follow a relapsing-­remitting course. 
Although much less likely than ADEM, episodes of MS may present 
with encephalopathy, but MS requires additional episodes of demye­
lination separated in time that are not associated with encephalopa­
thy and with new lesions on MRI for diagnosis. Pediatric MS typically 
presents in adolescence with monofocal neurologic deficits. However, 
cases in those younger than 10 years have also been described and are 
more likely to have initial episodes with polyfocal dysfunction and 
encephalopathy, making distinction from ADEM challenging. Lumbar 
puncture is performed to evaluate for other diseases and is more likely 
to reveal oligoclonal bands in MS than ADEM or other monophasic 
demyelinating diseases. Detection of anti–myelin oligodendrocyte gly­
coprotein (anti-­MOG) antibody may suggest an alternative diagnosis 
of ADEM or NMO, and detection of AQP4-­IgG is most consistent with 
NMO.
CNS vasculitis can be both primary (independent) or secondary to 
a systemic disease; presentation depends on the size of the blood vessels 
affected. Large-­vessel vasculitis is more likely to present with sudden-­
onset focal neurologic deficits and ischemic stroke, although occasion­
ally patients can present with more diffuse neurologic complaints such 
as decreased cognition and change in behavior. Small-­vessel vasculitis 
is more likely to present with encephalopathy, extensive focal deficits, 
and status epilepticus and can be difficult to distinguish from other 
inflammatory brain conditions such as autoimmune encephalitis (see 
Table 41.20). Childhood primary angiitis of the central nervous sys­
tem (cPACNS) is divided into three subtypes: angiography-­positive, 
nonprogressive cPACNS; angiography-­positive, progressive cPACNS; 
and 
angiography-­negative, 
brain 
biopsy–positive, 
small-­vessel 
cPACNS. Diagnosis of large-­vessel vasculitis is made on imaging with 
MRI that reveals ischemic lesions in large-­vessel distributions in com­
bination with MRA demonstrating irregular unilateral stenosis or 
dilatation in the distal internal carotid artery and proximal segments 
of the anterior cerebral artery and/or middle cerebral artery. Nonpro­
gressive cPACNS usually shows unilateral distribution of lesions, while 
progressive cPACNS is more likely to show bilateral lesions in multiple 
vascular territories. For small-­vessel cPACNS, MRI reveals gadolinium 
enhancement of lesions and meninges or inflammatory lesions in the 
subcortical or cortical areas usually without ischemic lesions, but it can 
also be normal. MRA is normal. Many patients require angiography or 
brain biopsy to confirm the diagnosis.
Secondary causes of vasculitis in children include infections (both 
active and postinfectious), systemic rheumatic disease (systemic 
lupus erythematous, ANCA-­associated vasculitis, scleroderma, der­
matomyositis, Behçet disease), inflammatory diseases (inflammatory 
bowel disease, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, Kawasaki dis­
ease), malignancy (especially CNS lymphoma), and drugs (cocaine, 
TABLE 41.20  Summary of Inflammatory Brain Disorders—cont’d
Disorder
Associated Antibody
Signs and Symptoms
Key Findings
Other 
inflamma­
tory brain 
conditions
Rasmussen enceph­
alitis
n/a
Refractory seizures
Unilateral cortical deficits
Cognitive decline
Progressive unilateral hemispheric and brain­
stem atrophy with contralateral cerebellar 
atrophy
Hemophagocytic lym­
phohistiocytosis
n/a
Seizures
Decreased consciousness
Focal motor deficits
Systemic symptoms:
Fever
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Lymphedema
Associated with systemic inflammation
Pancytopenia
Low fibrinogen
High ferrin
High triglycerides
Hashimoto encepha­
lopathy
Antithyroid antibodies
Decreased consciousness
Seizures
Myoclonus
Tremor
Hyperreflexia
May be euthyroid, hypothyroid, or 
hyperthyroid
Granulomatous 
inflammatory brain 
disease
n/a
Facial nerve palsy
Seizures
Cognitive dysfunction
Encephalopathy
Hydrocephalus
Myelopathy
May be associated with symptoms of 
sarcoidosis elsewhere (uveitis, cough, renal 
disease, polyarthritis)
MRI may have meningeal enhancement or 
white matter lesions
cPACNS
n/a
Large vessel:
Unilateral, focal neurologic deficits
Ischemic stroke
Small vessel:
Encephalopathy
Seizures
Fever
Fatigue
MRA in large vessel reveals stenosis/dilata­
tion of large vasculature
Imaging is normal in small vessel and diagno­
sis often requires biopsy
ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; AQP4, aquaporin-­4; cPACNS, childhood primary angiitis of the central nervous system; GABAAR, 
gamma-­aminobutyric acid A receptor; GABABR, gamma-­aminobutyric acid B receptor; GlyR, glycine receptor; mGlu R5, metabotropic glutamate 
receptor 5; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; NMDA, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate; HSV, herpes simplex virus; NMO, neuromyelitis optica.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
761
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
amphetamine). These secondary causes of CNS vasculitis are associ­
ated with systemic signs and symptoms. Work-­up typically includes 
inflammatory markers, CBC with differential, ANA, ANCA, extract­
able nuclear antigens (ENAs), anti–­double-­stranded deoxyribonucleic 
acid (anti-­dsDNA), complement components 3 and 4, von Willebrand 
factor (vWF) antigen, lumbar puncture with oligoclonal bands, neuro­
nal antibodies, tests for infection, and cytology.
TOXIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Toxic compounds are common causes of altered consciousness in 
children. More than 90% of poisonings in young children are unin­
tentional and involve a single substance, many of which are prescrip­
tion medications. Children in certain age groups are at greater risk of 
being poisoned; 44% and 59% of all cases of poisonings reported to 
poison control centers occur in children younger than 3 and 6 years 
of age, respectively. Of these ingestions, opioid, sedative-­hypnotic, and 
cardiovascular medication ingestions are the most common. Inten­
tional ingestions are far more common in adolescents. In addition, 
some medications, even when taken as prescribed, can have adverse 
reactions that cause AMS and encephalopathy including valproate, 
vigabatrin, levetiracetam, methotrexate, corticosteroids, cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, penicillins, cephalosporins, quinolones, macrolides, and 
metronidazole. The clinician’s index of suspicion should be dependent 
not only on the age of the patient but also on the history of the present 
illness; a poisoning should be suspected in a previously healthy child 
who presents with a sudden onset of unexplained symptoms (seizures, 
mental status changes, vomiting, hematemesis) or a gradual onset of 
symptoms preceded by a period of confusion or delirium. Medications 
and toxins within the house as well as recent medication changes should 
be reviewed. A correct diagnosis is usually established by integrating 
information from the history, physical examination, and ancillary tests 
and then identifying a toxidrome, a symptom complex associated with 
a given class of ingested drug. The most important aspects of the phys­
ical examination to identify a toxidrome are the level of consciousness, 
the pupillary examination, and the vital signs.
Level of Consciousness
Table 41.21 lists common agents responsible for different changes in 
mental status. Toxic exposures may also occur via routes other than 
the oral route; organophosphates may be absorbed through the skin, 
whereas other compounds, such as carbon monoxide, are inhaled.
Pupillary Examination
When the pupils are evaluated for size and reactivity, the presence of 
nystagmus should also be noted (Table 41.22). Most drugs cause hor­
izontal nystagmus; however, phenytoin may produce upbeat nystag­
mus, whereas phencyclidine (PCP) may cause rotary nystagmus.
Vital Signs
Although fever is typically indicative of infection or a metabolic distur­
bance, such as the hemorrhagic shock and encephalopathy syndrome, 
many toxic compounds may induce hyperthermia (Table 41.23). The 
most common causes of fever in intoxicated children include anticho­
linergic compounds, antihistamines, salicylates, and sympathomimetic 
agents. Less common causes of fever include agents producing the sero­
tonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignant syndromes. Hypothermia 
may also be a sign of drug exposure (Table 41.24). Sedative-­hypnotic 
agents, including ethanol, are common causes of hypothermia.
Bradycardia or tachycardia may result directly from the autonomic 
effect of a drug or may be a reflex response to a change in blood pressure. 
Intoxication with a β blocker, calcium channel blocker, α2-­adrenergic 
agonist (clonidine), or cholinergic agonist (organophosphate) charac­
teristically manifests with bradycardia with or without hypertension. In 
mild clonidine ingestions or in the early stage of clonidine intoxication, 
the patient may be hypertensive as a result of the partial α1-­agonist effect 
of the drug. Bradycardia may be a reflex response to the precipitation 
of hypertension by a vasoconstrictor agent, such as an ergotamine, or 
an α-­adrenergic agonist, such as phenylpropanolamine. A β-­adrenergic 
agonist or anticholinergic agent intoxication usually manifests with 
tachycardia as part of the symptom complex. Intoxication with drugs 
TABLE 41.21  Changes in Level of Consciousness Observed with Specific Drug Intoxications
Coma
Agitation
Confusions and/or 
Hallucinations
Seizures
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Cholinergic agents
Sedative-­hypnotics
Alcohols
Opiates
Neuroleptics
Tricyclic antidepressants
Phencyclidine
Salicylates
Heavy metals
Hypoxia
Carbon monoxide
Cyanide
Sympathomimetics
Methylxanthines
Phencyclidine
Salicylates
Alcohol
Anticholinergics
Psychotropics
Lysergic acid diethylamide
Mescaline
Marijuana
Antihistamines
Cocaine
Amphetamines
Methylxanthines
Tricyclic antidepressants
Cholinergic agents
Neuroleptics
Salicylates
Camphor
Isoniazid
Phenytoin
Antihistamines
TABLE 41.22  Effect of Drugs on Pupillary 
Findings
Dilated
Constricted
Nystagmus
Sympathomimetics
Anticholinergics
Cocaine
Tricyclic antidepressants
Glutethimide
LSD
Opiates
Phenothiazines
Cholinergic agents
Benzodiazepines
PCP
Clonidine
Barbiturates
Alcohol
Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
PCP
Glutethimide
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; PCP, phenylcyclohexyl piperidine 
(phencyclidine HCl).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
762
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
that possess both α-­ and β-­adrenergic agonist properties may manifest 
with both tachycardia and hypertension, whereas several classes of com­
pounds may cause hypotension with a reflex tachycardia. Examples of 
the latter include direct vasodilators or α-­adrenergic blockers (hydral­
azine, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants) and compounds that 
cause third-­space fluid losses (acute iron intoxication). The anticho­
linergic properties of the phenothiazines and tricyclic antidepressants 
contribute to the tachycardia seen with these agents. Cholinergic com­
pounds, such as organophosphates and carbamates, may cause tachycar­
dia instead of bradycardia because acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter 
found at nicotinic receptors in the sympathetic chain ganglion.
Tachypnea or hyperpnea may result from a central effect of a drug 
(salicylates, methylxanthines) or from a metabolic acidosis (salicylates, 
alcohols, lactic acid) in addition to structural CNS lesions or cardiopul­
monary compromise. Slow or shallow breathing should always raise the 
suspicion of drug ingestion, particularly with CNS depressants, such as 
narcotics and sedative-­hypnotics. Hypoventilation may also be a present­
ing symptom of a clonidine overdose as a result of its opiate-­like effects. 
In addition, organophosphate or carbamate intoxications may manifest 
with hypoventilation secondary to weakness of the respiratory muscles.
Odors emanating from the breath or clothing may offer invalu­
able clues as to the diagnosis. Not only do certain metabolic diseases, 
such as diabetic ketoacidosis and hepatic failure, produce character­
istic breath odors but also so do a number of chemical compounds, 
including cyanide (bitter almonds); isopropyl alcohol, methanol, and 
salicylate (acetone); methyl salicylate (wintergreen); arsenic, thallium, 
and organophosphates (garlic); and turpentine (violets). Inspection of 
the skin and mucous membranes may also be helpful (Table 41.25).
Although a single sign or symptom may be attributable to many 
classes of drugs, combinations of symptoms (toxidrome) enable the 
clinician to narrow down the number of possible agents. Sympathomi­
metic agents, anticholinergics, and tricyclic antidepressants all cause 
mydriasis and tachycardia. If these symptoms occur in a patient with a 
prolonged QRS interval on an ECG, the most likely cause is a tricyclic 
compound, whereas if the former symptoms occur in a diaphoretic, 
tremulous patient, a sympathomimetic agent would be suspected. 
Table 41.26 outlines toxidromes of common classes of compounds 
ingested by children.
Management of most ingestions includes prevention of further 
absorption and supportive therapy. Activated charcoal is one method 
for decreasing absorption of stomach contents. Gastric decontamina­
tion should be withheld if a nontoxic substance is ingested, if a nontoxic 
quantity of a toxic compound is ingested, if absorption is likely to be 
complete, or if a caustic agent is ingested. Under these circumstances, 
gastric decontamination carries risks but no benefits. Induction of 
emesis is contraindicated in patients with a depressed mental status or 
who are at risk for a sudden deterioration of their mental status.
Very few specific antidotes exist for substances that are ingested. If an 
antidote exists, its use depends on the patient’s prognosis if it were not 
administered. Not all children require treatment with N-­acetylcysteine 
after acetaminophen poisoning. If the patient is asymptomatic and has a 
serum acetaminophen concentration in a nontoxic range when plotted 
on the Rumack-­Matthew nomogram, N-­acetylcysteine therapy is not 
indicated. Table 41.27 is a partial list of available antidotes. Although 
not a true antidote, sodium bicarbonate is included as an antidote for 
salicylate and tricyclic antidepressant ingestions because its use can 
reduce symptoms by reducing tissue distribution of these compounds.
Some drugs lend themselves to procedures aimed at enhancing 
drug elimination from the body. These procedures include changing 
urinary pH (alkalinization to enhance salicylate excretion), using mul­
tiple doses of charcoal (theophylline, phenobarbital, carbamazepine), 
and performing extracorporeal drug removal (peritoneal or hemodi­
alysis, charcoal hemoperfusion, exchange transfusion). Either patient-­
related or drug-­related criteria should be met before the institution of 
extracorporeal drug removal (Table 41.28). When the management 
approach is not known, a resource such as a poison control center or a 
clinical pharmacologist should be consulted.
METABOLIC ENCEPHALOPATHIES
Metabolic derangements cause AMS through global cerebral dys­
function in the absence of primary brain disease, either structural 
or nonstructural. These disorders are important to quickly recognize 
as many are reversible if treated early but may lead to permanent 
effects or death if treatment is delayed. Derangement of this neuronal 
TABLE 41.23  Compounds and Conditions 
Inducing Hyperthermia
Muscular Hyperactivity or Rigidity
Agents producing serotonin syndrome
Agents producing neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Amoxapine
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Ethanol or sedative-­hypnotic withdrawal
Lithium
LSD
MAO inhibitors
Phencyclidine
Tricyclic antidepressants
Increased Metabolic Rate
Dinitrophenol
Pentachlorophenol
Salicylates
Thyroid hormone
Impaired Heat Dissipation or Thermoregulation
Anticholinergic agents
Antihistamines
Antipsychotic agents
Tricyclic antidepressants
Other/Unknown Mechanisms
Metal fume fever
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MAO, monoamine oxidase.
Modified from Olson KR, Pentel PR, Kelley MT. Physical assessment 
and differential diagnosis of the poisoned patient. Med Toxicol. 
1987;2:40. Permission granted by AIDS International, Inc.
TABLE 41.24  Compounds and Conditions 
Inducing Hypothermia
Ethanol
Sedative-­hypnotic agents (e.g., barbiturates, benzodiazepines)
Hypoglycemia
Isopropyl alcohol
Opiates
Phenothiazines
Tricyclic antidepressants
Adapted from Olson KR, Pentel PR, Kelley MT. Physical assessment 
and differential diagnosis of the poisoned patient. Med Toxicol. 
1987;2:41. Permission granted by AIDS International, Inc.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
763
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
homeostasis results in neuronal dysfunction, which first affects com­
plex brain functions such as consciousness. If untreated, progression of 
neuroinflammation through cytokine release can lead to neuronal cell 
death, prompting further inflammation and compromise to the blood-­
brain barrier leading to brain edema, herniation, and death. Metabolic 
encephalopathy is often characterized by lack of focal neurologic defi­
cits and preserved pupillary reactions (Table 41.29).
Hypoxia causes AMS in the immediate short term as well as caus­
ing hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) if a hypoxic insult is not 
immediately reversed. Treatment of hypoxia should happen immedi­
ately during the initial stabilization of the patient to prevent further 
injury. The hypoxic insult is often obvious from the prior history. Peri­
natal insults are a common cause of neonatal HIE, while drowning and 
airway obstruction may precipitate HIE in older children. Other incit­
ing events include cardiopulmonary arrest, severe hypotension from 
any etiology, or severe disruption of hemoglobin’s oxygen-­carrying 
capacity such as in carbon monoxide poisoning.
Sepsis from any source can also cause an encephalopathy likely 
through multiple mechanisms including hypotension, hypoperfu­
sion, and direct effects of the immune response on the blood-­brain 
barrier and brain parenchyma. When sepsis causes encephalopathy 
in the absence of CNS infection or direct effects from other end-­
organ failure, the term sepsis-­associated encephalopathy (SAE) is 
used. SAE can range from delirium and agitation to lethargy and 
coma. EEG can be normal, but as level of consciousness decreases, 
theta waves appear followed by the delta waves, generalization of tri­
phasic waves, and burst-­suppression patterns. Treatment is geared 
toward treating the underlying infection and metabolic derange­
ments caused by sepsis.
TABLE 41.25  Skin Manifestations of 
Intoxication
Manifestation
Toxin/Condition
Bullous lesions
Barbiturates, carbon monoxide, sedative-­
hypnotics, opioids
Diaphoresis
Cholinergic agents (organophosphates), sympath­
omimetics, mercury, arsenic, salicylates
Dry skin (and mucous 
membranes)
Anticholinergics, antihistamines, narcotics
Diffuse erythema
Anticholinergics, carbon monoxide, cyanide, boric 
acid, mercury
Cyanosis
Hypoxia, methemoglobinemia, ergotamines
Needle tracks
Opiates, phencyclidine, amphetamine
Jaundice
Acetaminophen
TABLE 41.26  Toxidromes of Common Classes of Drugs
Drug Class
Level of Consciousness
Pupils
Vital Signs
Other
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, 
cocaine, ephedrine, methylphenidate 
[Ritalin])
Agitation; psychosis
Dilated
↑ HR; ↑ BP; ↑ T
Tremors, sweating, arrhythmias; seizures
Anticholinergics (antihistamines, 
scopolamine, atropine, jimson weed, 
nightshade, phenothiazines, tricyclics)
Confusion; hallucinations
Dilated
↑ HR; ↑ T; ±↑ BP
Flushed; dry skin and mucous mem­
branes; urinary retention; decreased 
bowel sounds
Opiates
Euphoria; coma
Pinpoint
↓ RR; ±↓ HR; ±↓ BP
Shallow respirations; dry mucous 
membranes
Cholinergic syndrome (organophosphates; 
carbamates, bethanechol, Amanita 
mushrooms)
Coma
Miosis
↓ or ↑ HR; ↓ or ↑ BP
Salivation, lacrimation, urination, defe­
cation, bronchorrhea; muscle twitching 
before flaccidity; seizures
Sedative-­hypnotics (alcohol, barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines)
Coma
± Miosis
↓ RR (shallow); hypo­
thermia; ↓ BP
Ataxia; nystagmus; slurred speech
Neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophe­
nones)
Coma
Miosis (except 
thioridazine 
[Mellaril])
↑ HR; ↓ BP; ↓ or ↑ T
Dystonic reactions; ataxia; neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome; prolonged Q-­T 
interval
Tricyclic antidepressants
Confusion; agitation; coma
Dilated
↑ HR; ↓ or ↓ BP; ↑ T; 
↓ RR
Quinidine-­like effect: prolonged QRS or 
Q-­T interval and ventricular arrhyth­
mias; seizures; anticholinergic effects 
(see above)
Salicylates
Disorientation; hyperexcitability; 
coma (severe)
—
↑ T; ↓ or ↑ RR + depth
Vomiting; tinnitus; metabolic acidosis; 
hypokalemia
Carbon monoxide
Lethargy; coma
—
—
Headache, nausea, flulike syndrome, 
dizziness, blurred vision
Theophylline
Agitation
—
↑ HR; ↓ BP; ±↑ RR; ± ↑ T
Protracted vomiting; tremors, seizures, 
arrhythmias
Phencyclidine
Delirium; combativeness; catato­
nia; coma
Miosis
—
Rotary nystagmus; seizures
SSRIs
Drowsiness; agitation; delirium; 
coma
Dilated or unre­
active
↑ HR; ↑ T; ↓ BP
Nausea, vomiting, tremor, rigidity, myo­
clonus, hyperreflexia, diaphoresis
BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate; RR, respiratory rate; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; T, temperature.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
764
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Hypoglycemia is a common cause of metabolic encephalopathy in 
children; evaluation and treatment should happen concurrently with 
rapid stabilization and assessment of the child presenting with AMS. 
Children with AMS secondary to hypoglycemia may present with con­
fusion, delirium, or coma. Occasionally, focal neurologic deficits may 
be present that resolve with treatment of the hypoglycemia. The most 
common cause of hypoglycemia is ketotic hypoglycemia in the setting 
of ill or fasting infants and young children with decreased oral intake 
and glycogen stores (see Chapter 57).
Electrolyte derangements of various kinds can present with AMS 
and include both elevated and decreased serum levels of sodium, cal­
cium, and magnesium (see Chapter 59).
A variety of endocrinopathies can also present with AMS. The 
most common of these is diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), which occurs 
in children with underlying diabetes mellitus (DM), most commonly 
type 1, but occasionally in type 2. Symptoms include nausea, vom­
iting, abdominal pain, Kussmaul breathing, and decreased level of 
consciousness. Even without a history of DM, a child’s initial presen­
tation of DM may be in DKA, which also increases the risk of cerebral 
edema, an uncommon but dangerous complication of DKA. Children 
with DM type 2 may present with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state 
(HHS) indicated by severe hyperglycemia without ketoacidosis. The 
hyperosmolarity of HHS leads to a decreased level of consciousness 
and coma and carries a higher risk of mortality than DKA. Other rare 
endocrine disorders that present with AMS include myxedema coma 
in the setting of severe hypothyroidism. Clinical signs include hypo­
thermia, bradycardia, hypoventilation, and hypoxia, and it is often trig­
gered by infection, burns, or medications in untreated or undertreated 
hypothyroidism. Thyroid storm or severe hyperthyroidism can lead 
to agitation, irritability, psychosis, seizures, and, in rare cases, coma. 
Other symptoms consistent with hyperthyroidism are usually present 
and include tremor, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, and car­
diac arrhythmias. Adrenal crisis can also lead to confusion, behavioral 
changes, psychosis, and decreased level of consciousness progressing 
to coma. Associated systemic signs include hypotension, nausea, vom­
iting, abdominal pain, fever, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. Adre­
nal crisis is often triggered by stress-­including dehydration, trauma, 
surgery, infection, or sudden cessation of exogenous steroid treatment 
in the setting of Addison disease, congenital adrenal hypoplasia, or 
chronic exogenous steroid use.
End-­organ failure, particularly of the liver or kidneys, can also 
lead to AMS and decreased level of consciousness. Hepatic enceph­
alopathy occurs in the setting of both acute and chronic hepatic fail­
ure (see Chapter 18). In the setting of chronic liver failure, hepatic 
encephalopathy can be triggered by infection, excessive protein intake, 
TABLE 41.28  Indications for Extracorporeal 
Drug Removal*
Patient Related
Severe intoxication refractory to medical management (e.g., refractory 
seizures)
Impairment of normal excretion routes that may lead to prolonged intoxication
Drug Related
Ingestion and probable absorption of a potentially lethal dose determined 
after gut decontamination
Documentation of a potentially lethal drug level
Presence of a significant quantity of a compound that is metabolized to a 
toxic metabolite (e.g., methanol)
*Patient-­ and drug-­related criteria for extracorporeal drug removal. Only 
one criterion needs to be met.
TABLE 41.29  Characteristics of Metabolic 
Encephalopathy
Confusion, lethargy, delirium often precede or replace coma
Motor signs, if present, usually symmetric
Bilateral asterixis, myoclonus appear
Pupillary reactions usually preserved; tonic caloric reflex often present
Sensory abnormalities usually absent; hypothermia common
Abnormal signs reflect incomplete brain dysfunction at multiple anatomic levels
From Plum F. Neurology/sustained impairments of consciousness. In: 
Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennet JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medi­
cine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:2052.
TABLE 41.27  Specific Toxins and Their Antidotes
Toxin
Antidote
Acetaminophen
N-­Acetylcysteine
Anticholinergics
Physostigmine
Arsenic
Dimercaprol
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil
β Blockers
Glucagon*
Calcium channel blockers†
Calcium
Carbamate insecticides
Atropine
Carbon monoxide
Oxygen
Cyanide
Amyl nitrite or sodium nitrate plus 
sodium thiosulfate
Digitalis
Digoxin-­specific antibody fragments
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol or fomepizole
Heparin
Protamine
Toxin
Antidote
Iron
Deferoxamine
Lead
EDTA; dimercaprol; dimercaptosuc­
cinic acid; penicillamine
Mercury
Dimercaprol
Methanol
Ethanol or fomepizole
Opiates
Naloxone
Nitrites
Methylene blue
Organophosphates
Atropine; pralidoxime
Phenothiazines‡
Diphenhydramine or benztropine
Salicylates
Sodium bicarbonate
Tricyclic antidepressants
Sodium bicarbonate
Warfarin
Vitamin K
*May reverse cardiac toxicity.
†Usually requires saline infusion as well for bradyarrhythmias or conduction abnormalities.
‡Dystonic reactions only.
EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
765
CHAPTER 41  Altered Mental Status
gastrointestinal bleeding, or nonadherence to medications. Initial signs 
include sleep disturbance, confusion, and asterixis, which can prog­
ress to lethargy, seizures, coma, and posturing. Hepatic encephalopa­
thy in acute liver failure is a poor prognostic sign without transplant. 
Advanced kidney failure, whether acute or chronic, can lead to uremic 
encephalopathy, which presents with lethargy, confusion, hallucina­
tions, and occasionally coma. Other symptoms include tremor, myoclo­
nus, asterixis, seizures, and tetany. Treatment with hemodialysis usually 
resolves symptoms. Encephalopathy that occurs during or immediately 
after dialysis may represent dialysis disequilibrium syndrome and is 
thought to be related to rapid removal of urea leading to cerebral edema.
Hypertensive encephalopathy occurs in the setting of severe hyper­
tension and causes headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, and AMS, 
which improve with treatment of the hypertension. Hypertension may 
also be associated with reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy 
syndrome (RPLS) (also known as posterior reversible encephalopa­
thy syndrome [PRES] or hypertensive encephalopathy), which is also 
an acute encephalopathy characterized by cortical and white matter 
changes on T2 and FLAIR MRI that usually improves with treatment of 
hypertension. Predisposing factors include renal disease, uremia, and 
preeclampsia/eclampsia. Other causes of RPLS have been described 
including autoimmune disorders, chemotherapy, immunosuppressive 
therapy, and infection.
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Inborn errors of metabolism are complex and encompass many condi­
tions. Table 41.30 provides a partial list of inborn errors of metabolism 
that may manifest in the neonate with deterioration in consciousness, 
seizures, hypotonia, and/or apnea. Many of these conditions relate to 
defective enzymes that lead to accumulation of a toxic product. New­
born screening has increased the number of infants diagnosed and 
effectively treated during the asymptomatic phase of a disease. The 
clinical manifestations of metabolic disease in the neonate can be non­
specific (Table 41.31). The infants are often thought to have sepsis and 
are evaluated and treated for presumptive infection. The presence of 
a documented infection does not preclude metabolic disease because 
some of these infants are prone to infection (e.g., galactosemia and 
Escherichia coli sepsis). A family history of a previous infant dying from 
an unexplained illness or other children in the family with neurologic 
disorders may provide clues to a metabolic cause. Laboratory abnor­
malities that may be seen in metabolic disease are listed in Table 41.32.
Infants with urea cycle defects often manifest AMS, coma (recur­
rent), and emesis. They cannot metabolize waste nitrogen to urea; this 
leads to accumulation of ammonia in the blood. These disorders are 
inherited as autosomal recessive traits, except for ornithine transcar­
bamylase deficiency, which is X-­linked. The keys to the diagnosis of 
inborn errors of metabolism in the neonate are a high degree of sus­
picion, the appropriate screening studies (see Table 41.32), and, if the 
results are positive, a more detailed laboratory evaluation under the 
guidance of a specialist in metabolic diseases (Table 41.33).
Metabolic encephalopathy resulting from inborn errors of metab­
olism may also manifest in older children or adolescents. The onset 
of symptoms may be triggered by changes in dietary intake, fasting, 
dehydration, illness, medications, childbirth, trauma, or surgery. 
TABLE 41.30  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Neurologic and Laboratory 
Manifestations in Neonates
DETERIORATION IN CONSCIOUSNESS
Metabolic Acidosis
Organic acidemias
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphatase deficiency
Glycogen storage diseases
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Disorders of ketone metabolism
Hypoglycemia 
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Disorders of gluconeogenesis
Disorders of fructose and galactose metabolism
Glycogen storage diseases
Disorders of ketogenesis
Organic acidemias
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemias
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency
Hyperammonemia 
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
GLUD1-­related hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency
SEIZURES AND HYPOTONIA
Antiquitin deficiency (pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy)
Pyridoxamine 5’-­phosphate oxidase (PNPO) deficiency (pyridoxal phosphate-­
responsive epilepsy)
Folate metabolism disorders
Multiple carboxylase deficiency (holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency and 
biotinidase deficiency)
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
Disorders of creatine biosynthesis and transport
Disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency and sulfite oxidase deficiency
Serine deficiency disorders
Glycine encephalopathy
Asparagine synthetase deficiency
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Zellweger spectrum disorders
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Purine and pyrimidine metabolism defects
NEONATAL APNEA
Glycine encephalopathy
Asparagine synthetase deficiency
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:690, Table 102.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
766
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Additionally, less severe forms of disorders that classically present in 
infancy such as urea cycle disorders or organic acidemias may also 
present in older children with episodes of vomiting, lethargy, seizures, 
or psychomotor abnormalities. Recurrent hypoglycemia, frequent 
hospitalizations for dehydration, metabolic decompensation out of 
proportion to the severity of acute illness, recurrent vomiting, devel­
opmental delay, poor growth or failure to thrive, cramping after exer­
cise, and protein or carbohydrate (fructose) aversions may all signal 
concern for inborn errors of metabolism. Like in infants, work-­up is 
influenced by the presenting signs and symptoms and often requires 
consultation with a specialist in inborn errors of metabolism.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
AMS is a common symptom related to a wide variety of underlying 
pathologies and particularly when associated with a decreased level 
of consciousness indicates a serious manifestation of potentially life-­
threatening but at times reversible disorders. Initial diagnosis and 
management are focused on stabilization, rapid clinical assessment, 
and treatment of immediately reversible causes such as hypoglyce­
mia. Red flags indicating structural causes include signs of increased 
intracranial pressure, focal neurologic deficits, and signs of brainstem 
dysfunction. Red flags indicating life-­threatening toxic-­metabolic 
causes include signs of intracranial infections, sepsis, and hemody­
namic instability. Common causes vary by age, but toxic ingestion, 
trauma, seizures, infections, and metabolic disturbances, including 
inborn errors of metabolism, must be considered. Finding one etiology 
of AMS does not preclude other contributing comorbid conditions as 
many initial causes of AMS may progress to others. For example, severe 
head trauma may lead to seizures and dysregulation of sodium and 
increase the risk for subsequent infection. The location and etiology of 
AMS may have characteristic patterns or manifestations (Table 41.34).
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 41.31  Clinical Manifestations of 
Inborn Errors of Metabolism in the Neonatal 
Period
Lethargy
Coma
Seizures
Increased or decreased muscle tone
Poor suck and feeding
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Apnea
Tachypnea and/or hyperpnea
Respiratory failure
Jaundice
Unusual odors
Cardiomegaly
Hepatomegaly
TABLE 41.32  Laboratory Evidence of 
Metabolic Disease
Acidosis,* alkalosis
Hypoglycemia
Hyperammonemia
Elevated lactate levels
Elevated liver enzyme levels
Direct hyperbilirubinemia
Urine-­reducing substance
Urine ketones present in excess or absent when expected to be present
*High anion gap if increased organic acids (ketoacids, lactic acid) are 
produced. Normal anion gap if associated renal tubular acidosis (type I 
glycogen storage disease, galactosemia) is present.
TABLE 41.33  Laboratory Evaluation of 
Suspected Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Plasma ammonia
Arterial blood gas
Plasma amino acids
Plasma carnitine
Plasma pyruvate and lactate
Urinary amino acids
Urinary organic acids and acylcarnitine profile
TABLE 41.34  Characteristics and 
Categories of Coma
Supratentorial Mass Lesion Affecting Diencephalon/
Brainstem
 • Initial focal cerebral dysfunction
 • Dysfunction progresses rostral to caudal
 • Signs reflect dysfunction at one level
 • Signs often asymmetric
Subtentorial Structural Lesion
 • Symptoms of brainstem dysfunction or sudden-­onset coma
 • Brainstem signs precede or accompany the coma
 • Cranial nerve and oculovestibular dysfunction
 • Early onset of abnormal respiratory patterns
Metabolic-­Toxic Coma
 • Confusion or stupor precede motor signs
 • Motor signs usually symmetric
 • Pupil responses generally preserved
 • Myoclonus, asterixis, tremulousness, and generalized seizures common
 • Acid-­base imbalance common, with compensatory ventilatory changes
Psychogenic Coma
 • Eyelids squeezed shut
 • Pupils reactive or dilated, unreactive (cycloplegics)
 • Oculocephalic reflex unpredictable, nystagmus on caloric tests
 • Motor tone normal or inconsistent
 • No pathologic reflexes
 • Awake-­pattern EEG
From Vincent JL, Abraham E, Moore FA, et al., eds. Textbook of Criti­
cal Care. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:241, Box 48-­3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
766.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Coma Scales
Akavipat P. Endorsement of the FOUR score for consciousness assessment in 
neurosurgical patients. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2009;49:565–571.
Borgialli D, Mahajan P, Hoyle J, et al. Performance of the pediatric Glasgow 
Coma Scale score in the evaluation of children with blunt head injury. 
Acad Emerg Med. 2016;23(8):878–884.
Durham SR, Clancy RR, Leuthardt E, et al. CHOP Infant Coma Scale (“Infant 
Face Scale”): a novel coma scale for children less than two years of age. J 
Neurotrauma. 2000;17:729–737.
Fenichel GM. Altered states of consciousness. In: Fenichel GM, ed. Clinical 
Pediatric Neurology: A Signs and Symptoms Approach. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 2001:47.
Kevric J, Jelinek GA, Knott J, et al. Validation of the Full Outline of Unrespon­
siveness (FOUR) Scale for conscious state in the emergency department: 
comparison against the Glasgow Coma Scale. Emerg Med J. 2011;28:486–
490.
Kochar GS, Gulat S, Lodha R, et al. Full Outline of Unresponsiveness score 
versus Glasgow Coma Scale in children with nontraumatic impairment of 
consciousness. J Child Neurol. 2014;29:1299–1304.
Lieh-­Lai MW, Theodorou AA, Sarnaik AP, et al. Limitations of the Glasgow 
Coma Scale in predicting outcome in children with traumatic brain injury. 
J Pediatr. 1992;120:195.
Simpson D, Reilly P. Pediatric coma scale. Lancet. 1982;2:450.
Stead LG, Wijdicks EF, Bhagra A, et al. Validation of a new coma scale, the 
FOUR score, in the emergency department. Neurocrit Care. 2009;10:50–54.
Tatman A, Warren A, Williams A, et al. Development of a modified paediatric 
coma scale in intensive care clinical practice. Arch Dis Child. 1997;77:519–
521.
Wang MY, Griffith P, Sterling J, et al. A prospective population-­based study of 
pediatric trauma patients with mild alterations in consciousness (Glasgow 
Coma Scale score of 13-­14). Neurosurgery. 2000;46:1093–1099.
Wijdicks E, Bamlet WR, Maramattom BV, et al. Validation of a new coma 
scale: the FOUR score. Ann Neurol. 2005;58:585–593.
Diagnosis and Management of Altered Level of Consciousness and 
Coma
Allen C, Kriss Burger R. Psychiatric and behavioral causes of altered mental 
status. Pediatr Ann. 2019;48(5):201–204.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders. 5th ed. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013.
Avner J. Altered states of consciousness. Pediatr Rev. 2006;27(9):331–338.
Button K, Capraro A, Monuteaux M, et al. Etiologies and yield of diagnostic 
testing in children presenting to the emergency department with altered 
mental status. J Pediatr. 2018;200:218–224.
Dalmau J, Lancaster E, Martinez-­Hernandez E, et al. Clinical experience and 
laboratory investigations in patients with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis. Lan­
cet Neurol. 2011;10:63–74.
Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, et al. Diagnosis of reversible causes of coma. 
Lancet. 2014;384:2064–2076.
Elmonem MA, Belanger-­Quintana A, et al. The impact of COVID-­19 pan­
demic on the diagnosis and management of inborn errors of metabolism: a 
global perspective. Mol Genet Metab. 2020;7:241–244.
Kirkham FJ. Non-­traumatic coma in children. Arch Dis Child. 2001;85:303–
312.
Liao YJ, So YT. An approach to critically ill patients in coma. West J Med. 
2002;176:184–187.
Malas N, Brahmbhatt K, McDermott C, et al. Pediatric delirium: evaluation, 
management, and special considerations. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2017;19:65.
Ness JN. Neuromyelitis optica and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. In: 
Kliegman R, Stanton BS, St. Geme J, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediat­
rics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2922–2925.
Schunk J. Pediatric head injury. Pediatr Rev. 2012;33(9):398–411.
Wong CP, Forsyth RJ, Kelly TP, et al. Incidence, etiology, and outcome of non-­
traumatic coma: a population based study. Arch Dis Child. 2001;84:193–199.
Prognosis
Cheliout-­Heraut F, Rubinsztajn R, Ioos C, et al. Prognostic value of evoked po­
tentials and sleep recordings in the prolonged comatose state of children. 
Preliminary data. Neurophysiol Clin. 2001;31:283–292.
Christophe C, Fonteyne C, Ziereisen F, et al. Value of MR imaging of the brain 
in children with hypoxic coma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2002;23:716–723.
Forsyth RJ, Wong CP, Kelly TP, et al. Cognitive and adaptive outcomes and 
age at insult effects after non-­traumatic coma. Arch Dis Child. 2001;84:200–
204.
Mandel R, Martinot A, Delepoulle F, et al. Prediction of outcome after 
hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy: a prospective clinical and electrophysi­
ologic study. J Pediatr. 2002;141:45–50.
Robinson LR, Micklesen PJ, Tirschwell DL, et al. Predictive value of somato­
sensory evoked potentials for awakening from coma. Crit Care Med. 
2003;31:960–967.
Wohlrab G, Boltshauser E, Schmitt B. Neurological outcome in comatose 
children with bilateral loss of cortical somatosensory evoked potentials. 
Neuropediatrics. 2001;32:271–274.
Toxicology
Abbruzzi G, Stork CM. Pediatric toxicologic concerns. Emerg Med Clin North 
Am. 2002;20:223–247.
Bond GR, Woodward RW, Ho M. The growing impact of pediatric pharma­
ceutical poisoning. J Pediatr. 2012;160:265–270.
Bryant S, Singer J. Management of toxic exposure in children. Emerg Med Clin 
North Am. 2003;21:101–119.
Hoffman RJ, Nelson L. Rational use of toxicology testing in children. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 2001;13:183–188.
Jones A. Recent advances in the management of poisoning. Ther Drug Monit. 
2002;24:150–155.
Liebelt EL, DeAngelis CD. Evolving trends and treatment advances in pediatric 
poisoning. J Am Med Assoc. 1999;282:1113–1115.
McGuigan ME. Poisoning potpourri. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22:295–302.
Mokhlesi B, Leiken JB, Murray P, et al. Adult toxicology in critical care: part I: 
general approach to the intoxicated patient. Chest. 2003;123:577–592.
Powers KS. Diagnosis and management of common toxic ingestions and inha­
lations. Pediatr Ann. 2000;29:330–342.
Trauma
American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect: 
shaken baby syndrome: rotational cranial injuries—technical report. Pedi­
atrics. 2001;108:206–210.
Duhaime AC, Christian CW, Rorke LB, et al. Nonaccidental head injury in 
infants—the “shaken-­baby syndrome.” N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1822–1829.
Gedeit R. Head injury. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22:118–124.
Hackbarth RM, Rzeszutko KM, Sturm G, et al. Survival and functional 
outcome in pediatric traumatic brain injury: a retrospective review and 
analysis of predictive factors. Crit Care Med. 2002;30:1630–1635.
Morrissey K, Fairbrother H. Severe traumatic brain injury in children: an 
evidence-­based review of emergency department management. Pediatr 
Emerg Med Pract. 2016;13(10):1–22.
Narang S, Clarke J. Abusive head trauma: past, present and future. J Child 
Neurol. 2014;29:1747–1756.
Ng SM, Toh EM, Sherrington CA. Clinical predictors of abnormal comput­
ed tomography scans in paediatric head injury. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2002;38:388–392.
Prasad MR, Ewing-­Cobbs L, Swank PR, et al. Predictors of outcome following 
traumatic brain injury in young children. Pediatr Neurosurg. 2002;36:64–74.
Society for Pediatric Radiology. Consensus statement on abusive head trauma 
in infants and young children. Pediatri Radiol. 2018;48(8):1048–1065.
White JR, Farukhi Z, Bull C, et al. Predictors of outcome in severely head-­
injured children. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:534–540.
Primary Brain Disease
Armangue T, Petit-­Pedrol B, Dalmau J. Autoimmune encephalitis in children. 
J Child Neurol. 2012;27(11):1460–1469.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
766.e2
Bibliography
Benseler SM, Silverman E, Aviv RI, et al. Primary central nervous system 
vasculitis in children. Arthritis Rheum. 2006;54:1291–1297.
Brenton J, Goodkin H. Antibody mediated autoimmune encephalitis in child­
hood. Pediatr Neurology. 2016;60:13–23.
Chávez-­Bueno S, McCracken Jr GH. Bacterial meningitis in children. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 2005;52:795–810.
Curtis S, Stobart K, Vandermeer B, et al. Clinical features suggestive of 
meningitis in children: a systematic review of prospective data. Pediatrics. 
2010;126:952–960.
Dalmau J, Graus F. Antibody-­mediated encephalitis. N Engl J Med. 
2018;378:840–851.
deVeber G, Andrew M, Bjornson B, et al. Cerebral sinovenous thrombosis in 
children. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(6):417–423.
Dubey D, Pittock S, Kelly C, et al. Autoimmune encephalitis epidemiology and 
a comparison to infectious encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2018;83(1):166–177.
Han M, Zunt J. Neurologic aspects of infections in international travelers. 
Neurol. 2005;11(1):30–44.
Kim J. Introduction to cerebral cavernous malformation: a brief review. BMB 
Rep. 2016;49:255–262.
Kirkpatrick M, Engleman H, Minns RA. Symptoms and signs of progressive 
hydrocephalus. Arch Dis Child. 1989;64:124–128.
Krupp L, Tardieu M, Amato M, et al. International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis 
Study Group criteria for pediatric multiple sclerosis and immune-­mediated 
central nervous system demyelinating disorders: revisions to the 2007 
definitions. Mult Scler. 2013;19(10):1261–1267.
Lancon J, Killough K, Tibbs R, et al. Spontaneous dural sinus thrombosis in 
children. Pediatr Neurosurg. 1999;30(1):23–29.
Lehman RK, Mink J. Altered mental status. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med. 
2008;9:68–75.
Linabery A, Ross J. Trends in childhood cancer incidence in the US (1992-­
2004). Cancer. 2008;112(2):416–432.
Martin NG, Iro MA, Sadarangani M, et al. Hospital admissions for viral 
meningitis in children in England over five decades: a population-­based 
observational study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16:1279–1287.
Matricardi S, Farello G, Savasta S, et al. Understanding childhood neuroim­
mune diseases of the central nervous system. Front Pediatr. 2019;7:511.
Mooney MA, Zabramski JM. Developmental venous anomalies. Handb Clin 
Neurol. 2017;143:279–282.
Pradilla G, Ardila GP, Hsu W, et al. Epidural abscesses of the CNS. Lancet 
Neurol. 2009;8:292–300.
Metabolic Encephalopathies
Bhattacharyya S, Darby RR, Raibagkar P, et al. Antibiotic-­associated encepha­
lopathy. Neurology. 2016;86:963–971.
Espay AJ. Neurologic complications of electrolyte disturbances and acid-­base 
balance. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;119:365–382.
Glass H. Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy and other neonatal encephalopa­
thies. Continuum Child Neuro. 2018;24:57–71.
Gofton TE, Young GB. Sepsis-­associated encephalopathy. Nat Rev Neurol. 
2012;8:557–566.
Gross BA, Jankowitz BT, Friedlander RM. Cerebral intraparenchymal hemor­
rhage: a review. J Am Med Assoc. 2019;321(13):1295–1303.
Hamed SA. Neurologic conditions and disorders of uremic syndrome of 
chronic kidney disease: presentations, causes, and treatment strategies. 
Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2019;12(1):61–90.
Molnar L, Fulesdi B, Nemeth N, et al. Sepsis-­associated encephalopathy: a 
review of literature. Neurol India. 2018;66(2):352–361.
Shabab T, Khanabdali R, Moghadamtousi SZ, et al. Neuroinflammation path­
ways: a general review. Int J Neurosci. 2017;127(7):624–633.
Umpierrez G, Korytkowski M. Diabetic emergencies—ketoacidosis, hyper­
glycaemic hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 
2016;12(4):222–232.
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Burton BK. Inborn errors of metabolism in infancy: a guide to diagnosis. 
Pediatrics. 1998;102:E69.
Ellaway CJ, Wilcken B, Christodoulou J. Clinical approach to inborn errors 
of metabolism presenting in the newborn period. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2002;38:511–517.
Vernon HJ. Inborn errors of metabolism advances in diagnosis and therapy. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169:778–782.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
