533
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurobiologic disorder with 
onset in early childhood; it is characterized by impaired social com­
munication and interaction accompanied by restricted and repetitive 
behaviors.
With definitions that vary dependent on agencies, schools, and 
clinicians, there is often confusion surrounding the diagnosis of ASD. 
This is the term used for all children who were, in previous editions 
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 
divided into autism, Asperger syndrome, and pervasive developmen­
tal disorder not otherwise specified. The reliability and validity of the 
separation of these diagnoses were shown to be directly correlated 
to the diagnosing facility and not a distinct set of diagnostic criteria 
or biomarkers, and, therefore, the diagnoses were collated under the 
umbrella of autism spectrum disorder (DSM-­5).
Several criteria must be met to enable the diagnosis of ASD beyond 
difficulties in socialization (Tables 32.1 and 32.2). It should be noted 
that although these features must be present early in the developmental 
period, there is no age cutoff for making a diagnosis.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The diagnostic criteria in the DSM-­5 focus on symptoms in two pri­
mary domains. A thorough history of previous behaviors that meet 
criteria is sufficient for being present early in development. As with 
all symptoms in the DSM-­5, these behaviors must cause significant 
impairment to be a disorder. Finally, the symptoms cannot be better 
explained by intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disor­
der) or global developmental delay (see Table 32.1E) or other disorders 
(Table 32.3).
There are several modifiers and levels that help clinicians better 
communicate about the abilities and deficits of an individual with ASD. 
The modifiers include those for accompanying intellectual impair­
ment, accompanying language impairment, if the diagnosis is associ­
ated with a known medical or genetic condition, and if it is associated 
with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder. 
There is also a modifier if catatonia is present. The level system adds a 
way to indicate how much support an individual needs, from level 1, 
where minimal support is required and an untrained observer may not 
quickly notice they have ASD, to level 3, where very substantial support 
is required due to their symptoms (Table 32.4). Common clinical fea­
tures are noted in Table 32.5.
MEDICAL WORK-­UP
A thorough physical examination can help to guide next steps. Chil­
dren with ASD frequently react adversely to the focused attention of an 
examination, and, as a result, indirect techniques such as observation 
and examination by an experienced clinician are required. A dysmor­
phology evaluation (see Chapter 29) can aid with identifying comorbid 
syndromes and guide genetic testing. Facial asymmetry, multiple hair 
whorls, and prominent forehead have been described as occurring 
more often in patients with autism. There are reports of rapid head 
growth in the 1st year of life in some individuals. Specific organ sys­
tem malformations in individuals with ASD behaviors should raise the 
suspicion of a congenital malformation syndrome associated with 
autistic-­like behavior (Table 32.6).
During the initial physical work-­up, it is important to rule out other 
major medical concerns that can mimic autism (see Table 32.3). A for­
mal hearing screen is essential; relying on newborn hearing screening 
or screening undertaken at school is not sufficient when considering 
autism. Due to the child’s difficulty in participating in the test, it is 
important to test in a manner that does not involve child response, 
even if they are older. If a vision screening has not been performed 
adequately, this should also be included. A Woods lamp examination 
of the skin should be conducted to rule out neurocutaneous disorders 
such as tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Screening and Diagnosis for Autism Spectrum Disorder
All children should be screened for autism at the 18-­ and 24-­month 
well-­child visits. There are screening checklists that parents can com­
plete prior to the visit, which are then reviewed by the physician. The 
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised (M-­CHAT-­R) 
(https://m-­chat.org/en-­us/page/take-­m-­chat-­test/online) is one of the 
most widely used at ages 18–30 months. It is free, electronic for easy 
scoring, and available in many languages. The Social Communication 
Questionnaire is available for children ages 4 years and older with a 
mental age above 2 years and contains 40 yes-­or-­no questions for par­
ents with a simple cutoff score. These and other screening tools are not 
diagnostic but are meant to screen for parental concerns that could 
lead to a work-­up for ASD.
Autism spectrum disorder is a clinical diagnosis that can be made 
by qualified clinicians familiar with the diagnostic criteria, nuances 
of diagnosis, and experience in the field. However, there is an import­
ant role for neuropsychologic testing in unclear cases and this is often 
required for the child to obtain services. The gold standard test is the 
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), which is avail­
able for individuals 12 months of age through adulthood and requires 
about an hour to administer. The person administering the exam must 
have special training and certification in the ADOS. The test has good 
specificity and sensitivity in laboratory settings but has been met with 
some criticism in community settings. The Autism Diagnostic Inven­
tory–Revised (ADI-­R) can be used with those children who have a 
mental age of 2 years and older, requires a few hours, and is given by 
a trained administrator to the caregiver. Its biggest limitation is that 
it does not include any observation or interaction with the child. The 
Childhood Autism Rating Scale–2 (CARS-­2) is a 10-­minute observa­
tion tool used by trained neuropsychologists and psychologic testers 
to observe the child and uses an unscored parent questionnaire.
Autistic-­like Behaviors
Kathleen A. Koth
32
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
534
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
A neuropsychologic examination of a child with developmen­
tal delays or suspected ASD should go beyond testing for autism to 
determine the child’s cognition and adaptive functioning, which is of 
utmost importance in determining what types of support they need. 
If the patient is able to participate, intelligence testing is available for 
verbal and nonverbal children and adults of all ages. This helps screen 
for intellectual disability but also examines what areas of intelli­
gence are strengths and weaknesses for the child and will be used 
as building blocks for targeted interventions. Adaptive functioning 
testing, such as the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, can help to 
identify how the child is functioning overall, which may be the most 
helpful part of the diagnosis to use in intervention. Often individuals 
with autism are not functioning where expected for chronological or 
even cognitive age. Very intelligent individuals with ASD can strug­
gle with toilet training, food preparation, and other activities of daily 
living. Neuropsychologic assessment is also useful in planning school 
and home interventions.
Common Mimics and Co-­occurring Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders
There are many cognitive and communication difficulties that can 
appear to be ASD (see Table 32.3). These can also be co-­occurring with 
ASD and further complicate the overall picture (Table 32.7).
Communication disorders are difficult to recognize and require 
careful observation and standardized testing. Communication disor­
ders often do not become apparent until the expectations of the envi­
ronment exceed the individual’s abilities. For severe disorders this 
could be very early in life, whereas for a mild disorder it could be sev­
eral years into school when a problem is identified.
Receptive language disorder is a communication disorder where 
the process of receiving and comprehending language is abnormal. 
Expressive language disorder is difficulty with the production of 
vocal, gestural, and verbal signals. They do not have to be impaired 
together because these correlate with separate regions of the brain. 
Having either one, or both, presents significant challenges. These may 
present when children have difficulties in school that seem different 
from attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or learning 
disabilities.
In receptive language disorders, individuals have difficulty pro­
cessing verbal input. They may appear as though they have not been 
listening. In conversation, it is frequently interpreted that they do not 
understand what others were saying. When disciplined through ver­
bal command, they appear disobedient and repeat the behaviors. Yet 
when expressive language is preserved, they can converse, express 
themselves, and give others direction without apparent concern. This 
often causes difficulty in school and can have educators and parents 
blaming the child for not listening or paying attention. They can appear 
socially awkward or not able to fully participate in peer interactions 
when understanding is difficult.
When expressive language disorder is present, the individual has 
a difficult time expressing themselves but can understand completely 
what is being said to them. This can lead to frustration in the child 
who cannot express questions well to the teacher, cannot explain how 
they complete a task, or cannot give a presentation to the class. These 
TABLE 32.2  Associated Features of Autism 
Not in DSM-­5 Criteria
Atypical language development and abilities
Age <6 yr: frequently disordered and delayed in comprehension; two 
thirds have difficulty with expressive phonology and grammar
Age ≥6 yr: disordered pragmatics, semantics, and morphology, with rela­
tively intact articulation and syntax (i.e., early difficulties are resolved)
Motor abnormalities: motor delay; hypotonia; catatonia; deficits in coordina­
tion, movement preparation and planning, praxis, gait, and balance
Adapted from Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Baron-­Cohen S. Autism. Lancet 
2014;383:896–910.
TABLE 32.3  Conditions Commonly 
Misdiagnosed as Autism Spectrum Disorder
Primary communication disorder
 • Specific language impairment
 • Social (pragmatic) communication disorder
Anxiety disorder
 
• Selective mutism
Reactive attachment disorder
 • Post-­institutional autistic syndrome
Cognitive impairment
Visual impairment
Hearing impairment
Normal behavioral variations
From Simms MD. When autistic behavior suggests a disease other 
than classic autism. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2017;64(1):127–138 (Box 1, p. 
128).
TABLE 32.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for 
Autism Spectrum Disorder
A.
Persistent deficits in social communication and social interac­
tion across multiple contexts, as manifested by the following, 
currently or by history:
	1.	Deficits in social-­emotional reciprocity.
	2.	Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social 
interaction.
	3.	Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relation­
ships.
B.
Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, 
as manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by 
history:
	1.	Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or 
speech.
	2.	Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or 
ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior.
	3.	Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity 
or focus.
	4.	Hyper-­ or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in 
sensory aspects of the environment.
C.
Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (may 
not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited 
capacities, or may be masked by learned strategies in later life).
D.
Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupa­
tional, or other important areas of current functioning.
E.
These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability 
(intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental 
delay.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th 
ed. American Psychiatric Association; 2013:50–51.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
535
CHAPTER 32  Autistic-­like Behaviors
issues can make the child appear socially awkward as well and lead to 
embarrassment and social isolation. Not being able to express yourself 
verbally can also extend to explaining emotions and desires. Behavioral 
issues can result from the frustration and inability to express those to 
others.
Pragmatic language disorder is a very narrow spectrum disorder 
for those individuals who have difficulty in the social rules of verbal and 
nonverbal communication without any of the other symptoms of ASD 
such as repetitive behaviors, narrow ranges of interest, or insistence on 
routines. This diagnosis may apply when social difficulties cannot be 
better explained by intellectual developmental disorder (IDD) or inat­
tention. Although many children with ADHD have deficits in nonver­
bal communication, this is not considered pragmatic language disorder 
because the cause is not being able to attend long enough to observe 
details of others’ behavior.
The association of ASD and IDD is often difficult to separate. 
Approximately 50% or half of people with ASD have IDD. The com­
munication difficulties that many children with ASD have can make 
formal cognitive assessment challenging, but more so it can make the 
results inaccurate. How a person with ASD performs on an IQ test may 
be more representative of their level of function to participate than 
their actual cognitive ability. In nonautistic individuals IQ test subsets 
are usually within a narrow range, but in autism they can be scattered 
over a wide range, indicating strength in some areas and weakness 
in others. No IQ pattern has been identified to be diagnostic in ASD. 
Since the diagnosis of IDD no longer requires an IQ score for severity, 
overall functional cognition can be used in assessment, but participa­
tion and effort are required for accurate results. It is important not to 
assume overall cognitive strength or functional ability from a single skill. 
While completing calculus in their sophomore year of high school, an 
individual may struggle with reading comprehension on a grade school 
level, be unable to complete their daily hygiene without direct support, 
not know what money is, or be unable to prepare food.
IDD is not just cognitive intelligence but also function or adaptive 
reasoning. The changes in the DSM-­5 well articulate the conceptual, 
social, and practical domains that are affected in IDD. An individual 
with IDD may socialize more appropriately for their cognitive age than 
their chronological age. If one is to consider a diagnosis of ASD in 
addition to IDD, the socialization must be different from that expected 
for the developmental age with the inclusion of stereotyped or repeti­
tive behaviors, restricted areas of interest, inflexibility of routines, and 
unusual sensory input that are not expected with that developmental 
age. This is even more difficult in those with severe and profound IDD 
who already have very limited social understanding, self-­stimulating 
behaviors, and stereotypies. The diagnosis of ASD should only be 
added if the symptoms of ASD are above and beyond what can be seen 
in this population.
The addition of the IDD diagnosis to ASD can be very difficult 
when the autism symptoms are impairing daily functioning and par­
ticipation in standardized testing. The use of alternate communication 
tools and applied behavior analysis (ABA) therapy can help to identify 
cognitive strengths and functioning that are limited in their expression 
by autism.
GENETIC TESTING AND DIAGNOSIS
There is a wide spectrum of disorders that have autistic-­like behav­
ior (Tables 32.6, 32.8, and 32.9 and Fig. 32.1). There is no definitive 
monogenetic etiology for most patients with classic ASD; rather, ASD 
represents diverse pathoetiologic pathways, which overlap in a similar 
behavioral phenotype. It remains the current recommendation that all 
children with a developmental disorder such as ASD or IDD undergo 
genetic testing if a cause of the disorder is not otherwise known. One 
in five children with a neurodevelopmental disability has an identifi­
able genetic risk factor and that number is increasing rapidly with the 
application of advanced genetic diagnostic tools. The importance of 
reaching a unifying diagnosis can impact numerous areas including 
screening for comorbidities, helping families understand and accept 
the diagnosis and natural history, and making important reproductive 
decisions in addition to the potential development of specific therapy. 
TABLE 32.4  DSM-­5 Severity Levels for Autism Spectrum Disorder
Severity Level
Social Communication
Restricted, Repetitive Behaviors
Level 3
“Requiring very substantial 
support”
Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social communication skills cause 
severe impairments in functioning, very limited initiation of social interac­
tions, and minimal response to social overtures from others For example, a 
person with few words of intelligible speech who rarely initiates interac­
tion and, when they do, they make unusual approaches to meet needs only 
and respond to only very direct social approaches.
Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty coping with 
change, or other restricted/repetitive behaviors mark­
edly interfere with functioning in all spheres. Great 
distress/difficulty changing focus or action.
Level 2
“Requiring substantial 
support”
Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social communication skills; social 
impairments apparent even with supports in place; limited initiation of 
social interactions; and reduced or abnormal responses to social overtures 
from others. For example, a person who speaks simple sentences, whose 
interaction is limited to narrow special interests, and who has markedly 
odd nonverbal communication.
Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping with change, or 
other restricted/repetitive behaviors appear frequently 
enough to be obvious to the casual observer and inter­
fere with functioning in a variety of contexts. Distress 
and/or difficulty changing focus or action.
Level 1
“Requiring support”
Without supports in place, deficits in social communication cause noticeable 
impairments. Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear examples 
of atypical or unsuccessful responses to social overtures of others. May 
appear to have decreased interest in social interactions. For example, a 
person who is able to speak in full sentences and engages in communi­
cation but whose to-­and-­fro conversation with others fails, and whose 
attempts to make friends are odd and typically unsuccessful.
Inflexibility of behavior causes significant interference 
with functioning in one or more contexts. Difficulty 
switching between activities. Problems of organiza­
tion and planning hamper independence.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. American Psychiatric Association; 2013:52.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
536
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
As individuals with specific genetic diagnoses increase, parent support 
groups allow for sharing of common experience that can help families 
manage and cope, especially for their neurotypical siblings.
The current standard of care supports genetic testing in the form 
of a chromosomal microarray for all individuals with IDD or an 
ASD diagnosis. Fragile X testing should be considered if there is a 
family history of IDD, premature ovarian failure, or fragile X–asso­
ciated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) in an elderly male relative. 
With the advance of next-­generation sequencing technologies, large 
IDD/ASD gene panels are available that screen hundreds to thou­
sands of genes simultaneously. These gene panels are curated by the 
laboratories and are updated frequently based on published gene 
associations. It is important to be familiar with what test is being 
offered or to work with a genetic professional when ordering such 
testing. The current literature supports using exome sequencing as 
standard of care for first-­tier testing, but this test has variable insur­
ance coverage.
The diagnostic testing algorithm detailed in Figure 32.2 pro­
vides a comprehensive approach for diagnostic consideration. For 
patients with seizures see Figure 32.3. Although epilepsy is more 
common in children with ASD (onset in infancy or adolescence), 
there are epilepsy syndromes that have autistic-­like behaviors (see 
Table 32.9).
GENETIC DISORDERS THAT CO-­OCCUR WITH 
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
Fragile X Syndrome
Fragile X syndrome is the leading identifiable monogenetic cause of 
ASD. IDD is observed in about 85% of males and 20–30% of females 
with fragile X syndrome; ASD is seen is 30–43% of males and 16–20% 
of females. Cognitive deficits are seen in executive functioning, work­
ing memory, short-­term memory, and processing. Hyperarousal to 
sensory stimuli of all types is common. Individuals with fragile X syn­
drome have an increased risk of psychiatric co-­occurring illnesses such 
as ADHD and anxiety.
The physical manifestations can be very subtle in the young 
child showing midface hypoplasia with sunken eyes, large-­cupped 
ears, arched palate, and macro-orchidism. Medical features 
TABLE 32.5  Signs and Symptoms of Possible Autism in Preschool Children (or Equivalent 
Mental Age)
SOCIAL INTERACTION AND RECIPROCAL COMMUNICATION 
BEHAVIORS
Eye Contact, Pointing, and Other Gestures
Spoken Language
Language delay (in babbling or using words, e.g., using <10 words by age 2 yr)
Regression in or loss of use of speech
Spoken language (if present) may include unusual features, such as vocalizations 
that are not speechlike; odd or flat intonation; frequent repetition of set words 
and phrases (echolalia), use of subjective pronouns, such as you, she, or he, to 
refer to self after 3 yrs
Reduced and/or infrequent use of language for communication (e.g., use of 
single words, although able to speak in sentences)
Responding to Others
Absent or delayed response to name being called, despite normal hearing
Reduced or absent responsive social smiling
Reduced or absent responsiveness to other people’s facial expressions or 
feelings
Unusually negative response to the requests of others (“demand avoidance” 
behavior)
Rejection of cuddles initiated by parent or caregiver, although the child may 
initiate cuddles
Interacting with Others
Reduced or absent awareness of personal space, or unusually intolerant of 
people entering their personal space
Reduced or absent social interest in others, including children of own age—may 
reject others; if interested in others, child may approach others inappropri­
ately, seeming to be aggressive or disruptive
Reduced or absent imitation of others’ actions
Reduced or absent initiation of social play with others; plays alone
Reduced or absent enjoyment of situations that most children like (e.g., birthday 
parties)
Reduced or absent sharing of enjoyment
Reduced or absent use of gestures and facial expressions to communicate 
(although may place an adult’s hand on objects)
Reduced and poorly integrated gestures, facial expressions, body orientation, eye 
contact (looking at people’s eyes when speaking), and speech used in social 
communication
Reduced or absent social use of eye contact (assuming adequate vision)
Reduced or absent “joint attention” (when one person alerts another to something 
by means of gazing, finger pointing, or other verbal or nonverbal indication for 
the purpose of sharing interest); this would be evident in the child from lack of:
Gaze switching
Following a point (looking where the other person points to—may look at hand)
Pointing at or showing objects to share interest
Ideas and Imagination
Reduced or absent imagination and variety of pretend play
Unusual or Restricted Interests and/or Rigid and Repetitive 
Behaviors
Repetitive “stereotypic” movements such as hand flapping, body rocking while 
standing, spinning, and finger flicking
Repetitive or stereotyped play (e.g., opening and closing doors)
Overfocused or unusual interests
Excessive insistence on following own agenda
Extremes of emotional reactivity to change or new situations; insistence on things 
being “the same”
Overreaction or underreaction to sensory stimuli, such as textures, sounds, or 
smells
Excessive reaction to the taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food, or having 
extreme food fads
Adapted from Baird G, Douglas HR, Murphy MS. Recognizing and diagnosing autism in children and young people: summary of NICE guidance. 
BMJ. 2011;343:d6360 (Box 1, p. 901).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
537
CHAPTER 32  Autistic-­like Behaviors
TABLE 32.6  Syndromes with Autistic-­Like Behaviors
Chromosome Deletions
1q21
7q11.28
16p11.2
17q12
2q23.1 (MBD5 mutations)
12q24.3
Cri-­du-­chat (5p15.2-­p15.33)
22q deletion syndrome
Jacobsen (11q23.2)
Phelan-­McDermid (SHANK3 mutations; 22q13)
Pitt-­Hopkins (18q21.2)
Chromosome Duplications
15q11.1-­q13.3
7q11.23
18q12.2
16p11.2
1q21.1
22q11.2
Potocki-­Lupski (17p11.2)
Epilepsy Encephalopathies, Epilepsy
Cortical dysplasia focal epilepsy
SCN1A-­related syndromes (Dravet, Lennox Gastaut, others)
Early myoclonic encephalopathies (Ohtahara: STXBP1, ARX, SIK1)
SCN2A-­related syndromes (West, others)
SLC6A1 myotonic-­atonic epilepsy
HCN1-­related epilepsies
CDKL5
SCN8A
PCDH19
SCL35A2-­related disorders
Epilepsy-­aphasia spectrum (Landau-­Kleffner; GRIN2A; continuous spike wave 
during low-­wave sleep)
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (RING2)
IDD CDKL5 (Rett-­Like) Regression, Others
2q37 monosomy
Angelman
Bardet-­Biedl
Cardiofaciocutaneous
CHARGE association
Cohen
Congenital rubella
Cornelia de Lange
Costello
FOXG1 mutations
Fragile X
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Joubert
Kleefstra (EHMT1 mutations)
Lujan-­Fryns
Moebius sequence
Muscle-­eye brain disease
Myotonic dystrophy
Neurofibromatosis
Nonsyndromic intellectual disability due to SYNGAP1 mutations
Noonan
Oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (including Goldenhar)
Partial monosomy 1p36
Partial tetrasomy 15
Prader-­Willi
PTEN mutations
Rett complex (female >> male)
Ring chromosome 14
SETD1B mutations
Sex chromosome aneuploidies
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
Smith-­Magenis
Sotos
Timothy
Trisomy 21
Tuberous sclerosis
WAGR
Wiedemann-­Steiner (KMT2A mutations)
Williams
CHARGE, coloboma, heart, choanal atresia, retardation, genital, ear anomalies; IDD, intellectual developmental disability; WAGR, Wilms tumor, 
aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, mental retardation.
commonly include mitral valve prolapse, seizures, migraines, neu­
ropathy, otitis media, strabismus, joint laxity, ataxia, fibromyalgia, 
and gastrointestinal (GI) problems. Sleep disturbances are com­
mon and can be accompanied by sleep apnea and restless leg syn­
drome; affected individuals have difficulty with sleep latency and 
maintaining sleep.
MECP2-­Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Pathogenic variants in MECP2 cause a spectrum of disorders that 
include Rett syndrome, PPM-­X syndrome, MECP2 duplication syn­
drome, and MECP2-­related severe neonatal encephalopathy. Rett 
syndrome affects females and classically presents with a history of 
normal psychomotor development for the first 6–18 months of life. 
Development then stagnates for a period before rapid regression 
in motor and language skills before long-­term stability is reached. 
During the period of regression, stereotypic hand movements replace 
purposeful hand movements and are accompanied by behavioral 
issues with screaming and inconsolable crying. There can be panic-­
like attacks as well as bruxism and episodic apnea and/or hyperpnea, 
which make caring for an affected child difficult for parents. Autistic-­
like features can be present although rarely meeting the diagnostic 
criteria.
PTEN Hamartoma Syndrome
Rare autosomal dominant disorders of the PTEN pathway include 
Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), Proteus and Proteus-­
like syndromes, and Cowden syndrome. The presentation within 
each of these clinical subtypes differs. Patients with BRRS have facial 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
538
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
TABLE 32.7  Common Co-­occurring Conditions in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
Comorbidity
Individuals with 
Autism Affected
Comments
Developmental Disorders
Intellectual disability
∼45%
Prevalence estimate is affected by the diagnostic boundary and definition of intelligence (e.g., whether 
verbal ability is used as a criterion).
In individuals, discrepant performance between subtests is common.
Language disorders
Variable
In the DSM-­IV, language delay was a defining feature of autism (autistic disorder), but is no longer included 
in the DSM-­5.
An autism-­specific language profile (separate from language disorders) exists, but with substantial interindi­
vidual variability.
Attention-­deficit/ hyperactiv­
ity disorder
28–44%
In the DSM-­IV, not diagnosed when occurring in individuals with autism, but no longer so in the DSM-­5.
Tic disorders
14–38%
Approximately 6–5% have Tourette syndrome.
Motor abnormality
≤79%
See Table 32.2.
General Medical Disorders
Epilepsy
8–35%
Increased frequency in individuals with intellectual disability or genetic syndromes.
Two peaks of onset: early childhood and adolescence.
Increases risk of poor outcome.
Gastrointestinal problems
9–70%
Common symptoms include chronic constipation, abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea, and gastroesophageal 
reflux.
Associated disorders include gastritis, esophagus, gastroesophageal reflux disease, inflammatory bowel 
disease, celiac disease, Crohn disease, and colitis.
Immune dysregulation
≤38%
Associated with allergic and autoimmune disorders.
Genetic disorders
10–20%
Collectively called syndromic autism.
Examples include fragile X syndrome (21–50% of individuals affected have autism). Rett syndrome (most 
have autistic features but with profiles different from idiopathic autism), tuberous sclerosis complex 
(24–60%), Down syndrome (5–39%), phenylketonuria (5–20%).
CHARGE syndrome* (15–50%), Angelman syndrome (50–81%), Timothy syndrome (60–70%), and Joubert 
syndrome (-­40%).
Sleep disorders
50–60%
Insomnia is the most common.
Psychiatric Disorders
Anxiety
42–56%
Common across all age groups.
Most common are social anxiety disorder (13–29% of individuals with autism) and generalized anxiety 
disorder (13–22%).
High-­functioning individuals are more susceptible (or symptoms are more detectable).
Depression
12–70%
Common in adults, less common in children.
High-­functioning adults who are less socially impaired are more susceptible (or symptoms are more detect­
able).
Obsessive-­compulsive 
disorder (OCD)
7–24%
Shares the repetitive behavior domain with autism that could cut across nosologic categories.
Important to distinguish between repetitive behaviors that do not involve intrusive, anxiety-­causing thoughts 
or obsessions (part of autism) and those that do (and are part of OCD).
Psychotic disorders
12–17%
Mainly in adults.
Most commonly recurrent hallucinosis.
High frequency of autism-­like features (even a diagnosis of ASD) preceding adult-­onset (52%) and 
childhood-­onset schizophrenia (30–50%).
Substance use disorders
≤16%
Potentially because individual is using substances as self-­medication to relieve anxiety.
Oppositional defiant disorder 16–28%
Oppositional behaviors could be a manifestation of anxiety, resistance to change, stubborn belief in the 
correctness of own point of view, difficulty seeing another’s point of view, poor awareness of the effect of 
own behavior on others, or no interest in social compliance.
Eating disorders
4–5%
Could be a misdiagnosis of autism, particularly in females, because both involve rigid behavior, inflexible 
cognition, self-­focus, and focus on details.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
539
CHAPTER 32  Autistic-­like Behaviors
TABLE 32.7  Common Co-­occurring Conditions in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)—cont’d
Comorbidity
Individuals with 
Autism Affected
Comments
Personality Disorders†
Paranoid personality disorder 0–19%
Could be secondary to difficulty understanding others’ intentions and negative interpersonal experiences.
Schizoid personality disorder
21–26%
Partly overlapping diagnostic criteria.
Schizotypal personality 
disorder
2–13%
Some overlapping criteria, especially those shared with schizoid personality disorder.
Borderline personality 
disorder
0–9%
Could have similarity in behaviors (e.g., difficulties in interpersonal relationships, misattributing hostile 
intentions, problems with affect regulation), which requires careful differential diagnosis.
Could be a misdiagnosis of autism, particularly in females.
Obsessive compulsive 
personality disorder
19–22%
Partly overlapping diagnostic criteria.
Avoidant personality 
disorder
13–25%
Could be secondary to repeated failure in social experiences.
Behavioral Disorders
Aggressive behaviors
≤68%
Often directed toward caregivers rather than noncaregivers.
Could be a result of empathy difficulties, anxiety, sensory overload, disruption of routines, and difficulties 
with communication.
Self-­injurious behaviors
≤50%
Associated with impulsivity and hyperactivity, negative affect, and lower levels of ability and speech.
Could signal frustration in individuals with reduced communication, as well as anxiety, sensory overload, or 
disruption of routines.
Could also become a repetitive habit.
Could cause tissue damage and need for restraint.
Pica
∼36%
More likely in individuals with intellectual disability.
Could be a result of a lack of social conformity to cultural categories of what is deemed edible, or sensory 
exploration, or both.
Suicidal ideation or attempt
11–14%
Risks increase with concurrent depression and behavioral problems, and after being teased or bullied.
*Coloboma of the eye, heart defects; atresia of the choanae; retardation of growth or development, or both; genital or urinary abnormalities, or both; 
and ear abnormalities and deafness.
†Particularly in high-­functioning adults.
DSM-­IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition; DSM-­5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition.
Adapted from Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Baron-­Cohen S. Autism. Lancet. 2014;383:896–910.
dysmorphic features that include a broad, flat forehead; thick eyebrows; 
full cheeks; long philtrum; and pointed jaw in addition to macroceph­
aly. Skin manifestations include papillomatous papules and café-­au-­lait 
spots; hyperpigmented macules are common on the glans of the penis.
In BRRS, the diagnosis is frequently made in infancy or childhood 
due to the significant intellectual disability and/or ASD seen in 25–55% 
of cases. Cowden syndrome is an adult-­onset tumor predisposition 
syndrome, and Proteus syndrome is characterized by somatic over­
growth of the affected areas.
22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome has a broad array of phenotypic 
presentations that have many names including DiGeorge syndrome, 
velocardiofacial syndrome, Shprintzen syndrome, and conotruncal 
anomaly facial syndrome. This syndrome can be detected both early 
and later in life. Early presentations include congenital heart defects, 
cleft palate, hearing loss, immune dysfunction, and hypocalcemia.
The presence of cognitive impairment is common, but higher 
rates of ADHD and anxiety are also seen. Despite the presence of 
TABLE 32.8  Inborn Errors of Metabolism 
with Autistic-­like Behavior
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency
Biotinidase deficiency
Cerebral folate deficiency
Ceroid lipofuscinosis (infantile)
Cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency
Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency
Disorders of creatine transport or metabolism
Homocystinuria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Mitochondrial disorders
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Phenylketonuria (untreated)
Sanfilippo syndrome
Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency
Urea cycle disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
540
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
social-­emotional reciprocity and nonverbal communication, this dis­
order is rarely characterized by repetitive behaviors or restricted inter­
ests, leading few patients to meet the ASD diagnosis.
22q11.2 Duplication Syndrome
The reciprocal duplication of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome results 
in a disorder with more notable gross motor delays, although affected 
children struggle with abstract thinking and social abilities, which 
becomes more notable as school demands progress in the third or 
fourth grade. Receptive language is stronger than expressive; verbal 
memory is stronger than visuospatial memory.
These individuals can be described as shy or withdrawn, emo­
tionally liable, hyperactive, and impulsive. They can move from task 
to task quickly but are less able to adapt to changes in routine or the 
environment. Social deficits are often seen including the lack of social-­
emotional reciprocity. They do not often have the repetitive behaviors 
and rigidity to fulfill the threshold for diagnosis of ASD. In one study 
84% of cases had at least one psychiatric disorder, but only 18% met 
strict criteria for ASD.
Tuberous Sclerosis
This is an autosomal dominant disorder that results from pathogenic 
variants in either the TSC1 or TSC2 gene. The prevalence is estimated 
to be 1/6,000–9,000 people. Affected infants can be identified prena­
tally by the presence of cardiac rhabdomyomas as early as 22 weeks 
of gestation. Infants can present with infantile spasms, or during an 
evaluation for ASD. Most commonly it is identified postnatally with 
cardiac rhabdomyomas, with hypopigmented macules on the skin, or 
after the development of seizures. MRI will reveal subependymal nod­
ules and cortical tubers.
IDD can be present, the severity of which is often associated with 
the age of seizure onset and their severity. Psychiatric comorbidity is 
significant, with 30–50% having ADHD, 30–60% with depression or 
anxiety disorders, and 25–50% with ASD.
Timothy Syndrome
Timothy syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is associ­
ated with long QT syndrome. It is caused by pathogenic variants in 
the CACNA1C gene, which encodes a calcium channel. The gene vari­
ant allows calcium to enter cells abnormally, which causes a prolonged 
QT interval that increases the risk of arrhythmias and sudden cardiac 
death. Physical examination can demonstrate low-­set ears, lower nasal 
bridge, small upper jaw, and widely spaced teeth. Cutaneous syndac­
tyly webbed fingers and toes are commonly found. Seizures, stroke, and 
blindness can also be found. Developmental delays, including ASD, are 
common.
Phelan-­McDermid Syndrome
Contiguous gene deletion of the 22q13 region that includes SHANK3 or 
pathogenic variants in SHANK3 results in Phelan-­McDermid syndrome. 
SHANK3, which encodes for a scaffolding protein in the postsynaptic 
glutamatergic synapse, plays a critical role in synaptic function. While it 
TABLE 32.9  Single Gene and Genomic Copy Number Regions Commonly Associated with 
Autism and Epilepsy
Gene or Genomic 
Region
Associated Syndrome
Key Features
15q11-­q13
Chromosome 15q11-­q13 
duplication syndrome
Autism, intellectual disability, ataxia seizures, developmental delays, and behavioral problems
Note: Deletion of this region is associated with Angelman syndrome/Prader-­Willi syndrome
Chromosome 21
Down syndrome
Distinct facial dysmorphisms, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and medical comorbidities
22q13.3/SHANK3
Phelan-­McDermid syndrome
Neonatal hypotonia, global developmental delay, absent or severely delayed speech, autistic behavior, 
and minor dysmorphic features
FMR1
Fragile X syndrome
Moderate to severe intellectual disability, macro-orchidism, and distinct facial features (long face, large 
ears, and prominent jaw)
TSC1/2
Tuberous sclerosis
Multisystem disorder characterized by hamartomas (brain, heart, lungs, kidneys, and skin)
PTEN
PTEN-­related disorders
Hamartoma syndromes and malignancies (breast, thyroid, and endometrial)
Macrocephaly and ASD have been reported in children with PTEN mutations
MECP2
MECP2-­related disorders
Severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by arrest of development between 6 and 18 mo of 
age, regression of skills, loss of speech, stereotypic hand movements, microcephaly, seizures, and 
intellectual disability
CDKL5
CDKL5-­related disorders
X-­linked dominant condition characterized by early onset of seizures, severe global developmental delay, 
and postnatal microcephaly
Other features include subtle dysmorphic facial features, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal problems, 
stereotypic hand movements, and intellectual disability
FOXG1
FOXG1-­related disorders
Severe neurodevelopmental disorder with features of classic Rett syndrome but earlier onset in the first 
months of life
MEF2C
MEF2C-­related disorders
Severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, epilepsy, and stereotypic 
movements
CASK
CASK-­related disorders
Characterized by a distinct malformation phenotype in females involving postnatal microcephaly and 
pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia, developmental delay, growth retardation, and eye abnormalities
SCN2A
SCN2A-­related disorders
Autosomal dominant seizure disorder characterized by infantile onset or refractory seizures
From Lee BH, Smith T, Paciorkowski AR. Autism disorder and epilepsy: disorders with a shared biology. Epilepsy Behav. 2015;47:191–201 (Table 1, 
p. 193).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Mother
Mother
Mother
Mother
Father
Father
Father
Father
Mother
Father
Child with ASD
Child with ASD
Child with ASD
Male child with ASD
Child with ASD
Inherited
De novo
Autosomal recessive
Copy number variation
B. Variation
A. Inheritance
Translocation
Autosomal dominant
X-linked
Additive risk
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
Cohen syndrome
Cortical dysplasia–focal epilepsy
Deficiencies in AMT, PEX7,
SYNE1, BCKDK
Common variation
Fragile X syndrome
Duchenne muscular
dystrophy
Phelan-McDermid syndrome
Timothy syndrome
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis complex
CHARGE syndrome
Velocardial facial syndrome
Neurofibromatosis type 1
Angelman syndrome
Potocki-Lupski syndrome
CHD8, DYRK1A, SCN2A, ARID1B, ANK2, GRIN2B,
SYNGAP1, ADNP, TBR1, POGZ, KATNAL2
Phelan-McDermid
Velocardial facial
Potocki-Lupski
16p11.2 deletion
16p11.2 duplication
15q13.3 deletion
15q11.2q13 duplication
NRXN1 deletion
Phelan-McDermid
Tuberous sclerosis
Fragile X
syndrome
Timothy syndrome
Smith-Lemli-Opitz
Cornelia de Lange
Tuberous sclerosis
Cohen syndrome
CHARGE syndrome
Neurofibromatosis
AMT
PEX7
SYNE1
BCKDK
Smith-Lemli-Opitz
Cornelis de Lange
Tuberous sclerosis
Cohen syndrome
CHARGE syndrome
Neurofibromatosis
Duchenne muscular
dystrophy
Cortical dysplasia-
focal epilepsy
Angelman
Phelan-McDermid
Most likely
common
variation
CHD8, DYRK1A,
SCN2A, ARID1B,
ANK2, GRIN2B,
SYNGAP1, ADNP,
TBR1, POGZ,
KATNAL2, BCKDK
del
dup
Trinucleotide
repeat
Missense
Indel
Nonsense
Splice-
site
Intronic or
intergenic
CGGCGG...
ATG TTT ... ... ... ... CAG ... ... ... CAG ... ...
Likely protein damaging
TCT
Ser
CAAG
TAG
C. Penetrance
80
60
40
20
0
100
D. Genetic contributions to ASD population
Phelan-McDermid syndrome
Timothy syndrome
Smith-Lemil-Opitz syndrome
Cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy syndrome
Potocki-Lupski syndrome
Angelman syndrome
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis complex
Cohen syndrome
Fragile X  syndrome
CHARGE  syndrome
Velocardial facial syndrome
Neurofibromatosis type 1
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
% patients with syndrome diagnosed with ASD
SHANK3
CACNA1C
DHCR7
CNTNAP2
17p11.2 dup
NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3
TSC1, TSC2
VPS13B
FMR1
CHD7
22q11.2 del
NF1
DMD
UBE3A
Percentage of individuals with
ASD harboring known mutations
Percent of liability due to
different classes of mutations
Syndromic
(3.40%)
CNV
(1.28%)
Strongly implicated
de novo SNVs (1.34%)
Unaccounted (41%)
Predicted
common (49%)
inherited
Non-additive (4%)
Rare inherited (3%)
De novo (3%)
KATNAL2 (0.08%)
POGZ (0.08%)
TBR1 (0.08%)
ADNP (0.10%)
SYNGAP1 (0.10%)
GRIN2B (0.13%)
ANK2 (0.13%)
ARID1B (0.13%)
SCN2A (0.13%)
DYRK1A (0.13%)
CHD8 (0.21%)
15q13.3 del (0.16%)
16p11.2 dup (0.24%)
15q11.2q13 dup (0.25%)
16p11.2 del (0.31%)
NRXN1 del (0.32%)
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (0.28%)
Phelan-McDermid (0.28%)
Tuberous sclerosis (0.90%)
Fragile X (1.94%)
Prevalence of ASD in syndromes
of known genetic etiology
Fig. 32.1  Genetic architecture of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A, The inheritance patterns of syndromes with known genetic etiology and high 
incidence of autism, as well as that of genes recently identified to be associated with autism. The red stars indicate a causal allele and the red 
pie charts indicate a small proportion of risk. Most dominant disorders show de novo inheritance. Autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, and 
X-­linked inheritance patterns best fit a major gene model, whereas a polygenic model is best represented by additive risk. B, The types of genetic 
variation (left and middle) and the developmental disorders (right) associated with autism. Genes that have been associated with ASD are also 
indicated. C, The penetrance of known syndromic mutations summarized from multiple studies. Ninety-­five percent binomial proportion confidence 
intervals, based on Wilson’s score interval, are shown. D, The percentage of individuals with ASD harboring known mutations, as well as the per­
centage of liability from different classes of mutations. The percentage variance in liability measures the contribution of a particular variant or class of 
variants relative to the population variance in a theoretical variable called liability. Liability is a continuous and normally distributed latent variable that 
represents each individual’s risk (both genetic and environmental) for developing a disease. Notably, percentage variance in liability is directly depen­
dent on the frequency of the variant and the effect size of the variant, and it is inversely dependent on the frequency of the disease in the population. 
CNV, copy number variation. (From de la Torre-­Ubieta L, Won H, Stein J, et al. Advancing the understanding of autism disease mechanisms through 
genetics. Nat Med. 2016;22[4]:345–361 [Fig. 1, p. 346].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
542
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
For individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of
a developmental disorder (autism spectrum
disorder, intellectual disability, or global
developmental delay)
Complete
neuropsychiatric
evaluation
Current symptoms
Physical signs
Family history
Lab abnormalities
Review previous genetic reports
Etiology of DD is unknown and genetic
testing not performed or incomplete
Review laboratory tests
Newborn screening results
Electrolytes
Complete blood count
Hepatic profile
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Lead level
Metabolic testing
Key history components
Prenatal and birth history
Developmental history
Family history (3-generation)
Morphologic abnormalities
Other affected organ systems
Neurologic exam (or consult)
Hearing and vision tests
Pre-test genetic counseling
Informed consent
Insurance preauthorization for testing
Chromosomal
microarray and
fragile X testing
No variants
Variant of unknown
significance (VOUS)
Parental testing to discriminate
pathogenic variants
Unresolved
clinical findings?
Yes
No
Known pathogenic
variant
Genetic syndromes that may
be clinically evident
Fragile X syndrome
PTEN hamartoma syndrome
Rett syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis
Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes
Down syndrome
Unresolved clinical findings
• Seizures
• Developmental regression
• Hypotonia or dystonia
• Poor growth
• Abnormal head size or shape
• Congenital anomalies (heart,
  limbs, urogenital system)
If a molecular diagnosis is
made, consider:
• Testing family members
• Subspecialty referrals
• Referral to patient support
  organizations
• Offering participation in
  research trials
• Periodic monitoring for
  medical comorbidities
Consider additional testing:
• Whole exome sequencing
• Chromosomal analysis (karyotype)
• Mitochondrial DNA testing
(if positive see molecular diagnosis follow-up)
Molecular diagnosis
Post-test counseling and
collaboration with care providers
Recognized
genetic
syndrome?
Test for genetic
syndrome
Yes
No result
Benign
Pathogenic
No
Fig. 32.2  Diagnostic genetic testing algorithm for youth with developmental disorders. JAACAP-­D-­17-­00189. 
DD, development disorder. (From Muhle R, Reed H, Vo L, et al. Clinical diagnostic genetic testing for individ­
uals with developmental disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2017;56[11]:910–913.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
543
CHAPTER 32  Autistic-­like Behaviors
Patient with epilepsy
Is there impairment of
• Language?
• Social development?
• Behavior?
Referral to development
expert for autism evaluation
Genetic evaluation of autism
Genetic evaluation of epilepsy
CMA
Gene panel
WES
CMA
Gene panel
WES
Fig. 32.3  Suggested workflow for evaluation of patients with epi­
lepsy who may be at risk for autism. A patient with epilepsy should 
be screened for impairment in language, social development, and/
or behavior. If warranted, the patient should be referred to a trained 
expert in autism diagnosis. If a diagnosis of autism is confirmed, or if 
significant other developmental concerns exist (i.e., intellectual disabil­
ity), genetic evaluation is appropriate. The clinical genetic evaluation for 
autism and epilepsy may have overlap and may be tailored by recogni­
tion of conditions where autism and epilepsy overlap. Current clinical 
genetic evaluation includes sequential chromosomal microarray (CMA), 
autism and epilepsy next-­generation sequencing gene panels, and, if 
necessary, whole exome sequencing (WES). (Modified from Lee BH, 
Smith T, Paciorkowski AR. Autism disorder and epilepsy: disorders with 
a shared biology. Epilepsy Behav. 2015;47:191–201.)
accounts for a relatively small number of cases of ASD and IDD, the sever­
ity of the phenotype increases with the size of the affected region. While 
20% of the cases are de novo, parents can carry a balanced chromosomal 
translocation, increasing the recurrence risk in additional offspring.
Most individuals have at least one visible dysmorphic feature 
including dolichocephaly, long eyelashes, pointed chin, prominent or 
dysplastic ears, bulbous nose, and full lips in addition to hypoplastic 
or dysplastic nails and large, fleshy hands. Hypotonia is often present 
and can present early in the form of feeding abnormalities and posture. 
Gait is almost uniformly affected and can range from nonambulatory 
to having issues with gait, toe walking, and broad-­based ataxia. Coor­
dination and motor planning issues are also seen in most cases. An 
increased risk of scoliosis is present.
Medical comorbidities are common. GI issues are most common 
and include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), constipation, 
and diarrhea. Recurrent ear and upper respiratory infections can be 
linked to immune system abnormalities as well as allergies and asthma. 
There is an increased incidence of seizures. MRI data have included an 
increase in brain abnormalities including the corpus callosum, arach­
noid cyst, ventriculomegaly, and dysmyelination. There can be signifi­
cantly delayed or absent speech. Behavioral difficulties are often found 
but have not been well categorized.
There is an increased incidence of ASD in individuals with Phelan-­
McDermid syndrome, along with IDD.
Cortical Dysplasia–Focal Epilepsy Syndrome
CNTNAP2 variants can be seen clinically with ASD, focal epilepsy, lan­
guage regression, and IDD. It can also be associated with Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome, ADHD, and schizophrenia.
15q11-­13 Deletion or Duplication Maternal/Paternal
The loss or gain of genetic material from 15q11.2-­13 has been seen 
frequently in the context of an ASD diagnosis. Portions of this region 
are additionally imprinted, and clinically unique syndromes are 
manifest dependent on whether the loss of material is maternal or 
paternal.
Angelman syndrome is a result of this alteration in the mater­
nally inherited allele. Most individuals with Angelman syndrome 
have severe IDD are nonverbal, and usually plateau in development 
between 18 and 24 months. If they do have speech, it is usual phrase 
speech and receptive language skills are better than expressive. They 
are happy to engage with others and seek social attention in a devel­
opmentally appropriate manner but can have repetitive and restric­
tive behavior as seen in many with severe IDD. Body movements and 
mannerisms, such as hand flapping, are very common.
Prader-­Willi syndrome is the result of alteration in the paternally 
inherited allele. Individuals have mild to moderate IDD. Social defi­
cits are often reported in individuals with Prader-­Willi but often not 
to the severity of those with ASD. They can have some repetitive and 
restrictive behaviors, be insistent on routines, arrange objects, and have 
repetitive speech.
Potocki-­Lupski Syndrome
The duplication of 17p11.2 is known as Potocki-­Lupski syndrome. 
Younger children are usually identified due to hypotonia, poor feed­
ing with failure to thrive, sleep-­disorder breathing, and cardiovascular 
anomalies. Older children can have developmental delays and cog­
nitive impairment. For those individuals who have speech it can be 
marked with precision, referring to themselves in the third person, 
having running commentaries, or echolalia.
Behavioral issues are seen in most patients including those with 
attention, hyperactivity, anxiety, somatization, and withdrawal. ASD 
can be seen in these individuals with motor mannerisms, repetitive 
behaviors, social aspects of withdrawal, poor eye contact, and difficulty 
with transitions.
Ring Chromosome 14 Syndrome R(14) Syndrome (OMIM 
#616606)
This is a rare genetic syndrome for which prevalence and incidence 
are not known. Moderate to severe IDD is persistent in affected indi­
viduals. The level of impairment is largely due to the time of onset of 
epilepsy and its severity. Language is one of the most affected features. 
Behaviorally, hyperactivity and stereotypies are often noted. There are 
reports of ASD being present with the need to adhere to routines as 
well as being hyper-­ or hyporeactive to stimuli.
Pitt-­Hopkins Syndrome
Pitt-­Hopkins syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
deletions of the TCF4 gene located on 18q21.2. Physical signs include 
abnormal facies and hand abnormalities as well as gross motor deficits. 
Individuals usually have very limited speech and severe IDD. Many 
children with this deletion have significant behavioral outbursts with 
hair pulling, tantrums, inappropriate laughing, and throwing, banging, 
and kicking objects. There can be self-­injurious behaviors or hitting, 
pinching, and pushing.
ASD has been diagnosed in those with Pitt-­Hopkins syndrome. The 
combination of communication issues driving social interaction issues 
as well as repetitive behaviors can be present.
METABOLIC DISORDERS THAT PRESENT WITH 
AUTISTIC-­LIKE FEATURES
In addition to genetic syndromes, metabolic disorders can present with 
autistic-­like behaviors (see Table 32.8).
Metabolic disorders remain an important consideration in the 
differential diagnosis for children presenting with features of autism. 
Referral to a specialist center for additional testing is recommended as 
many of these disorders require expert knowledge to ensure that the 
appropriate testing is requested.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
544
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
Regression
Loss of developmental milestones may occur in 10–20% of children 
with ASD often at ∼18–24 months. Some children without obvious ear­
lier signs of ASD may show developmental regression by ∼3–4 years 
of age, a condition previously named childhood disintegrative disor­
der; this disorder has been incorporated into the general designation 
of ASD. In addition, regression may rarely be seen in adolescents with 
ASD and may be associated with catatonia or seizures.
The cause of regression is often not known; possible etiologies, par­
ticularly in those with profound and rapid-­onset regression, should 
include epilepsy syndromes, genetic syndromes (tuberous sclerosis, 
Rett), neurodegenerative storage diseases (lipid, leukodystrophies), 
lead poisoning (pica is common in ASD), hypothyroidism, new onset 
seizures, catatonia, and autoimmune or subacute sclerosing panen­
cephalitis (see Chapter 28).
Catatonia
Catatonia is a serious disorder seen in many neuropsychiatric diseases 
including ASD. Catatonia usually presents acutely often at the onset 
of puberty and demonstrates symptoms within motor, speech, and 
behavioral domains (autism shut down syndrome). Symptoms include 
stupor, catalepsy, waxy flexibility, mutism, negativism, posturing, man­
nerisms, stereotypy, agitation, grimacing, echolalia, and echopraxia 
(diagnostic criteria require 3 of 12 symptoms). Motor manifestations 
may be hypo-­ or hyperactivity; self-­injurious behaviors may also be 
present. Behavioral manifestations also include regression, obsessive-­
compulsive behaviors, withdrawal or depression, sensory sensitivity 
(light, touch, movement, taste), and a delusional belief that friends or 
family have been replaced by a double (Capgras syndrome). Treatment 
includes benzodiazepines and, in refractory patients, electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT).
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
While “unknown” continues to be the current answer for the etiology 
in the majority of individuals with ASD, it is important for clinicians to 
be aware of the comorbid disorders and disorders that masquerade as 
ASD to ensure accurate clinical diagnoses and appropriate utilization 
of resources for optimal wellness of this population. Red flags or clues 
to another diagnosis are noted in Table 32.10.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 32.10  Red Flags
Single or multiple congenital anomalies
Dysmorphic features
Macro-­ or microcephaly
Epilepsy encephalopathy syndromes
New-­onset seizures
Regression
Neurocutaneous lesions
Family history of genetic disease
Catatonia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
544.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
What is Autism
Bridgemohan CA. Autism spectrum disorder. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme 
III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:294–302.21e.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-­5. Washington 
(D.C.): American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013.
Lord C, Brugha TS, Charman T, et al. Autism spectrum disorder. Nat Rev Dis 
Primers. 2020;6(1).
Lord C, Petkova E, Hus V, et al. A Multisite Study of the Clinical Diag­
nosis of Different Autism Spectrum Disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2012;69(3):306–313. https://doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.148.
Medical Evaluation
AAP Statement on U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Final Recommenda­
tions on Autism Screening (February 2016).
Besag FMC, Vasey MJ. Seizures and epilepsy in autism spectrum disorder. 
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2020;29:483–500.
DiGennaro Reed FD. Assessment and treatment of stereotypic behavior in 
children with autism and other developmental disabilities: a thirty-­year 
review. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2012;6:422–430.
Ghaziuddin N, Andersen L, Ghaziuddin M. Catatonia in patients with autism 
spectrum disorder. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2020;29:443–454.
Gotham K, Risi S, Pickles A, et al. The Autism Diagnostic Observation Sched­
ule (ADOS). J Autism Dev Disord. 2006.
Initial Medical Evaluation of a Child Diagnosed with an Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, Clinician Fact Sheet – Caring for Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders: A Resource Toolkit for Clinicians. 2nd ed. American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2013.
Ozgen H, Hellemann GS, DeJonge MV, et al. Predictive value of morpholog­
ical features in patients with autism versus normal controls. J Autism Dev 
Disord. 2013;43:147–155.
Rutter M, LeCouteur A, Lord C. Autism Diagnostic Inventory – Revised 
(ADI-­R). WPS Publishing; 2003.
Schopler E, Van Bourgondien ME, Wellman GJ, et al. Childhood Autism Rating 
Scale–2 (CARS-­2). WPS Publishing; 2010.
Screening and Diagnosis for ASD
Siegel DJ, Minshew NJ, Goldstein G. Wechsler IQ profiles in diagnosis of high-­
functioning autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 1996;26:389–406.
Sparrow SS, Cicchetti DV, Saulnier CA. Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales: 
(Vineland III), Survey Interview Form/Caregiver Rating Form. 3rd ed. Livo­
nia, MN: Pearson Assessments; 2016.
Wier ML, Yoshida CK, Odouli R, et al. Congenital anomalies associated with 
autism spectrum disorders. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2006;48:500–507.
Common Mimics—Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Berryer MH, Hamdan FF, Klitten LL, et al. Mutations in SYNGAP1 cause 
intellectual disability, autism, and a specific form of epilepsy by inducing 
haploinsufficiency. Hum Mutat. 2013;34(2):385–394.
Betancur C. Etiological heterogeneity in autism spectrum disorders: more 
than 100 genetic and genomic disorders and still counting. Brain Res. 
2011;1380:42–77.
Boccuto L, Lauri M, Sarasua SM, et al. Prevalence of SHANK3 variants in 
patients with different subtypes of autism spectrum disorders. Eur J Hum 
Genet. 2013;21:310–316.
Butler MG, Dasouki MJ, Zhou XP, et al. Subset of individuals with autism 
spectrum disorders and extreme macrocephaly associated with germline 
PTEN tumor suppressor gene mutations. J Med Genet. 2005;42:318–321.
Chahil G, Yelam A, Bollu PC. Rett syndrome in males: a case report and review 
of the literature. Cureus Open Access Report. DOI:10.7759/cureus.3414.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-­5. Washington 
(D.C.): American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013.
Doan RN, Lim ET, De Rubeis S, et al. Recessive gene disruptions in autism 
spectrum disorder. Nat Genet. 2019;51:1092–1098.
Harris JC. Intellectual Disability: Understanding Its Development, Causes, 
Classification, Evaluation, and Treatment. London: Oxford University Press; 
2006.
Hiraide T, Nakashima M, Yamoto K, et al. De novo variants in SETD1B are 
associated with intellectual disability, epilepsy, and autism. Hum Genet. 
2018;137:95–104.
Kleefstra T, de Leeuw N. Kleefstra syndrome. Gene Rev 2010 Oct 5 [Up­
dated 2019 Mar 21]. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. 
GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2020.
Manzi B, Livia Loizzo A, Giana G, et al. Autism and metabolic diseases. J Child 
Neurol. 2008;23:307–314.
Miles JH. Autism spectrum disorders—a genetics review. Genet Med. 
2011;13(4):278–294.
NIH Genetics Home Reference: Jacobsen syndrome. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/
condition/jacobsen-­syndrome.
Suter B, Treadwell-­Deering D, Zoghbi HY, et al. MECP2 mutations in people 
with Rett syndrome. J Autism Dev Disord. 2014;44(3):703–711.
Talkowski ME, Mullegama SV, Rosenfeld JA, et al. Assessment of 2q23.1 
microdeletion syndrome implicates MBD5 as a single causal locus intellec­
tual disability, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder. Am J Hum Genet. 
2011;89:551–563.
Vegas N, Cavallin M, Maillard C, et al. Delineating FOXG1 syndrome. Neurol 
Genet. 2018;4:e281.
Wolff M, Brunklaus A, Zuberi SM. Phenotypic spectrum and genetics of 
SCN2A-­related disorders, treatment options, and outcomes in epilepsy and 
beyond. Epilepsia. 2019;60(S3):S59–S67.
Genetic Testing and Diagnosis
Cook Jr EH, Scherner SW. Copy-­number variations associated with neuropsy­
chiatric conditions. Nature. 2008; 455:919–923.
De la Torre-­Ubieta L, Won H, Stei JL, et al. Advancing the understanding of 
autism disease mechanisms through genetics. Nat Med. 2016;22(4):345–
361.
Genetic Disorders That Co-­occur with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder
Muhle RA, Reed HE, Vo LC, et al. Clinical diagnostic genetic testing for indi­
viduals with developmental disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2017;56(11):910–913.
Ornoy A, Weinstein-­Fudim L, Ergaz Z. Genetic syndromes, maternal diseases 
and antenatal factors associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). 
Front Neurosci. 2016;10:316.
Satterstrom FK, Kosmicki JA, Wang J, et al. Large-­scale exome sequencing 
study implicates both developmental and functional changes in the neuro­
biology of autism. Cell. 2020;180(3):568–584.
Wier ML, Yoshinda CK, Odouli R, et al. Congenital anomalies associated with 
autism spectrum disorder. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2006;48:500–507.
Fragile X
Jalnapurkar I, Cochran DM, Frazier JA. New therapeutic options for fragile X 
syndrome. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2019;21:12.
Lozano R, Atoosa A, Wilaisakditipakorn T, et al. Fragile X syndrome: a review 
of clinical management. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2016;5(3):145–157.
Mila M, Alvarez-­Mora MI, Madrigal I, et al. Fragile X Syndrome: an overview 
and update on the FMR1 gene. Clin Genet. 2018;93:197–205.
MeCP2
Wen Z, Chen T, Li G, et al. Identification of autism-­related MeCP2 muta­
tions by whole-­exome sequencing and functional validation. Mol Autism. 
2017;8:43.
PTEN
Hansen-­Kiss E, Beinkampen S, Adler B, et al. A retrospective chart review of 
the features of PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome in children. J Med 
Genet. 2017;54:471–478.
Isik E, Simsir OS, Solmaz AE, et al. Clinical and molecular aspects of PTEN 
mutations in 10 pediatric patients. Ann Hum Genet. 2020:1–7.
Pilarski R. PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: a clinical overview. Cancers. 
2019;11:84.
Rademacher S, Eickholt BJ. PTEN in autism and neurodevelopmental disor­
ders. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2019;9(11).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
544.e2
22q11.2 Deletion
Morrison S, Chawner SJRA, van Amelsvoort TAMJ, et al. Cognitive deficits in 
childhood, adolescence, and adulthood in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and 
association with psychopathology. Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10:5.
Serur Y, Frumer DS, Daon K, et al. Psychiatric disorders and autism in young 
children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome compared to children with idio­
pathic autism. Eur Psychiatry. 2019;55:116–121.
Tang KI, Antshel KM, Fremont WP, et al. Behavioral and psychiatric pheno­
types in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2015;36:639–650.
22q11.2 Duplication
Wenger TL, Miller JS, DePolo LM, et al. 22q11.2 duplication syndrome: elevat­
ed rate of autism spectrum disorder and need for medical screening. Mol 
Autism. 2016;7:27.
Tuberous Sclerosis
DiMario FJ, Sahin M, Ebrahimi-­Fakhari D. Tuberous sclerosis complex. Pedi­
atr Clin North Am. 2015;62:633–664.
Gupta A, de Bruyn G, Tousseyn S, et al. Epilepsy and neurodevelopmental co­
morbidities in tuberous sclerosis complex: a natural history study. Pediatr 
Neurol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.12.016.
Vries PJ, Whittemore VH, Leclezio L, et al. Tuberous sclerosis associated 
neuropsychiatric disorders and the TAND checklist. Pediatr Neurol. 
2015;52:25–35.
Timothy Syndrome
Timothy Syndrome. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). 
https://rarediseases.org/rare-­diseases/timothy-­syndrome/. Published July 
10, 2017. Accessed July 10, 2020.
Shank 3 – Phelan-­McDermid Syndrome
Kohlenberg TM, Trelles MP, McLarney B, et al. Psychiatric illness and regres­
sion in individuals with Phelan-­McDermid syndrome. J Neurodev Disord. 
2020;12:7.
Kolevzon A, Angarit A, Bush L, et al. Phelan-­McDermid syndrome: a review of 
the literature and practice parameters for medical assessment and monitor­
ing. J Neurodev Disord. 2014;6:39.
CNTNAP2
Contactin-­associated protein-­like 2; CNTNAP2. https://www.omim.org/
entry/604569. Accessed July 10, 2020.
Poot M. Connecting the CNTNAP2 networks with neurodevelopmental disor­
ders. Mol Syndromol. 2015;6:7–22.
15q11-­13
Baker EK, Godler DE, Bui M, et al. Exploring autism symptoms in an Aus­
tralian cohort of patients with Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. J 
Neurodev Disord. 2018;10:24.
Butler MG, Manzard AM, Forster JL. Prader-Willi syndrome: clinical genetics 
and diagnostic aspects with treatment approaches. Curr Pediatr Rev. 
2016;12(2):136–166.
Smith–Magenis Syndrome & Potocki–Lupski Syndrome
Neira-­Fresneda J, Potocki L. Neurodevelopmental disorders associated with 
abnormal gene dosage: Smith-­Magenis and Potocki-­Lupski syndromes. J 
Pediatr Genet. 2015;4:159–167.
Ring Chromosome 14 Syndrome R(14) Syndrome
Rinaldi B, Vaisfeld A, Amarri S, et al. Cirmin. Guideline recommendations for 
diagnosis and clinical management of Ring14 syndrome—first report of an 
ad hoc task force. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017;12:69.
Pitt-­Hopkins Syndrome
Zollino M, Zweier C, Van Balkonm ID, et al. Diagnosis and management 
in Pitt-­Hopkins syndrome: first international consensus statement. Clin 
Genet. 2019;95:462–478.
Metabolic Disorders That Present with ASD-like Features
Manzi B, Loizzo AL, Giana G, et al. Autism and metabolic diseases. J Child 
Neurol. 2008;23(3):307–314.
Regression
DeJong H, Bunton P, Hare DJ. A systematic review of interventions used to 
treat catatonic symptoms in people with autistic spectrum disorders. J 
Autism Dev Disord. 2004;44:2127–2136.
Mughal S, Faizy RM, Saadabadi A. Autism spectrum disorder (regressive au­
tism, child disintegrative disorder). NCI Bookshelf. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK525976/.
Thompson L, Gillberg C, Landberg S, et al. Autism with and without regres­
sion: a two-­year prospective longitudinal study in two population-­derived 
Swedish cohorts. J Autism Dev Disord. 2019;49:2281–2290.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
