717
The clinical evaluation of childhood movement disorders depends on 
the crucial step of phenomenology that precedes and guides evaluation 
and management. Historically, many of the chronic movement disor­
ders were identified as phenotypic syndromes based on clinical pre­
sentation, associated symptoms, and disease course. With the growing 
availability of genetic testing, more of the underlying metabolic and 
heredodegenerative disorders causing chronic movement disorders are 
being identified, producing a clearer understanding of the full clinical 
spectrum of these disorders (Fig. 40.1).
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Movement disorders are a group of disorders where there is excessive 
movement or a paucity of voluntary movement (Table 40.1). The prob­
lem is not primarily due to weakness or abnormality of tone (spastic­
ity). This group of disorders is characterized by difficulty initiating 
movement, abnormal control of voluntary movement, abnormalities of 
posture, or the presence of unwanted involuntary movements. Primary 
movement disorders imply a dysfunction in the basal ganglia and its 
connections or dysfunction of the cerebellum and its connections.
Movements disorders in general can be divided into two main 
categories. There may be a paucity of normal voluntary movements 
(hypokinetic) or the presence of abnormal involuntary movements 
(hyperkinetic). The hyperkinetic movement disorders include dystonia, 
ataxia, tremor, chorea, athetosis, ballismus, tics, and myoclonus. In the 
hypokinetic disorders there is a paucity or decreased amplitude of nor­
mal voluntary movements (hypokinesia), slow voluntary movements or 
difficulty initiating voluntary movement (bradykinesia), or loss of move­
ment (akinesia). One example of a hypokinetic movement disorder is 
parkinsonism (resting tremor, slow voluntary movements, rigidity).
CHIEF COMPLAINT
The presenting symptom or chief complaint in a child with a move­
ment disorder may be any of the following:
 • Inability to sit still
 • Gait abnormality
 • Twitching
 • “Weakness” or dropping things
 • Shaking/trembling of the hands
 • Unsteadiness
 • Abnormal movements
The goal of the history and examination is to confirm the presence of 
the abnormal movement and correctly characterize it. Phenomenology 
is the study or observation of the abnormality. The clinical evaluation 
of movement disorders emphasizes the question “What type of abnor­
mal movement is present?” or “What is the phenomenology?” rather 
than “Where is the lesion in the neurologic axis?” Phenomenology is 
determined by clinical examination, observation, and, when necessary, 
videotape review. Videotape review is especially useful when a parox­
ysmal movement is not witnessed during the clinic visit. Phenomenol­
ogy links directly to potential differential diagnosis as well as choice of 
symptomatic therapy.
HISTORY
The clinical history in the child with a suspected movement disorder 
should include the course of the problem, whether acute or chronic. 
Specific information on whether the movements are paroxysmal (epi­
sodic) should be obtained. If the abnormal movements are paroxysmal, 
the history should indicate whether the abnormal movements are task 
specific (e.g., writer’s cramp, which is a task-­specific focal dystonia) and 
whether there are specific triggers that provoke the abnormal move­
ments. Initiation of sudden movement that triggers dystonia is the hall­
mark of paroxysmal kinesigenic dystonia or dyskinesia (Table 40.2). 
Anticipation, emotional change, and stress can increase the frequency 
of tics. Excitement and emotional distress tend to bring out stereotyp­
ies. In general, abnormal movements do not awaken a child from sleep. 
Most movement disorders disappear in deep sleep except for ballismus 
and severe torsion dystonia. An abnormal movement that awakens a 
child from sleep should raise the suspicion for seizures.
The history should clarify the areas of the body affected, severity, 
and degree of functional impairment. Associated neurologic symp­
toms such as weakness, visual disturbance, seizures, and mental status 
changes imply a more widespread neurologic process than that primar­
ily affecting the basal ganglia. Symptoms such as fever, rash, and phar­
yngitis suggest the presence of systemic illness.
The impact of the abnormal movement on the child’s day-­to-­day 
function as well as limitations of function should be documented.
A detailed academic, behavioral, and psychiatric history should be 
obtained as movement disorders are often accompanied by behavioral, 
emotional, cognitive, and psychiatric comorbidities.
The history should include medications that have been recently 
started or stopped as well as chronic medications.
The child’s birth and developmental history clarify whether the 
movement disorder occurred in a child who had no preceding neuro­
logic conditions or in a child who had prior neurologic/developmental 
difficulty. The age of onset may provide a clue to the diagnosis (Fig. 40.2 
and Table 40.3).
Family history of similar symptoms or a variation of the same type 
of problem suggests a genetically inherited disorder.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The general physical examination should determine the presence of 
systemic signs.
Movement Disorders in Childhood
S. Anne Joseph
40
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
718
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
The comprehensive neurologic examination determines whether 
there are other neurologic abnormalities besides involuntary move­
ments. The mental status examination should include observations 
about alertness, attention, behavior, mood, and emotions. Cranial 
nerve examination should specifically determine whether there is nys­
tagmus, limitation of eye movements, or weakness of the face, tongue, 
and jaw muscles. In general, the motor exam portion of the neurologic 
examination tends to emphasize muscle tone, strength, and the muscle 
stretch reflexes (deep tendon reflexes). This portion of the motor exam 
is effective in identifying the presence of weakness, spasticity, or hypo­
tonia. Some features of involuntary movements such as the inability to 
maintain a voluntary contraction may be detected during the general 
motor examination. The template of the motor examination that starts 
with muscle tone, then goes on to testing of strength, and ends with 
reflex testing is useful for localization but insufficient for characteri­
zation of abnormal movements. Although it is assumed that general 
observation of the patient occurs throughout the visit, this alone is 
often insufficient for accurate characterization of the movement disor­
der. Therefore, once the motor exam that assesses tone, strength, and 
reflexes is completed, an additional portion of time should be allocated 
specifically for the observation of the involuntary movements to cate­
gorize them (phenomenology).
Posture and abnormal movements should be observed while the 
patient is in the recumbent position, in the seated position, standing 
upright with arms by the side, and then standing with arms and fingers 
outstretched. The child’s ability to maintain a voluntary posture or vol­
untary muscle contraction should be assessed. This includes the ability 
to maintain grip while holding the examiner’s hands and the ability to 
maintain tongue protrusion. Observation of tasks such as picking up, 
grasping, playing with small toys, pouring water from glass to glass, 
and writing is useful in the characterization of involuntary movements 
affecting the upper extremities, trunk, and neck. Stance, gait, swivel, 
running, stooping, and recovering should be assessed. Observation 
of speech is important as abnormal movements of the tongue, palate, 
lower face, and jaw affect the quality of speech. Abnormal movements 
of the laryngeal muscles affect voice production and quality. Motor 
impersistence and parakinesia (described in the section on chorea) 
should be recognized and identified when present. Paroxysmal move­
ments such as tics may be briefly suppressible during a voluntary motor 
task, only to emerge once the task is accomplished. Tics when mild may 
not be witnessed in the clinic. Paroxysmal kinesigenic dystonia is often 
provoked by getting up from the seated position or at the beginning 
of a short sprint (see Table 40.2). Paroxysmal movements that occur 
between periods of normalcy may not be witnessed during the exam­
ination. When a paroxysmal movement is not witnessed in the clinic, 
videotape review is often helpful.
The gait examination is an essential component of the neurologic 
examination in a child with a movement disorder. The various gait 
abnormalities linked to the different movement disorders are listed in 
Table 40.4.
DYSTONIA
Dystonia is defined as a movement disorder in which involuntary 
sustained or intermittent muscle contractions cause twisting and 
repetitive movements, abnormal postures, or both. Dystonia is often 
initiated or worsened by voluntary action and associated with overflow 
muscle activation.
Dystonia can affect any part of the body. Terms used to describe 
the distribution of dystonia include focal, segmental, multifocal, and 
Define the dominant
movement disorder
Presence of one or more
movement disorders?
Identify all subtypes of
movement disorders
Identify associated
neurologic features
Clinically based
syndrome
Diagnostic
work-up
Identify associated non-
neurologic features
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Fig. 40.1  A systematic approach to diagnosis in patients presenting with movement disorders. (From 
Abdo WF, van de Warrenburg BPC, Burn DJ, et al. The clinical approach to movement disorders. Nat Rev. 
2010;6:29–37 [Fig. 1, p. 34].)
TABLE 40.1  Types of Childhood Movement 
Disorders
Dystonia
Chorea, athetosis, ballismus
Myoclonus
Tremor
Ataxia
Stereotypies
Tics
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
719
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
TABLE 40.2  Classification of Primary and Epilepsy Paroxysmal Dyskinesias
PKD
PNKD
PED
PHD*
Inheritance
AD
AD
AD
Usually sporadic
Gender M:F
4:1
2:1
2:3
7:3
Age at onset, yr
<1–20
<1–20s
2–30
4–20s
Phenomenology of 
abnormal movements
Dystonia with or without chorea/
ballism, uni-­ or bilateral
Dystonia with or without 
choreoathetosis, uni-­ or 
bilateral, rarely spasticity
Dystonia, sometimes 
in combination with 
choreoathetosis, uni-­ or 
bilateral
Dystonia, chorea, ballism
Triggers
Sudden movement, change in 
direction, acceleration, startle
Alcohol, caffeine, emotions, 
fatigue
Prolonged exercise, muscle 
vibration
Sleep
Duration of paroxysms
Seconds up to 5 min
2 min–4 hr
5 min–2 hr
30 min up to 50 min
Frequency of paroxysms
1 per month to 100 per day
Few per week to few in a lifetime
Few per month
Few per year to few per night
Genetics
	1.	EKD1: 16p11.2-­q12.1 (DYT10) with 
PRRT2 gene within this region
	2.	EKD2: 16q13-­q22.1 (DYT19)
	3.	EKD3: no variant on 
chromosome 16
	1.	PNKD: 2q35 (DYT8)
	2.	SCL2A1: chromosome 1 (DYT9)
	3.	KCNMA1: 10q22
	4.	Locus on 2q31 (DYT20)
	1.	SCL2A1: 1p35-­p31.3 
(DYT18)
	1.	CHRNA4: 20q13.2-­q13.3
	2.	CHRNB2: chromosome 1q21
	3.	Locus on chromosome 15q24
	4.	Locus on chromosome 8p21
Treatment
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, others)
Avoiding triggers, benzodiazepines 
(clonazepam)
Avoiding triggers, ketogenic 
diet (in GLUT-­1 deficiency)
Anticonvulsants
*Also known as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; PED, paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia; PHD, paroxysmal hypogenic dyskinesia (a seizure 
disorder); PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia; PNKD, paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia.
BNSM
Exaggerated startle
Other PEM
Oculogyric crisis
Paroxysmal tonic upgaze
BPTI
TDI
PKD
PED
Episodic ataxia
Acquired PMD
PNKD
BMEI spectrum
Hemiplegic attacks
Neonatal
age
Infancy
Childhood
Adolescence
Adulthood
Fig. 40.2  Onset of different paroxysmal movement disorders (PMDs) according to age. BNSM, benign 
neonatal sleep myoclonus; BMEI, benign myoclonus of early infancy; BPTI, benign paroxysmal torticollis of 
infancy; PEM, paroxysmal eye movements; PED, paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia; PKD, paroxysmal 
kinesigenic dyskinesia; PNKD: paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia. (From Garone G, Capuano A, Travaglini 
L, et al. Clinical and genetic overview of paroxysmal movement disorders and episodic ataxias. Intern J Mol 
Sci. 2020;21:3630, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
720
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
generalized. Focal dystonia affects a single body part. Examples of focal 
dystonia include blepharospasm (involuntary spasms of the eyelids), 
torticollis (dystonia of the neck muscles), and writer’s cramp (dysto­
nia of the hand). Dystonia that affects two contiguous body parts is 
referred to as segmental dystonia (e.g., neck and arm or face and arm). 
Dystonia of two noncontiguous body parts is referred to as multifocal 
dystonia. Dystonia on one side of the body (e.g., left leg and left arm) 
is described as hemidystonia. Dystonia of more than one limb with 
involvement of the trunk is termed generalized dystonia. Dystonia may 
affect the larynx in isolation as a focal dystonia or as part of a more gen­
eralized dystonia giving rise to a “strangled,” “whispery,” or “breathy” 
quality of voice production. The distribution of dystonia may be some­
times helpful in localization. For example, acute hemidystonia may be 
due to pathology in the contralateral basal ganglia. The documentation 
of the distribution of dystonia also helps in the clinical detection of 
progression of disease over time.
The clinical evaluation of a patient with dystonia should delin­
eate the time course of symptoms (acute, subacute, or chronic), 
distribution, whether it is present all the time or paroxysmal 
(if paroxysmal, whether it is provoked by initiation of movement), 
whether there is a diurnal variation (worse toward the end of the 
day), presence of other symptoms, and family history of similar 
conditions.
The etiology or underlying causes of pediatric dystonia are quite 
heterogenous. It is helpful in the clinical setting to differentiate acute 
dystonia from subacute or chronic dystonia. Acute dystonia in general 
suggests that the dysfunction in the brain is acute and therefore should 
be evaluated urgently. Associated symptoms of fever or systemic symp­
toms suggest a primary central nervous system (CNS) infection or 
inflammation that requires urgent evaluation.
Subacute and chronic dystonia are usually due to more slowly pro­
gressive acquired conditions, genetic disorders, or heredodegenerative 
conditions.
Acute Dystonia
When faced with a child presenting with acute dystonia, the evalua­
tion should be conducted rapidly considering drugs/toxins, infection, 
inflammation, and acute ischemia as possible causes (Table 40.5).
TABLE 40.3  IEMs Associated with Movement Disorder by Age at Onset
Prenatal
Neonatal
Infancy and Childhood
Adolescence and Adulthood
 • Atypical Gaucher 
disease due to saposin 
C deficiency
 • Glycine encephalopathy
 • Hyperekplexia or hyperexcitability: 
SUOX—isolated sulfite oxidase 
deficiency
 • Absence of voluntary movements or 
HRS: CLPB 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria 
disorder, ADSL adenylosuccinate 
lyase deficiency, and PC pyruvate 
carboxylase deficiency
 • Myoclonic jerks: GLDC and 
ATM-glycine encephalopathy
 • Tremor, jitteriness, dystonia: HTRA2 
3-­methylglutaconic aciduria type 8
 • Most of the IEMs presenting with MD 
begin in this age group
 • Onset before 2 yr of age: disorders 
of purine and creatine metabolism, 
neurotransmitter disorders, propionic 
and methylmalonic acidemia, glutaric 
aciduria type 1, disorders of cobalamin 
metabolism, biotinidase deficiency, 
manganese disorders (SLC39A8), GLUT-­1 
deficiency, mitochondrial disorders 
(including Leigh syndrome), SNX14 
deficiency, CLN14 disease, Niemann-­Pick 
type C, sialidosis, PMM2-­CDG and other 
congenital disorders of glycosylation
 • Adult-­onset ataxia:
3-­methylglutaconyl-­CoA hydratase 
deficiency, 3-­phosphoglycerate 
dehydrogenase deficiency, 
g-­glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency, 
OPA1 deficiency, very long-­chain fatty 
acid elongase 4 deficiency, very long-­
chain fatty acid elongase 5 deficiency, 
abetalipoproteinemia, hereditary 
coproporphyria, complex MD (tremor, 
ataxia, myoclonus, perioral dyskinesias), 
cathepsin F deficiency (myoclonus, 
cerebellar ataxia, parkinsonism), neuronal 
ceroid lipofuscinosis type 4 (Parry type)
Many IEMs presenting with MD do not have a specific age of onset, and hence this parameter may not be extremely valuable in evaluating a par­
ticular case.
IEMs, inborn errors of metabolism; MD, movement disorder.
From Ortigoza-­Escobar JD. A proposed diagnostic algorithm for inborn errors of metabolism presenting with movements disorders. Front Neurol. 
2020;11:582160, Table 2.
TABLE 40.4  Gait Abnormalities in Movement Disorders
Ataxia
Wide-­based stance. Extra steps to the side or backward to maintain balance while standing still. Extra steps to the side and a “drunken”-­type 
gait with trunk sway when walking. Veering to the side and falls especially when turning or changing direction. Hurls self forward while 
running with a tendency to fall at the end of the run. In general, the mildly ataxic child tends to have a harder time standing still or walking 
slowly compared to running. When severe, standing, walking, and running are all significantly impaired.
Choreoathetosis
Lurching-­type gait. Difficulty standing still or motionless with intermittent, random jerky movements of arms, neck, trunk, legs, and face giving 
rise to a “fidgety” appearance.
Tics
Normal gait and coordination.
Stereotypies
Normal gait.
Dystonia
If dystonia is focal and does not involve the legs or trunk, gait may be normal. In generalized dystonia, look for twisting and/or prominent 
lordosis of the trunk or twisting inward or medially of the legs. The feet may be inverted and plantarflexed. The abnormality tends to become 
more noticeable the longer the patient walks or runs. When dystonia is severe, the affected limbs tend to move “en bloc” with little apparent 
flexibility at the joints.
Tremor
Gait can be normal. In the parkinsonian patient there is difficulty initiating movement and the gait is often slow and “stiff.” In the patient with 
orthostatic tremor, standing brings out the tremor in the legs. The tremor disappears or improves when seated or walking.
Myoclonus
Gait is usually normal. If myoclonus affects the trunk or legs, lightning-­like jerks depending on the amplitude can result in falls.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
721
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
In these situations, dystonia is often not isolated and is often accom­
panied by systemic symptoms and signs or other abnormalities in the 
neurologic system such as mental status changes, seizures, or acute 
psychiatric symptoms.
Infections
Viral or bacterial encephalitis may affect the basal ganglia, giving rise 
to an acute movement disorder with dystonia, usually in the setting 
of systemic symptoms and symptoms arising from multifocal involve­
ment of the brain.
Inflammation
Postinfectious syndromes such as acute disseminated encephalomy­
elitis (ADEM) may present with a mixed movement disorder with 
dystonia.
­N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor (NMDAR antibody) encephali­
tis is one of the more well-­defined autoimmune disorders presenting 
with both movement disorders (chorea, dystonia) and neuropsychiat­
ric symptoms. The symptoms usually evolve in a subacute to chronic 
fashion occasionally with acute worsening. A clinical suspicion of the 
condition, often with MRI signal changes in the hippocampi, mesial 
temporal lobes, thalamus, and brainstem (not all cases have MRI 
changes), with NMDAR antibody positivity in serum and cerebrospi­
nal fluid (CSF) help clinch the diagnosis. Screening for an underlying 
tumor should be undertaken. Cases in children and adolescents have 
been linked to ovarian or testicular teratoma, seminoma, and small-­
cell lung cancer. The incidence of tumors in children with this condi­
tion is lower than that of adults. Management is with immune therapy 
following tumor resection (in the cases linked to tumors).
Acute Dystonic Reactions from Medications
Areas affected include the jaw muscles (trismus), neck (torticollis), 
back (opisthotonus), and extraocular muscles (oculogyric deviation 
of eyes). The patient may also have trouble chewing or swallowing. 
Although these sudden movements can mimic seizures, the patient 
remains fully aware of their surroundings and the dystonia resolves 
almost immediately with intravenous Benadryl. Commonly used med­
ications such as antiemetics, anticonvulsants, and neuroleptics with 
dopamine-­blocking properties can give rise to acute or delayed dys­
tonic reactions.
Paroxysmal Dystonia
Paroxysmal dystonia in sleep should raise the suspicion of seizures and 
appropriate neurophysiologic evaluation may be needed to differenti­
ate seizures from a movement disorder. Paroxysmal dystonic move­
ments with alteration of consciousness should also raise the suspicion 
of seizures (Table 40.6).
Paroxysmal Kinesigenic Dyskinesia
Paroxysmal dystonia or choreoathetosis triggered by the initiation of 
movement suggests the diagnosis of paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskine­
sia (PKD) (see Table 40.2). PKD appears to be a heterogenous disor­
der in which initiation of movement triggers episodes of dystonia or 
choreoathetoid movements. The symptoms are often unilateral. Onset 
of symptoms is between ages 1 and 20 years. The episodes of dysto­
nia are clinically distinct from seizures because consciousness is fully 
preserved, and the episodes are triggered by the initiation of move­
ment. There is no associated pain with these episodes. The episodes last 
seconds to less than a minute. Some patients have additional neuro­
logic disorders such as benign infantile epilepsy. Infantile convulsions 
followed by PKD in late childhood or adolescence is thought to be a 
variant form of PKD.
The diagnosis of PKD is confirmed by the absence of organic dis­
ease or structural abnormality on neuroimaging and the response to 
anticonvulsant medications such as carbamazepine, usually in low 
doses. This condition may be sporadic or familial. Familial PKD can 
be caused by variants in the proline-­rich transmembrane protein 2 
(PRRT2). However, this gene is found in only a portion of individu­
als with PKD. Variants in KCNA1 are identified in some families with 
PKD. A diagnostic approach to paroxysmal dyskinesias is noted in 
Fig. 40.3.
Sandifer Syndrome
Episodic arching or dystonic posture of the neck and back in an infant 
or child can be seen in the setting of reflux. These episodes are usually 
related to feeds.
Benign Paroxysmal Torticollis
This is thought to be a migraine variant. In this condition children have 
paroxysmal episodes of head and/or trunk tilt that can last for hours 
or days, usually without other symptoms. Onset can be as early as the 
first year of life. Usually these episodes gradually decrease with age and 
resolve or evolve into episodes of migraine as the child grows older. 
At initial presentation, a detailed clinical evaluation should be under­
taken, with appropriate testing to rule out organic causes. Careful 
monitoring should occur to determine whether these symptoms evolve 
into those of migraine or change to suggest a chronic neurogenetic dys­
tonia that would warrant further evaluation.
Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is a rare condition presenting 
in childhood with episodes of temporary paralysis, often affecting one side 
of the body (hemiplegia). The episodes usually occur before age 18 months 
and last from minutes to days. Although not primarily a movement dis­
order, individuals can also have episodic choreoathetosis or dystonia in 
addition to episodes of hemiplegia. The episodes of abnormal movements 
can occur during or separate from the episodes of paralysis. These epi­
sodes can occur with triggers of stress, cold, or extreme tiredness. Some­
times there is no recognizable trigger. Other potential symptoms include 
TABLE 40.5  Differential Diagnosis of 
Acute Dystonia
Drugs: L-­dopa, dopamine antagonists, fenfluramine, antipsychotics, antiemetics, 
anticonvulsants, flecainide, ergots, some calcium channel blocking agents
Toxins: carbon monoxide, magnesium, carbon disulfide, cyanide, methanol, 
disulfiram, wasp sting
Structural: stroke or lesion involving the basal ganglia
Infection: viral or bacterial encephalitis; other infections with focal brain 
lesions: tuberculosis, neurocysticercosis
Inflammation: involving the basal ganglia: acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM), ­N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor (NMDAR) 
encephalitis, rarely antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
TABLE 40.6  Differential Diagnosis of 
Paroxysmal Dystonia
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dystonia
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dystonia
Sandifer syndrome
Benign paroxysmal dystonia
Seizures
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
722
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
developmental delay, abnormal eye movements, and seizures. Most indi­
viduals have pathogenic variants in ATP1A3, and a smaller number have 
variants in ATP1A2. There is a high rate of de novo (sporadic) events, so 
many patients do not have a family history of similar symptoms. When 
there is a family history, it tends to follow an autosomal dominant pattern. 
Several treatments have been used including flunarizine, benzodiazepines, 
topiramate, oral adenosine triphosphate (ATP), coenzyme Q, acetazol­
amide, aripiprazole, and dextromethorphan, with various rates of success 
in aborting attacks or decreasing their frequency.
Chronic Dystonia
Classification of chronic dystonia is linked to etiology (Tables 40.7 and 
40.8).
Primary pure dystonia: Dystonia is the only clinical symptom and 
there is no identifiable exogenous cause or other inherited degen­
erative disease.
Primary dystonia plus syndromes: Dystonia may be a prominent or early 
sign but there are other abnormal movements such as myoclonus, 
ataxia, or parkinsonism, and there is no evidence of neurodegeneration.
Primary paroxysmal dystonia: Dystonia occurs in brief episodes with 
normalcy in between. These disorders can be familial or sporadic.
Secondary dystonia: Dystonia is a symptom of an identified neuro­
logic condition such as brain tumor, stroke, infection, inflamma­
tion, drugs, or toxins.
Heredodegenerative: Dystonia is one of many other neurologic signs 
or symptoms of a heredodegenerative or metabolic disorder (see 
Table 40.8).
Primary Dystonia
Early-­Onset Dystonia
Early-­onset idiopathic torsion dystonia caused by variants in DYTI 
(TOR1A/torsin A) represents the most common and most severe form 
of pure primary chronic dystonia in childhood. Previously referred 
to as dystonia musculorum deformans, it accounts for 16–53% of 
pediatric-­onset dystonia in the non-­Jewish population and for 80–90% 
of cases in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The dystonia usually 
Paroxysmal
choreoathetosis
and spasticity
Main causes of recurring paroxysmal
episodes of dyskinesia
Classic
paroxysmal dyskinesias
Complex
migraine
Alternating
hemiplegia
of childhood
ATP1A3
variants
SCL2A1
variants
GCH1
variants
Parkin
variants
PED
Paroxysmal
exercise-
induced
dyskinesia
PNKD
Paroxysmal
non-
kinesigenic
dyskinesia
CACNA1A
variants
SCN1A
variants
Paroxysmal
hypnogenic
dyskinesia
Could this be
nocturnal frontal
lobe epilepsy?
PNKD
variants
PKD
Paroxysmal
kinesigenic
dyskinesia
ICCA
Infantile convulsions
and paroxysmal
choreoathetosis
PRRT2
variants
Variants in
CHRNA2, CHRNA4,
CHRNB2 or KCNT1
Fig. 40.3  Main genetic causes of recurring paroxysmal episodes of dyskinesia. (From Swaiman KF, Ashwal A, 
Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:722, Fig. 94-­1.)
TABLE 40.7  Types of Chronic Dystonia
PRIMARY (PURE) DYSTONIA
Autosomal Dominant
Idiopathic torsion dystonia: DYTI (TOR1A)
Idiopathic torsion dystonia/whispering dysphonia: DYT4 (TUBB4A)
Adolescent/early adulthood onset: DYT6 (THAP1)
DYT13
Autosomal Recessive
DYT17
PRIMARY DYSTONIA PLUS SYNDROMES
Autosomal Dominant
Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) cyclohydrolase-­1: DYT5 (dopa-­responsive 
dystonia)
Dystonia myoclonus: DYT11: epsilon sarcoglycan gene variant
Rapid-­onset dystonia parkinsonism: DYT12
Alcohol-­responsive dystonia myoclonic dystonia: DYT15
Autosomal Recessive
Young-­onset dystonia parkinsonism: DYT16
PRIMARY PAROXYSMAL DYSTONIA
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD): DYT10 (PxMD-PRRT2)
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD1): DYT8 (PxMD-PNKD)
Paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia (PED): DYT18 (PxMD-SLC2A1) 
gene variants
SECONDARY DYSTONIA
Structural defects: stroke, tumor
Infection/inflammation
Drugs, toxins
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Rasmussen syndrome
DYT, prefix nomenclature for numbering monogenic dystonias.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
723
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
TABLE 40.8  Diseases with Complex Symptoms and Dystonia: Inherited Neurodegenerative/
Metabolic Disorders
Disorder
MOI
Gene(s)
Clues to the Diagnosis
Neurodegenerative Diseases
DRPLA (dentatorubral-­pallidoluysian atrophy) AD
ATN1
Huntington disease–like; prominent myoclonus
Huntington disease (Westphal variant 
juvenile-­ or childhood-­onset HD)
AD
HTT
Family history; caudate atrophy on MRI
Huntington disease–like 2
AD
JPH3
African ancestry
Rett or Rett-­like syndrome
XL, AD
MECP2, FOXG1, GNB1
Unusual stereotypies; autism
Parkin type of early-­onset Parkinson disease
AR
PARK2
Abnormal DaTscan
Chorea-­acanthocytosis
AR (and possible AD)
VPS13A
Acanthocytes in blood smear
McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome
XL
XK
Weak expression of Kell antigens; acanthocytes in blood smear
Neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease
AD or sporadic
Unknown
MRI: high-­intensity signal in cortico-­medullary junction on DWI 
images; intranuclear inclusions on skin biopsies
Disorders Leading to Brain Calcification
Primary familial brain calcification
AD
PDGFB, PDGFRB, SLC20A2, 
XPR1
MRI/CT: calcifications in basal ganglia, white matter, and 
cerebellum
Disorders of Heavy Metal Metabolism
Wilson disease
AR
ATP7B
↓ Plasma ceruloplasmin; Kaiser-­Fleischer corneal ring; face of 
the giant panda sign on MRI
Hypermanganesemia with dystonia, 
polycythemia, and cirrhosis
AR
SLC30A10
T1-­weighted hyperintensities in basal ganglia and cerebellum 
on MRI
AR
SLC39A14
Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA)
Mitochondrial membrane protein-­associated 
neurodegeneration
AR
C19orf12
T2-­weighted hypointensities in substantia nigra and globus 
pallidus on MRI; T2-­weighted hyperintense streaking between 
hypointense internal globus pallidus and external globus pallidus
Aceruloplasminemia
AR
CP
MRI: hypointensity of basal ganglia, thalamus, red nucleus, 
occipital cortex, and cerebellar dentate nuclei on T2-­
weighted images
Woodhouse-­Sakati syndrome
AR
DCAF17
Dystonia deafness syndrome; hypogonadism; alopecia
Fatty acid hydroxylase–associated 
neurodegeneration
AR
FA2H
MRI: hypointensity of the globus pallidus, confluent 
hyperintensities of white matter on T2-­weighted images, 
pontocerebellar atrophy, thin corpus callosum
Neuroferritinopathy
AD
FTL
MRI: cystic lesions in the basal ganglia, bilateral pallidal necrosis; 
hypointensity of caudate, globus pallidus, putamen, substantia 
nigra, and red nuclei on T2-­weighted images
Pantothenate kinase–associated 
neurodegeneration
AR
PANK2
Eye-­of-­the-­tiger sign on MRI
PLA2G6-­associated neurodegeneration
AR
PLA2G6
Cerebellar hypoplasia and T2-­weighted high signal in the 
cerebellum on MRI
β-­Propeller protein–associated 
neurodegeneration
XL
WDR45
MRI: hypointense globus pallidus and substantia nigra on 
T2-­weighted images
Lipid Storage Disorders
Neuronal ceroid-­lipofuscinoses
AR; adult-­onset AD 
or AR
ATP13A2, CLN3, CLN5, 
CLN6, CLN8, CTSD, 
CTSF, DNAJC5, GRN, KCTD7, 
MFSD8, PPT1, TPP1
Dementia; epilepsy; visual loss in children
Fucosidosis
AR
FUCA1
MRI: hypointensity of globus pallidus and substantia nigra on 
T2-­weighted images; dysostosis multiplex
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
AR
NPC1, NPC2
Supranuclear gaze palsy, splenomegaly, ↑ oxysterol blood levels
Sphingolipidosis
Arylsulfatase A deficiency
AR
ARSA
Progressive demyelination
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 40.8  Diseases with Complex Symptoms and Dystonia: Inherited Neurodegenerative/
Metabolic Disorders—cont’d
Disorder
MOI
Gene(s)
Clues to the Diagnosis
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Krabbe disease
AR
GALC
Progressive demyelination, enlargement of optic nerve and chiasm
GM1-­gangliosidosis
AR
GLB1
MRI: hyperintensity of caudate nucleus and putamen with 
signs of diffuse hypomyelination on T2-­weighted images
GM2-­gangliosidosis, AB variant
AR
GM2A
Indistinguishable from GM1-­gangliosidosis
Leukodystrophies
Creatine deficiency syndromes
GAMT, GATM, SLC6A8
MR spectroscopy: no creatine peak
Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease
XL
PLP1
Hypomyelination on MRI
Disorders of Purine Metabolism
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
XL
HPRT1
Self-­mutilation; ↑ uric acid in plasma and urine
Mitochondrial Disorders
Leigh syndrome
AR, mt
Pathogenic variants in the 
mtDNA; nuclear genes*
Bilateral basal ganglia lesions on MRI; ↑ lactate levels on 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
Mt
Pathogenic variants in the 
mtDNA
Optic nerve changes on fundoscopy
MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, 
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes)
Mt
Pathogenic variants in the 
mtDNA
Deep white matter changes and strokelike lesions on MRI
MERRF (myoclonus epilepsy associated 
with ragged-­red fibers)
Mt
Pathogenic variants in the 
mtDNA
Progressive myoclonus, epilepsy, and ataxia; muscle biopsy 
showing ragged-­red fibers; ↑ lactate in serum and CSF
POLG-­related disorders
AR, AD
POLG
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, ataxia
Deafness-­dystonia-­optic neuronopathy 
syndrome (Mohr-­Tranebjaerg syndrome)
XL
TIMM8A
Dystonia (particularly oromandibular) and deafness
Other dystonia-­deafness syndromes
AD
SERAC1, SUCLA2
Dystonia and deafness
XL
DDP
Dystonia and deafness
Organic Acidurias
D-­2-­hydroxyglutaric aciduria
AR
D2HGDH
Newborn screening
Glutaric aciduria type 1
AR
GCDH
Newborn screening
Methylmalonic acidemia
AR
MCEE, MMAA, MMAB, 
MMADHC, MMUT
Newborn screening
Aminoacidurias
Homocystinuria caused by cystathionine 
β-­synthase deficiency
AR
CBS
Homocysteine levels ↑ in blood
Phenylketonuria
AR
PAH
Newborn screening
Hartnup disorder
AR
SLC6A19
Levels of neutral amino acids ↑ in urine
Disorders of Biotin Metabolism
Biotinidase deficiency
AR
BTD
Newborn screening
Disorders of Thiamine Metabolism
Biotin-­thiamine-­responsive basal ganglia 
disease
AR
SLC19A3
Recurrent subacute encephalopathy; symmetric and bilateral 
edematous lesions in caudate nucleus, putamen, and cortex 
on MRI
Disorders of Galactose Metabolism
Classic galactosemia and clinical variant 
galactosemia
AR
GALT
Newborn screening
Encephalopathy with Uncertain Pathogenesis
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
AD, AR
ADAR, RNASEH2A, 
RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, 
SAMHD1, TREX1
Early-­onset encephalopathy; chilblain lesions
Disorders with ataxia as a predominant feature, particularly AD SCA (e.g., SCA3) and AR early-­onset ataxias (e.g., ataxia-­telangiectasia)
*Genes associated with mitochondrial DNA-­associated Leigh syndrome and NARP: BCS1L, C20ORF7, C8ORF38, COX10, COX15, FOXRED1, 
MTFMT, NDUFA2, NDUFA9, NDUFA10, NDUFA12, NDUFAF2, NDUFAF6, NDUFS1, NDUFS3, NDUFS4, NDUFS7, NDUFS8, SDHA, SURF1.
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DWI, diffusion-­weighted imaging; MOI, mode of inheritance; mt, mito­
chondrial; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia; XL, X-­linked.
Klein C, Lohmann K, Marras C, et al. Hereditary dystonia overview. In: GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle: University of Washington, 
1993–2021. 2003 Oct 28 [updated 2017 Jun 22], Table 4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
725
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
begins in childhood or early adolescence as a focal dystonia either in 
the hand or foot and gradually progresses. Rarely the neck or facial 
muscles may be involved first. Treatment is symptomatic.
Dopa-­Responsive Dystonia
This group of disorders with onset in childhood, adolescence, or early 
adulthood presents with dystonia with dramatic and sustained response 
to levodopa. This condition was initially referred to as dopa-­responsive 
dystonia (DRD) with marked diurnal fluctuation or Segawa syndrome. 
Symptoms have marked diurnal fluctuation, with mild or minimal dys­
tonia in the morning (after overnight sleep), progressively worsening 
toward the end of the day. Several clinically similar conditions with 
dystonia have been described, all with the common features of diurnal 
variation and responsiveness to levodopa. The collective group of DRD 
appears to be a fairly heterogenous group with either a dominant or 
recessive pattern of inheritance. Although most cases of DRD in child­
hood are due to pathogenic variants in guanosine triphosphate (GTP) 
cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1), other abnormalities such as compound het­
erozygous variants in GCH1, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), sepiapterin 
reductase (SPR), or 6-pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase (6-­PTS) 
genes have been found. Older adolescents with symptoms of DRD have 
been linked to juvenile parkinsonism and Parkin gene variants. Not 
all clinical forms have an identified genotype. CSF neurotransmitter 
metabolites show abnormalities in the dopamine metabolites neop­
terin and biopterin.
The age of onset is around 6 years, often with dystonia of the foot as 
the first presenting symptom. This gradually progresses to generalized 
dystonia. However, onset can be as young as infancy with dystonia and 
rigidity. It is not uncommon for such young children to be misdiagnosed 
as having cerebral palsy. Treatment with levodopa results in a dramatic 
improvement. In a child with chronic dystonia without an identified 
etiology, a trial of levodopa should be considered.
Symptomatic Dystonia
Acute or subacute hemidystonia should alert the clinician of the possi­
bility of a space-­occupying lesion in the contralateral basal ganglia such 
as a tumor or a stroke.
Hemidystonia has been reported as a symptom of Rasmussen 
syndrome.
Dystonia has also been reported as an early symptom of ataxia-­
telangiectasia occurring prior to the onset of ataxia.
Wilson Disease
Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabo­
lism that manifests with damage to hepatic cells and the basal ganglia. 
The disorder in childhood usually presents with hepatic symptoms (see 
Chapter 18). Adolescent patients present with psychiatric and behav­
ioral manifestations, while in young adults, dystonia, parkinsonism, 
tremor, and abnormal gait can be seen. Although rare, movement dis­
orders have been reported in younger children with Wilson disease. 
Children with Wilson disease and movement disorder present with 
dystonia, tremor, ataxia, or gait abnormality with rigidity. The initial 
presentation may be any one of these in isolation or in combination, 
remaining stable for years before progression occurs. The presence 
of Kayser-­Fleischer (K-­F) rings in the eyes (due to copper deposition 
in the Descemet membrane of the cornea) is a helpful sign but not 
pathognomonic when present (Fig. 40.4). This can sometimes be seen 
with bedside ophthalmoscopy but often requires a slit-­lamp examina­
tion to be visualized. The diagnosis of Wilson disease is made with 
a low serum copper and ceruloplasmin, increased 24-­hour urinary 
copper excretion, and the presence of K-­F corneal rings or detection 
of biallelic ATP7B pathogenic variants on molecular genetic testing. 
When a diagnosis remains unclear, the definitive test is a liver biopsy 
for measurement of copper concentration in liver tissue. Treatment is 
lifelong with copper chelating agents.
Lesch-­Nyhan Syndrome
This X-­linked condition is characterized by severe, impulsive self-­
mutilatory behaviors. It results from a deficiency of the enzyme 
hypoxanthine-­guanine-­phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT), which 
is associated with hyperuricemia, developmental delays, and severe 
intellectual disability. Symptoms of motor dysfunction and dystonia or 
choreoathetosis often precede the self-­mutilatory behavior, with chil­
dren mistakenly given a diagnosis of cerebral palsy. Serum uric acid 
levels are elevated, and diagnosis is confirmed with enzyme testing or 
gene sequencing.
Rasmussen Syndrome
This immune-­based disorder usually affects one side of the brain caus­
ing refractory focal seizures and progressive unilateral loss of motor 
function (hemiparesis) and intellectual disability. The progressive loss 
of function occurs because of chronic inflammation and atrophy of one 
hemisphere of the brain.
Although primarily linked to focal seizures and epilepsia partialis 
continua, basal ganglia involvement resulting in unilateral dystonia or 
chorea has been reported.
Niemann-­Pick Type C
Niemann-­Pick type C is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by defects 
in intracellular cholesterol and lipid transport. The clinical manifes­
tations typically begin in childhood or early adulthood and include 
slowly progressive dementia, often with seizures. Most patients also 
have progressive ataxia with a supranuclear vertical gaze palsy, although 
other phenotypes with dystonia, spasticity, myoclonus, or parkinson­
ism may also occur.
Management of Dystonia
Management in primary dystonia is symptomatic. Anticholinergic 
medications, dopamine-blocking and -­depleting agents, baclofen, 
and benzodiazepines have been utilized, often with incomplete bene­
fit and with side effects limiting dose escalation. Botulinum toxin can 
be effective in focal dystonia. In generalized dystonia, botulinum toxin 
injections can be helpful when administered to the most disabling 
sites. Levodopa is the mainstay of treatment for DRD. Other forms of 
dystonia may respond partially to levodopa. Since complete response 
to levodopa can be clinically diagnostic for DRD, a trial of levodopa 
Fig. 40.4  Kayser-­Fleischer ring. There is a brown discoloration at the 
outer margin of the cornea because of the deposition of copper in the 
Descemet membrane. Here it is clearly seen against the light green 
iris. Slit-­lamp examination is required for secure detection. (From Ala A, 
Walker AP, Ashkan K, et al. Wilson’s disease. Lancet. 2007;369:397–408.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
726
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
should be considered in every child who presents with a primary 
dystonia.
Deep brain stimulation has been utilized with some success in cases 
refractory to medication.
Management for secondary dystonia targets the underlying etiol­
ogy as well as symptom treatment.
CHOREA/ATHETOSIS/BALLISMUS
Chorea is defined as an ongoing random-­appearing sequence of one 
or more discrete involuntary movements or movement fragments.
Ballismus is defined as chorea that affects proximal joints such as 
the shoulder or hip. This leads to more dramatic, large-­amplitude 
movements with a “flinging” or “flailing” quality.
Athetosis is defined as a slow, continuous, writhing movement that 
prevents maintenance of a stable posture.
Chorea and athetosis often coexist and are referred to as 
choreoathetosis.
Choreic movements appear random due to their timing, duration, 
and anatomic location. These movements are usually rapid and tend to 
have a jerky quality. Chorea is present during voluntary movements as 
well as at rest. Children with chorea tend to appear “fidgety.” Chorea is 
distinguished from tremor by its randomness and lack of rhythmicity.
Choreoathetosis is usually accompanied by two clinical phenomena. 
Motor impersistence observed in choreoathetosis is the inability to sus­
tain voluntary contraction of muscles. The individual often drops objects 
in their grasp. During the examination when asked to grasp the examin­
er’s hand and sustain a grip, repetitive intermittent involuntary relaxation 
and voluntary contraction trying to maintain this muscle contraction 
give rise to the milkmaid grip. The combination of random, jerky 
movements of chorea and motor impersistence gives rise to the piano 
playing movements of fingers while trying to hold arms and fingers out­
stretched. If chorea is generalized or affects the buccolingual muscles, 
there is inability to keep the tongue protruded (darting tongue).
The second phenomenon seen in chorea is parakinesia. These are 
voluntary movements made to mask or camouflage the involuntary 
movements.
Chorea can be acquired or occur in the setting of an underlying 
chronic disorder.
Acute Chorea
Acute chorea tends to be acquired (Table 40.9) and should be evaluated 
urgently. In a child with acute chorea the following questions should be 
answered at the initial evaluation:
 1. Is there evidence for a primary CNS infection or a postinfectious 
condition such as ADEM or Sydenham chorea?
	2.	 If the chorea is unilateral, is there evidence of a focal lesion such as 
an acute stroke or lesion in the basal ganglia?
	3.	 Is there evidence of systemic involvement?
	4.	 Is there evidence for cardiac involvement?
 5. Are any of the following tests needed:
 
a. ECG/echocardiogram
 
b. Neuroimaging: MRI of the brain with magnetic resonance angi­
ography
 
c. ASO titers and anti-­DNase B titers
 
d. Antinuclear antibody (ANA), antiphospholipid antibody panel
	
e.	 Throat swab for culture
 
f. CSF analysis for infection or inflammation
Sydenham Chorea
This is one of the most common causes of acquired chorea affecting 
children between the ages of 5 and 15 years. The onset is often insidious 
and occurs after a streptococcal infection. The chorea is usually gener­
alized but can affect one side more than the other at onset. Sydenham 
chorea is considered a major clinical criterion of acute rheumatic fever. 
The onset of chorea and emotional lability in an otherwise healthy child 
should raise the suspicion of this condition. The diagnosis is based on 
finding a link to a previous streptococcal infection with a throat swab 
(culture) and high blood titers of streptococcal antibodies (ASO, anti-­
DNase B), or the presence of arthritis, carditis, or cardiac valvular dis­
ease. This condition occurs anywhere from a few weeks to 8 months 
after the acute streptococcal infection or exposure to streptococcus. 
Therefore, at the onset of choreoathetosis, the characteristic signs of 
an acute streptococcal pharyngitis are no longer present. About 25% of 
individuals with rheumatic fever develop Sydenham chorea, and in one 
series, up to 50% of individuals who presented with Sydenham cho­
rea had cardiac involvement. Differential diagnosis in the absence of 
laboratory tests that support previous streptococcal exposure includes 
other inflammatory conditions such as antiphospholipid antibody 
­syndrome or lupus. In most cases, the chorea in Sydenham chorea grad­
ually resolves but can take anywhere from weeks to a year to disappear. 
In some cases, chorea persists chronically. Sydenham chorea can recur 
with reinfection. Antiepileptic agents such as levetiracetam, carbamaz­
epine, benzodiazepines, valproate, and low-­dose dopamine-­depleting 
agents have been utilized for symptomatic treatment to decrease the 
chorea in Sydenham chorea. There has been some support for using a 
short course of oral steroids or intravenous immunoglobulin based on 
the idea that ongoing inflammation is contributing to the symptoms. 
In every child suspected of Sydenham chorea a cardiology evaluation 
is recommended, and once the diagnosis is confirmed, management is 
similar to that of rheumatic fever, with long-­term antibiotic prophy­
laxis against streptococcal infection. Neuroimaging of the brain with 
MRI is done to rule out alternative causes.
Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis
ADEM is thought to be an immune-­based disorder of the brain and 
spinal cord, triggered by a preceding environmental stimulus such as a 
viral/bacterial infection or immunization.
The diagnosis is made based on the acute presentation of a child 
with neurologic signs and symptoms pointing to multifocal brain dis­
ease, diffuse/scattered fairly discrete signal changes on the MRI of the 
brain and/or spinal cord, occasional involvement of the optic nerves 
(optic neuritis), the absence of a primary CNS infection (bacterial or 
TABLE 40.9  Causes of Acute 
Choreoathetosis
Acute infection/encephalitis
Autoimmune: Sydenham chorea, lupus, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), ­N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate 
receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis, system lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Drug induced: withdrawal emergent syndrome (abrupt discontinuation 
of a dopamine receptor antagonist), anticonvulsants (phenytoin, 
carbamazepine), tardive dyskinesia (long-­term side effects of dopamine 
receptor antagonists and neuroleptics), amphetamines, cocaine, tricyclic 
antidepressants
Toxins: alcohol, anoxia, carbon monoxide, toluene, thallium, mercury, 
manganese
Systemic disease: hyperthyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia
Vascular: bilateral chorea has been linked to cardiopulmonary bypass 
surgery: Stroke from ischemia, embolus, hemorrhage, moyamoya disease, 
midsize vessel cerebral vasculopathy usually unilateral at onset
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
727
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
viral), and either normal CSF or mild CSF pleocytosis with elevated 
protein. The patient often looks ill and may have a fever. Although 
this condition is thought to predominantly affect white matter, signal 
changes are often seen in the basal ganglia and abnormal movements 
such as choreoathetosis can be part of the presenting symptoms. At 
presentation acute encephalitis and ADEM can be difficult to differen­
tiate. When suspected, the evaluation, which includes neuroimaging 
and CSF evaluation, should be performed urgently. The treatment of 
ADEM targets suppressing inflammation with intravenous corticoste­
roids. Intravenous immunoglobulins or plasmapheresis may benefit 
children who fail to respond to corticosteroids.
Drug-­Induced Chorea
Chorea can be seen when dopamine receptor blocking drugs are 
abruptly withdrawn. This is referred to as withdrawal emergent 
syndrome. The chorea gradually resolves within weeks to months. 
Slow tapering of the medication when possible instead of abrupt 
withdrawal decreases the risk of this syndrome. Tardive syndromes 
or tardive dyskinesia can be seen with the chronic use of neuroleptic 
agents for psychiatric disorders, as well as some neurologic and gas­
trointestinal disorders. Neuroleptics such as phenothiazines, haloper­
idol, risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine, and antiemetics such as 
metoclopramide and prochlorperazine, have been linked to the occur­
rence of chorea late in the course of treatment. The risk of tardive dys­
kinesia in children appears lower than adults but has been reported as 
high as 9.8% after long-­term exposure.
Chronic Chorea
Chronic choreoathetosis in childhood is due to disorders that may be 
static (perinatal hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy or malformations of 
brain development) or progressive (genetic, metabolic, or heredode­
generative diseases).
Disorders that present with chronic chorea are broadly considered 
as isolated (Table 40.10), in which chorea may be the only symptom, or 
a part of more complex disorders (Table 40.11), with other neurologic 
symptoms as well as chorea.
TABLE 40.10  Genetic Disorders with 
Chorea as the Primary Symptom
Benign hereditary chorea
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia
TABLE 40.11  List of Monogenic Causes of Chorea
Gene
Main Associated 
Phenotype
Gene Product
Inheritance
Age of Onset
Diagnostic Clues
HTT
Huntington disease
Huntingtin
AD (CAG 
expansion)
Childhood to late 
adulthood
Cognitive decline, psychiatric 
disturbances
Progressive course
MRI: caudate nucleus head atrophy
PRNP
HDL1
Prion protein
AD (octapeptide 
coding repeat 
expansion)
Adulthood
Dementia and psychiatric features
Possible parkinsonism at onset and 
longer survival than HD
JPH3
HDL2
Junctophilin 3
AD (CAG/CTG 
expansion)
Adulthood
Parkinsonism may be first manifestation
High frequency in people with Black 
African ancestry
TBP
HDL4
Spinocerebellar ataxia 
type 17
TATA box-­binding protein
AD (CAG 
expansion)
Childhood to 
adulthood
Ataxia and cognitive decline
Frequent parkinsonism
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
ATN1
Dentatorubral-­
pallidoluysian atrophy
Atrophin-­1
AD (CAG 
expansion)
Childhood to 
adulthood
Seizures, myoclonus, and cognitive decline
MRI: cerebellar and brainstem atrophy 
(especially pons)
High frequency in Japan
C9orf72
FTD/MND
Chromosome 9
Open reading 
frame 72
AD (GGGGCC 
expansion)
Childhood to 
adulthood
Prominent cognitive and psychiatric 
features
Pyramidal signs
MRI: diffuse cerebral atrophy
FTL
Neuroferritinopathy
Ferritin light chain
AD
Teenage to late 
adulthood
Action-­specific facial dystonia
Reduced ferritin plasma levels
MRI: iron deposition in basal ganglia 
and cortical pencil lining
SLC20A2
Idiopathic basal ganglia 
calcification (IBGC)
Na-­dependent phosphate transporter 
type 2
AD
Symptoms: early to 
late adulthood
Calcium deposition: 
childhood to 
adolescence
CT scan: basal ganglia, cerebellar 
dentate nuclei, and subcortical white 
matter calcification
PDGFB
Platelet-­derived growth factor β 
polypeptide
PDGFRB
Platelet-­derived growth factor receptor β
XPR1
Xenotropic and polytropic retroviruses 
receptor
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 40.11  List of Monogenic Causes of Chorea—cont’d
Gene
Main Associated 
Phenotype
Gene Product
Inheritance
Age of Onset
Diagnostic Clues
VPS13A
Chorea-­acanthocytosis
Chorein
AR
Early adulthood
Severe oromandibular dystonia with lip 
and tongue biting
Head drops
Peripheral axonal neuropathy
Elevated serum CK
MRI: caudate nucleus head atrophy
XK
McLeod syndrome
Kell blood group protein
X-­linked 
recessive
Adulthood
Peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy
Cardiomyopathy
Elevated serum CK
ATM
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia mutated gene
AR
Childhood to 
adulthood
Oculocutaneous telangiectases
Sensorimotor neuropathy
Elevated serum α-­fetoprotein
Predisposition to malignancy
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
APTX
Ataxia with oculomotor 
apraxia (AOA) types 1, 
2, and 4
Aprataxin
AR
Childhood to 
adulthood
Sensorimotor neuropathy
Hypoalbuminemia in AOA1
Hypercholesterolemia in AOA1 and AOA4
Elevated α-­fetoprotein in AOA2 and 
AOA4
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
SETX
Senataxin
PNKP
Polynucleotide kinase 3’-­phosphatase
RNF216
Gordon-­Holmes syndrome
Ring finger protein 216
AR
Adulthood
Hypogonadism
MRI: cerebellar atrophy
NKX2-­1
NKX2-­1-­related chorea
Thyroid transcription factor 1
AD/de novo
Infancy
Nonprogressive course
Hypotonia and early falls
Learning difficulties
Frequent pulmonary and thyroid 
dysfunction
ADCY5
ADCY5-­related chorea
Adenylate cyclase 5
AD/de novo
Infancy to childhood
Normal cognition
Dystonia and myoclonus may become 
prominent with age
Severe diurnal and nocturnal 
exacerbations
Axial hypotonia and delayed milestones 
in most severe cases
PDE10A
PDE10A-­related chorea
Phosphodiesterase 10A
De novo/AR
Infancy to childhood
Delayed milestones and language 
development and dysarthria in cases 
with recessive variants
MRI: symmetric T2-­hyperintense 
bilateral striatal lesions in cases with 
dominant de novo variants
GPR88
GPR88-­related chorea
G protein–coupled receptor 88
AR
Childhood
Language delay and learning disabilities
GNAO1
Early infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy type 17 
(Ohtahara syndrome)
Gαo
De novo
Infancy to childhood
Progressive and severe movement 
disorder associated with developmental 
delay, with or without seizures
FOXG1
Congenital Rett disease
Forkhead box G1
De novo
Infancy to early 
childhood
Severe intellectual disability, absent 
language, acquired microcephaly
MRI: corpus callosum abnormalities, 
frontal or frontotemporal 
underdevelopment, mild cerebellar 
hypoplasia, and delayed myelination
SYT1
Severe motor delay and 
intellectual disability
Synaptotagmin-­1
De novo
Infancy
Severe delayed motor development 
without seizures
SCN8A
Early infantile epileptic 
encephalopathy type 13
BFIS
NaV1.6α-­subunit of voltage-­gated Na 
channels
AD/de novo
Infancy to childhood
Paroxysmal dystonia/chorea triggered 
by sudden movements or emotional 
stress
Focal EEG abnormalities during attacks
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BFIS, benign familial infantile seizures; CK, creatine kinase; HD, Huntington disease; HDL, ­Huntington 
disease–like.
From Menacci NE, Carecchio M. Recent advances in genetics of chorea. Curr Opin Neurol. 2016;29(4):486–495.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
729
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
Benign Hereditary Chorea
Benign hereditary chorea (BHC) was initially described clinically as 
a rare autosomal dominant disorder presenting with chorea in early 
childhood and a family history of the same. Although it was recognized 
that some children with this condition also had associated hypotonia, 
mildly delayed motor development, and tremor, there was usually 
no progression of symptoms and apart from chorea children usually 
remained well. The family history often helped confirm this clinical 
diagnosis. The disorder is caused by a pathogenic variant in the NKX2.1 
(TITF1) gene. Since the identification of the genetic etiology, there has 
been a phenotypic expansion leading to the consideration of NKX2-­1-­
related disorders that range from BHC to choreoathetosis, congenital 
hypothyroidism, and neonatal respiratory distress (known as brain-­
lung-­thyroid syndrome). Interestingly, some of the original families 
described as having BHC did not harbor identifiable variants in this 
gene, suggesting that this disorder may be genetically heterogeneous.
Classical BHC presents with hypotonia in infancy and delayed motor 
milestones, with the onset of chorea around age 2 years or earlier. The 
chorea is generalized, increasing with excitement or stress. Usually the 
chorea remains stable with some improvement in adolescence and young 
adulthood. Other types of movements seen in individuals who have 
pathogenic variants in NKX2.1 include dystonia, ataxia, tremor, sudden 
falls (nonepileptic drops), and tics. These symptoms may occur with or 
without chorea. Speech difficulty consisting of dysarthria or stuttering 
have been reported in BHC. Cognitive skills were previously thought to 
be normal in BHC; however, recent studies show conflicting results, with 
some individuals having higher cognitive skills than expected for age, 
and some lower. Depression, psychosis, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), and obsessive-­compulsive disorder (OCD) have all 
been reported with NKX2.1 gene variants. NKX2.1 testing should be 
considered in individuals with neonatal hypotonia, motor developmen­
tal delay, and early-­onset chorea and/or dystonia. The presence of lung or 
thyroid symptoms should further increase the suspicion of this disorder.
Treatment
Treatment of chorea should target the underlying cause. Symptom 
treatment can be with dopamine receptor blocking agents (neuroleptics 
and tetrabenazine), although potential side effects of these medications 
should be taken into consideration. Other medications that have been 
used for symptomatic treatment of chorea include anticonvulsants, 
specifically sodium valproate, levetiracetam, and the benzodiazepines.
ATAXIA
Ataxia is unsteadiness out of proportion to the degree of weakness and 
involuntary movements. True ataxia implies a disorder of the cerebel­
lum and its connections.
Many of the ataxic disorders have myoclonus, chorea, and dystonia 
as part of the phenotype. These abnormal movements when present do 
not directly cause the unsteadiness. The presence of other abnormal 
movements and symptoms in an ataxic child may be helpful in identi­
fication of the underlying cause.
The clinical exam in a child suspected of having ataxia should focus 
on the presence of cerebellar tremor (intention tremor), nystagmus, 
dysarthria, and truncal titubation. Stance, gait, and coordination are 
important parts of the examination of the ataxic child. The clinical 
exam should also determine whether other abnormal movements such 
as choreoathetosis, myoclonus, or dystonia are present. In every child 
with ataxia, careful observation of eye movements should occur specif­
ically looking for the presence of opsoclonus. This sign may be subtle 
and difficult to detect, especially if the child is irritable. Signs that point 
to the underlying etiology include cutaneous/conjunctival telangiec­
tasia (ataxia telangiectasia) and opsoclonus (opsoclonus-­myoclonus 
ataxic encephalopathy) (Tables 40.12, 40.13, and 40.14).
Opsoclonus-­Myoclonus Ataxic Encephalopathy/Opsoclonus 
Myoclonus Syndrome
The diagnosis of this syndrome is entirely clinical. In this condition, 
otherwise healthy children between the ages of 1 and 4 years (mean 
age of onset about 18 months) develop ataxia over days to weeks. At 
onset the condition may mimic acute cerebellar ataxia, which tends 
to be a self-­limiting postinfectious disorder, resolving within a few 
weeks. However, in opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome (OMS) the ataxia 
does not resolve within a few weeks but tends to gradually worsen, or 
remain the same, with gradual increase in irritability and the occur­
rence of myoclonus and opsoclonus. Myoclonus and opsoclonus may 
be present at onset but may occur after the onset of ataxia. When opso­
clonus and myoclonus are mild, they can be missed during the exam­
ination of an irritable ataxic child. The clinical diagnosis is much easier 
to arrive at when the triad of symptoms—myoclonus, opsoclonus, and 
ataxia—are present from onset or when opsoclonus is severe. However, 
the diagnosis may be missed for months when opsoclonus is mild and 
starts indolently a few weeks after the onset of ataxia.
Opsoclonus is defined as chaotic, multidirectional, rapid, conjugate 
eye movements. There is often a subtle eyelid flutter accompanying the 
darting eye movements. When opsoclonus is mild, the child has dif­
ficulty maintaining eye contact or maintaining gaze on a toy. Quick 
darting movements of the eyes when the child is asked to visually focus 
on an object may initially appear to suggest that the child is volitionally 
looking away. However, with careful observation of eye movements, it 
gradually becomes apparent that the multidirectional jerky, involuntary 
eye movements interfere with visual focus. When severe or dramatic, 
parents usually notice the movement and bring it to the clinician’s 
attention, often using descriptive terms that illustrate why the disorder 
was historically referred to as “dancing eyes–dancing feet syndrome.”
Myoclonus is easily recognizable when large in amplitude. When 
subtle, the isolated, lightning-­like jerks may be easier to feel rather than 
detect visually.
Encephalopathy in OMS is usually profound and consists of irri­
tability, sleep disturbance, and rage attacks. With time, encephalopa­
thy worsens and is accompanied by potentially irreversible neurologic 
regression.
TABLE 40.12  Causes of Ataxia
Acute Ataxia
Cerebellar stroke: embolic/dissection/thrombosis of the vertebral arteries, 
hemorrhage
Acute hydrocephalus
Acute decompensation from a posterior fossa tumor (astrocytoma, 
ependymoma, medulloblastoma), primitive neurectodermal tumor (PNET), 
cerebellar hemangioblastoma (von Hippel–Lindau syndrome)
Postinfectious: postinfectious cerebellar ataxia, acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM), Miller Fisher variant of Guillain-­Barré syndrome 
(acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy [AIDP])
Drug ingestion/toxins
Subacute Ataxia
Paraneoplastic: opsoclonus-­myoclonus ataxic encephalopathy
Brain tumor: posterior fossa/cerebellar/brainstem tumors
Hydrocephalus
Celiac disease
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
730
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
The condition is thought to be a neuroinflammatory, often para­
neoplastic disorder. Once the diagnosis is made, a careful search for a 
neuroblastoma (in the chest/abdomen/pelvis) should be undertaken. 
In about 50% of children, a remote neuroblastoma is found. However, 
resection of tumor alone is insufficient to reverse or stop the progres­
sion of OMS. Long-­term immune therapy with continued surveillance 
for tumor recurrence or detection is the mainstay of management. The 
challenge is to consider this condition early in the differential diagnosis 
of acute or subacute ataxia, exclude other conditions that cause acute 
ataxia in children, and shorten the time to treatment.
Clinical Observations in Children with Ataxia
When ataxia is mild, young children tend to have an easier time run­
ning compared to standing still. Running may be easier as children 
tend to launch themselves forward to compensate for their difficulty 
with balance. Standing still, with feet together, is often accompanied 
by steps backward or to the side to maintain balance. Changing direc­
tion while walking or turning around is often accompanied by a step to 
the side to maintain balance. Stooping and recovering may be difficult. 
When the ataxia is mild, children can stoop and recover but tend to do 
so with feet placed wide apart. When ataxia is severe, standing, walk­
ing, running, and even sitting become difficult and require support.
The muscle stretch reflexes (deep tendon reflexes) should be evalu­
ated in all children as part of the neurologic examination. In cerebellar 
disorders the reflexes may be blunted. However, if there is peripheral 
nerve involvement (e.g., in the Miller Fisher variant of Guillain-­Barré), 
reflexes are lost.
Acute Cerebellar Ataxia
This condition is usually seen in children between ages 2 and 7 years 
(see Table 40.12). The onset is usually explosive with ataxia that is max­
imal on the day of onset. Often the symptom of ataxia is preceded by a 
febrile illness. The condition is thought to be postinfectious in nature. 
Infectious agents that have been linked to acute cerebellar ataxia include 
coxsackievirus, echoviruses, Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis A, measles, 
TABLE 40.14  Phenotypic Clues to Specific 
Gene Variants in the Dominant Ataxias
Clue
Related Dominant Ataxia
Age at onset
Young adult: SCA1, 2, 3, 7; childhood onset: 
DRPLA, SCA7, SCA13
Older adult: SCA6
Degree of anticipation in age 
at onset
Often large in SCA7, DRPLA
Often seen in all CAG repeat–related SCAs
Benign course
SCA6
Upper motor neuron signs
SCA1, 5, 7, 8; MJD
Rare in SCA2
Akinetic-­rigid syndrome
MJD, SCA2
Chorea
Prominent in DRPLA; may occur late in other 
SCAs
Action tremor
SCA12, SCA15/16
Very slow saccades
SCA2, 7; may occur late in SCA1, 3; 
uncommon in SCA6
Downbeat nystagmus
SCA6, EA2
Generalized areflexia
SCA2, 4
SCA3 with older-­adult onset
Visual loss
SCA7
Seizures
SCA10; early-­onset cases of DRPLA and 
SCA7
Dementia/psychiatric features
SCA12, 17, 27; DRPLA
Myoclonus
DRPLA, SCA14
Intellectual disability
SCA13
Episodic symptoms
EA1 and EA2
DRPLA, dentatorubral-­pallidoluysian ataxia; EA, episodic ataxia; MJD, 
Machado-­Joseph disease; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s 
Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1471, Table 97.4.
TABLE 40.13  Ataxias in Which Specific 
Abnormalities May Confirm or Point to the 
Diagnosis*
Disorder
Diagnosis
Abetalipoproteinemia
Low vitamin E levels, abnormal lipoprotein 
electrophoresis
Aceruloplasminemia
Cognitive changes, craniofacial dyskinesia, ataxia, 
retinal degeneration, low serum copper, absent 
ceruloplasmin, abnormal MRI brain; variants in 
the ceruloplasmin gene
Adrenomyeloneuropathy
Ataxia, neuropsychiatric changes, abnormal MRI, 
elevated serum long-­chain fatty acids; variants in 
the ABCD2 gene
Ataxia with coenzyme 
Q10 (CoQ10) 
deficiency
Low CoQ10 in muscle biopsy
AOA1
High serum cholesterol, low albumin
AOA2
High α-­fetoprotein
AT
High α-­fetoprotein, low immunoglobulin (Ig)
Celiac disease
Antitissue transglutaminase antibody
Cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis
Intestinal symptoms, spastic ataxia, cognitive 
impairment, tendon xanthoma, high serum 
cholestanol; variants in the CYP27A1 gene
Late-­onset Tay-­Sachs 
(LOTS)
Ataxia, neurogenic weakness, cognitive changes; 
hexosaminidase levels, hex-­A variant analysis
Niemann-­Pick type C 
(NPC) disease
Vertical gaze palsy, hepatosplenomegaly, 
fibroblast and NPC variants
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
complex (PDHC) 
deficiency
Plasma and CSF lactate; PDHC in fibroblasts; 
variants in PDHC complex genes
Refsum disease
Ataxia, neural deafness, retinitis pigmentosa, 
ichthyosis, elevated plasma phytanic acid; 
variants in PHYH and PEX 7 genes
Syndromes of myoclonic 
epilepsy
Many associated with ataxia
Vanishing white matter 
disease
MRI and MRS
Wilson disease
Serum copper, ceruloplasmin
AOA, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia; AT, ataxia-­telangiectasia; CNS, 
central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRS, magnetic res­
onance spectroscopy.
*Some also appear in Table 40.14, and many have additional CNS fea­
tures. Clinical features summarized only for those not described in main 
text.
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s 
Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1470, Table 97.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
731
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
mumps, parvovirus B19, Borrelia burgdorferi, and Mycoplasma pneu­
moniae. Acute cerebellar ataxia is usually self-­limited, with recovery 
occurring within a few days and resolution of symptoms within weeks 
to months. The diagnosis in the acute phase is one of exclusion, with 
exclusion of other postinfectious conditions (ADEM, Miller Fisher 
variant of Guillain-­Barré syndrome) and posterior fossa structural 
abnormalities. The diagnosis is fully confirmed retrospectively once 
the course of recovery has taken place. Most children get neuroimag­
ing at the onset to evaluate for other conditions such as posterior fossa 
abnormalities and ADEM. CSF analysis is indicated after neuroimag­
ing if encephalitis is suspected. Children with acute cerebellar ataxia 
should be monitored closely to make sure that they are following the 
expected course of recovery. If recovery does not continue as expected, 
alternative diagnoses such as OMS should be considered.
Causes of Chronic Ataxia
Chronic ataxia is often due to a structural abnormality of brain devel­
opment such as Dandy-­Walker syndrome or due to a progressive hered­
itary or neurodegenerative disorder (Tables 40.15, 40.16, and 40.17). 
The progressive hereditary ataxias are often accompanied by additional 
neurologic signs and symptoms. Clinical features that may be seen in 
the progressive genetic ataxias include other abnormal movements, 
encephalopathy, peripheral nerve involvement, and spasticity. Hyper­
kinetic movements such as dystonia, myoclonus, chorea, and tremor 
have been reported to occur in about one third of patients with progres­
sive autosomal recessive ataxia. The presence of ataxia, with involuntary 
movements with progressive loss of reflexes, should raise suspicion for 
Friedreich ataxia.
Glucose Transporter-­1 Deficiency Syndrome
The glucose transporter-­1 (GLUT-­1) deficiency syndrome is caused by 
variants in the SLC2A1 gene, which encodes for the glucose transporter 
protein type 1. GLUT-­1 deficiency was previously recognized as a cause 
TABLE 40.15  Autosomal Recessive Ataxias
Entity
Gene Locus/Gene/
Protein
Variant
Friedreich ataxia
9q/FRDA/frataxin
Homozygous GAA 
expansion; rarely 
heterozygous expansion 
and point mutation in 
second allele
MIRAS
15q/POLG 1/polymerase γ Point mutations
IOSCA
6p/C10orf2/Twinkle
Point mutations
Abetalipoproteinemia
8q/αTTP/αTTP
Frameshift or missense 
variants
Cayman ataxia
19q/ATCAY/caytaxin
Missense variants
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
11q/ATM/ATM
Deletions, missense 
variants, insertions
AOA1
9p/APTX/aprataxin
Point mutations
AOA2
9q/SETX/senataxin
Point mutations
ATLD
11q/mRE11/mRE11
Missense, nonsense 
variants
SCAN1
14q/TDP1
Missense, nonsense 
variants
ARSACS
13q11/SACS/sacsin
Missense, nonsense 
variants
MSS
5q/SIL1/BiP-­associated 
protein
Point mutations
ARCA1
6q/SYNE1/SYNE 1
Point mutations
ARCA 2
Several genes in CoQ 10 
pathway
AOA1, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1; AOA2, ataxia with ocu­
lomotor apraxia type 2; ARCA1, 2, autosomal recessive cerebellar 
ataxia type 1 and 2; ARSACS, autosomal recessive ataxia of Charlevoix-­
Saguenay; ATLD, ataxia-­telangiectasia–like disorder; IOSCA, infantile-­
onset spinocerebellar ataxia; MIRAS, mitochondrial recessive ataxia 
syndrome; MSS, Marinesco-­Sjögren syndrome; SCAN1, spinocerebellar 
ataxia with axonal neuropathy.
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s 
Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1465, Table 97.2.
TABLE 40.16  Autosomal Dominant Ataxias 
Related to Nucleotide Expansions
Disease
Gene/Protein
Repeat
Locus
SCA1
ATXN1/ataxin-­1
CAG
6p
SCA2
ATXN2/ataxin-­2
CAG
12q
SCA3 (MJD) ATXN3/ataxin-­3
CAG
14q
SCA6
CACNA1A/calcium channel CAG
19p
SCA7
ATXN7/ataxin-­7
CAG
3p
SCA8
ATXN8/untranslated
CTG-­CAG
13q
SCA10
ATXN10/untranslated
ATTCT
22q
SCA12
PP2R2B/phosphatase
CAG
5q
SCA17
TBP/TATA binding protein
CAG
6q
SCA 31
Unknown
TGGAA insertion
SCA 36
NOP56
GGCCTG untranslated
DRPLA
ATN
CAG
12p
ATN, atrophin; ATXN, ataxin; MJD, Machado-­Joseph disease; SCA, 
spinocerebellar ataxia; TBP, TATA binding protein.
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s 
Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1474, Table 97.5.
TABLE 40.17  Autosomal Dominant 
Ataxias with Defined Variants Unrelated 
to Nucleotide Expansions
Disease
Gene
Locus
Mutation
SCA5
SPTBN2
11p
Deletions, point mutation
SCA11
TTBK2
15q
Insertion/deletion
SCA13
KCNC3
19q
Point mutations
SCA14
PRKCG
19q
Deletions, point mutations
SCA15/16
ITPR1
3p
Deletions, point mutations
SCA20*
Unknown
11q
Duplication
SCA27
FGF14
13q
Point mutations
SCA28
AFG3L2
18p
Point mutations
*In SCA20, the region duplicated has multiple genes.
SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s 
Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1474, Table 97.6.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
732
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
of infantile epilepsy, developmental delay, cognitive impairment, spas­
ticity, and ataxia. The GLUT-­1 protein is involved in moving glucose 
across the blood-­brain barrier. The diagnosis is suspected when the 
CSF glucose is lower than expected when compared with serum glucose 
and confirmed by erythrocyte glucose uptake studies and by GLUT-­1 
gene sequencing. With the availability of genetic testing, the spectrum 
of symptoms from this disorder has expanded. This disorder can pres­
ent not only with seizures and movement disorders but also exclusively 
with movement disorders. The most common movement disorder in 
GLUT-­1 deficiency is ataxia and dystonia often combined with spas­
ticity. Gene variants in the GLUT-­1 gene have also been described as a 
cause of dominant and sporadic paroxysmal exertion-­induced dyskine­
sia (PED/DYT18) and slowly progressive spastic paraparesis combined 
with PED (DYT19). The spectrum of movement disorders that can be 
seen in GLUT-­1 deficiency includes gait disturbance, dystonia, chorea, 
cerebellar action tremor, myoclonus, dyspraxia, episodic ataxia, weak­
ness, parkinsonism, exercise-­induced dyskinesias, and nonkinesigenic 
dyskinesia. Treatment with the ketogenic diet may lead to symptom­
atic improvement. With the availability of a potential treatment linked 
to symptomatic improvement, it becomes important to consider this 
condition in children who present with chronic and paroxysmal move­
ment disorders.
Ataxia-­Telangiectasia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder charac­
terized by ataxia, cutaneous telangiectasia, immune dysfunction, can­
cer susceptibility, and radiation sensitivity (Fig. 40.5). Although there is 
a wide variability in severity of symptoms between affected individuals, 
in general, motor dysfunction starts in infancy. Ataxia may be subtle 
and noticed when the child starts to ambulate. Dystonia or chorea may 
be present prior to the onset of frank ataxia. Immune dysfunction with 
frequent sinopulmonary infections may be noted in early childhood. 
Cutaneous telangiectasias tend to develop after age 2 years, sometimes 
much later. Usually they first appear on the conjunctiva. Other areas 
where they may be seen include the ears, flexor surfaces of the limbs, 
and face.
AT has been clinically referred to as a chromosomal instability 
syndrome, a neurocutaneous syndrome, and a DNA repair disorder. 
Most but not all patients with AT have high serum α-­fetoprotein levels. 
About 80% have decreased levels of immunoglobulin A (IgA), immu­
noglobulin E (IgE), and immunoglobulin G (IgG) (selective deficiency 
of IgG-­2 subclass).
Individuals with AT have an increased risk of malignancies, espe­
cially lymphoma and leukemia. They are also highly sensitive to radia­
tion, which produces cellular and chromosomal damage and may be a 
precipitant in the development of neoplasia.
The diagnosis should be suspected in a child with chronic ataxia. 
Serum α-­fetoprotein is utilized as a screening tool but may be normal 
in a minority of patients. MRI of the brain may be normal initially with 
cerebellar degeneration becoming apparent later. The diagnosis of AT 
can be confirmed by the absence or deficiency of ataxia-­telangiectasia 
mutated (ATM) protein and/or ATM kinase activity in cell lines estab­
lished from lymphocytes or skin biopsies, or the identification of 
pathologic variants in the ATM gene. With the availability of whole 
exome sequencing (WES) and its use in children with undiagnosed 
neurologic or motor symptoms, milder and atypical forms of AT are 
being identified.
Management is supportive, targeting motor dysfunction, infec­
tions, immune function, and pulmonary function. Exposure to radia­
tion should be minimized.
Evaluation and Testing in a Child with Ataxia
Overall, the evaluation of a child with acute or subacute ataxia is dif­
ferent from that of a child with chronic ataxia. In a child with acute 
ataxia an acquired etiology requiring rapid diagnosis and treatment is 
assumed. Chronic ataxia is often due to a heredodegenerative disorder 
or chronic structural brain abnormality.
Consideration for testing in a child with acute ataxia should 
include neuroimaging with MRI. Consider both brain and spine if 
a postinfectious cause such as ADEM is suspected with assessment 
of cerebral vasculature if ischemia/stroke is suspected. Contrast with 
neuroimaging is indicated if infection or inflammation is suspected. 
Evaluation of CSF for infectious agents, pleocytosis, autoimmune 
markers, glucose (with simultaneous serum glucose), protein, and 
lactate should be performed if a primary CNS infection or inflam­
mation is suspected. If acute ataxia continues to evolve and takes on a 
subacute course, celiac disease and OMS should be considered. OMS 
tends to be overlooked if not considered, leading to irreversible neu­
rologic regression.
In chronic ataxia treatable causes should be screened for. Screen­
ing should include serum α-­fetoprotein, vitamin E levels, antitissue 
transglutaminase antibody (for celiac disease), and lipoprotein profile. 
Serum α-­fetoprotein may be elevated in AT. Although AT is not treat­
able, it would be important to identify individuals with this condition 
to avoid unnecessary radiation, which could predispose them to future 
tumors. In all children with chronic ataxia with or without seizures, 
testing for GLUT-­1 deficiency should be strongly considered. Further 
tiered testing should proceed for children with chronic ataxia who 
remain undiagnosed, eventually proceeding to WES or targeted next-­
generation sequencing panels.
TREMOR
Tremor is an involuntary, rhythmic oscillatory movement of a body 
part. In general, the limbs and head when unsupported exhibit a 
slight tremor. This is referred to as a physiologic tremor. Physiologic 
tremor is usually not visible, unless it is enhanced by fatigue, anxiety, 
or medication. A pathologic tremor is usually visible under normal 
circumstances.
Tremor is classified by its frequency, amplitude, distribution 
(what parts of the body are affected), whether it is present at rest, 
whether it is induced by trying to sustain posture (sustension) or by 
motion (action or kinesis), and whether it increases at the end point 
of motion.
Fig. 40.5  Conjunctival telangiectasia in a patient with ataxia-­
telangiectasia. (From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. 
Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:1468, Fig. 97.6.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
733
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
The clinical examination should note which parts of the body are 
involved and activation conditions (what conditions bring out the 
tremor). Activation conditions consist of either rest or action. Action 
implies voluntary muscle contraction either while maintaining pos­
ture (postural) or during voluntary movement of the affected area 
(kinesis).
Resting tremor is a tremor in a body part in conditions where that 
body part is at rest and not voluntarily activated. This is examined with 
the specific body part relaxed and completely supported.
Action tremor occurs while voluntarily maintaining a position 
against gravity (postural and orthostatic tremor) or during voluntary 
movement of that body part (kinetic tremor). Kinetic tremor is fur­
ther subdivided into simple kinetic tremor (tremor is roughly the same 
throughout the movement) and intention tremor (tremor that is pres­
ent during movement of that body part and increases as the body part 
approaches its target).
Once the tremor is confirmed and classified, the next clinical deter­
mination is whether it is isolated or associated with other symptoms or 
signs (e.g., seizures, other movement disorders, or systemic signs such 
as hepatomegaly, K-­F ring, or exophthalmos).
The aforementioned describes phenomenology and not etiology. 
However, once the tremor is classified, the search for an underlying 
cause is undertaken based on the diseases linked to the tremor syn­
drome (Table 40.18). A tremor syndrome may have multiple etiologies. 
Intention tremor implies a lesion or dysfunction in the cerebellum or 
its connections. Combined tremor syndromes usually have an under­
lying structural, metabolic, or heredodegenerative basis.
Unless the child or adolescent presents with an isolated tremor that 
has the clinical features of an isolated essential tremor combined with a 
strong family history of the same, further evaluation to determine the 
cause should be undertaken.
Essential Tremor
This condition causes an isolated tremor syndrome. The tremor is a 
postural, mid-­amplitude, mid-­frequency tremor usually starting in 
the adolescent age group without any other associated neurologic/
movement disorder symptoms. A family history is helpful, but usually 
diagnosis is made in the absence of other etiologies and with normal 
neuroimaging. Longitudinal follow-­up is necessary to make sure no 
other symptoms emerge with time indicating an alternative underlying 
disorder. Treatment is usually not needed. However, if tremor impairs 
fine motor skills, symptomatic treatment with propranolol or primi­
done can be attempted.
Shudder Attacks
These are discrete episodes of a rapid tremor of the head, shoulder, and 
arms, often accompanied by facial grimacing. The episodes last several 
seconds and can occur multiple times a day. There is no alteration of 
consciousness with these episodes. Onset is usually in infancy or early 
childhood. They typically abate as the child grows older. There has been 
some suggestion that shudder attacks may be the earliest manifesta­
tion of essential tremor, but this link has not been proven. Seizures 
with shuddering semiology have been described; therefore, an EEG to 
capture and characterize the movements may be warranted. The EEG 
should remain normal during a shudder if indeed the shudder is a 
movement and not a seizure.
TICS
Tics are repeated, intermittent movements or movement fragments 
that are almost always briefly suppressible and are usually associated 
with awareness of an urge to perform the movement. Tics can be motor 
(movement) or vocal.
Simple motor tics consist of repetitive movements in one small 
muscle group, for example, blinking or eyebrow elevation. Complex 
motor tics consist of a sequence of stereotyped movements involving 
multiple muscle groups, for example, flailing of arms with a simultane­
ous facial grimace and neck thrust.
Simple vocal tics consist of rudimentary sounds such as sniffing 
or throat clearing or a repetitive simple sound such as “uh” or “ah.” 
Complex vocal tics consist of repetitive words or phrases, for exam­
ple, “gotta go.” Tics have two additional phenomena. They are often 
preceded by an unpleasant sensory feeling or “premonitory urge,” and 
they can be voluntarily suppressed for brief periods. Tics are most often 
seen in the setting of a tic disorder or Tourette disorder.
Tourette Disorder
Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at 
some time during the illness, waxing and waning for more than a year 
since first tic onset before age 18 years, not due to the direct physiologic 
effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or a general medical condition 
(e.g., Huntington disease, encephalitis).
Chronic Motor Tic or Vocal Tic Disorder
Single or multiple motor or vocal tics, but not both, have been pres­
ent at some time during the illness, waxing and waning for more 
than a year since tic onset, starting prior to age 18 years, not due to 
a substance such as cocaine or a general medical condition such as 
encephalitis.
Provisional Tic Disorder
Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics have been present for less 
than a year with onset prior to age 18 years, not due to the direct effect 
of a substance (such as stimulants) or a general medical condition (e.g., 
postviral encephalitis).
Comorbidities that can be seen in individuals with a tic disorder 
include ADHD, learning difficulties, obsessive compulsions/OCD, 
anxiety, depression, behavior difficulty (oppositional defiance, disrup­
tive behavior, explosive outbursts), and sleep difficulty. Comorbidities, 
when present, tend to manifest earlier than tics. Tics in childhood tend 
to start around the early school years. A positive family history is pres­
ent in about one half of patients. Reports indicate that tic severity in 
general may decline during adolescence. By early adulthood tic symp­
toms in the greater proportion of patients with Tourette syndrome may 
be greatly diminished.
TABLE 40.18  Causes of Tremor
Metabolic/electrolyte derangement: abnormality of glucose, calcium, 
magnesium
Endocrine: thyroid, parathyroid dysfunction
Drugs/medication: antiepileptic agents (lamotrigine, valproate), 
β2-­adrenergic agonists, nicotine, caffeine stimulants, antihistamines, 
tricyclic antidepressants, theophylline, neuroleptics
Heredodegenerative disorders: Wilson disease
Screening Tests to Consider for the Child Who Presents 
with Tremor
Thyroid function
Serum copper and ceruloplasmin
Glucose and electrolytes
MRI of the brain
Eye exam
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
734
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Treatment is aimed at the comorbidities that interfere with aca­
demic and social function. Treatment of tics is purely symptomatic, 
and the goal is not for complete tic suppression but rather a reduc­
tion in tics to decrease the secondary psychosocial impairment. Most 
children have mild tics that do not interfere with activity and do not 
require treatment. However, tics can be disabling and cause social 
embarrassment. Treatments that have been used to suppress tics 
include non-­neuroleptic medications (guanfacine, clonidine, topira­
mate), neuroleptics (pimozide, haloperidol, aripiprazole), and behav­
ior therapy. Although tic-­suppressing typical and atypical neuroleptics 
are often effective, their side effects often limit their usefulness. Com­
prehensive behavior interventions for tics (CBIT) can improve symp­
toms of Tourette syndrome.
STEREOTYPIES
Stereotypies are repetitive, simple movements that can be voluntarily 
suppressed. These are involuntary, patterned, purposeless movements 
such as body rocking; head nodding; head shaking; head banging; hand 
flapping; repetitive, sequential finger movements; fluttering fingers in 
front of face; and head nodding. These primary movements may be 
accompanied by stereotypic jumping or jaw opening. Stereotypies tend 
to occur when the child is excited, stressed, distracted, or engrossed. 
Stereotypies can be stopped by distraction. They can continue for many 
minutes if the child is not distracted by another activity. Stereotypies 
can be seen in typically developing children as well as in children with 
autism spectrum disorder, developmental disorders, sensory depriva­
tion, and adaptive and language difficulty. They can be seen in individ­
uals with tic disorders but are distinct from tics and do not respond to 
the usual medications used to suppress tics. Stereotypies typically begin 
before age 3 years.
MYOCLONUS
Myoclonus is a sequence of repeated, often nonrhythmic, brief, shock­
like jerks due to sudden involuntary contraction or relaxation of one 
or more muscles.
Myoclonus can either be a movement disorder (Table 40.19) or 
epileptic. The EEG is a useful tool in differentiating the two, as myo­
clonic seizures are associated with epileptiform discharges on the EEG. 
Although sometimes difficult to clinically differentiate, myoclonic 
seizures are distinct from myoclonus (movement disorder) in their 
mechanism. However, myoclonic seizures and myoclonus can both be 
present together in certain specific progressive neurologic diseases.
Neonatal Sleep Myoclonus
This is a self-­limiting disorder seen in otherwise normal neonates 
during sleep. The myoclonic jerks can affect the arms, legs, or face; are 
often fragmented, typically occurring in clusters of jerks over a few 
seconds; only occur in sleep; and disappear as soon as arousal occurs. 
Waking the baby while the movement is occurring causes the move­
ments to cease. Benign sleep myoclonus begins in the first month of 
life, gradually diminishing and resolving by age 6 months. Due to the 
possibility of myoclonic seizures in this age group, an EEG is usually 
done. In benign neonatal sleep myoclonus, the EEG remains normal 
during the myoclonic jerk. Inadvertent treatment with benzodiaze­
pines or sedating medications can exacerbate the myoclonus in benign 
neonatal sleep myoclonus.
Hereditary Hyperekplexia
Hyperekplexias are a group of nonepileptic, exaggerated stimulus-­
induced startle disorders (see Chapter 38). Tactile, auditory, or 
emotional stimuli provoke an excessive myoclonic or startle response. 
The phenomenology involves myoclonic-­type jerks that simultane­
ously involve the neck, trunk, and arms. When the onset occurs in 
infancy, there is often “stiffness” or persistent hypertonia with super­
imposed repetitive startles, thus leading to the descriptive term stiff 
baby syndrome. There are several genetically distinct hyperekplex­
ias, some associated with epileptic seizures and others remaining a 
pure movement disorder. The pure movement disorder forms tend 
to gradually improve with age and respond well to benzodiazepines 
such as valium or clonazepam.
Essential Myoclonus
Onset of myoclonus is in the first 2 decades of life. There should be 
no associated epilepsy, cognitive impairment, ataxia, or other move­
ment disorders. Differential diagnosis in adolescence includes juvenile 
myoclonic epilepsy (JME) and in a younger child, Jeavons syndrome. 
In JME, epileptic myoclonic and absence seizures in the first few hours 
after waking up in the morning often remain unrecognized as seizures 
until the onset of a generalized tonic-­clonic seizure several years later. 
Jeavons syndrome is a type of generalized epilepsy characterized by 
childhood-­onset eyelid myoclonia, with or without absence seizures, 
photosensitivity, and, in some patients, generalized tonic-­clonic sei­
zures. Differentiating the epilepsy syndromes with myoclonic seizures 
from a movement disorder is fairly straightforward in the presence of 
generalized tonic-­clonic seizures or absence seizures. When the diag­
nosis is in doubt, an EEG capturing the myoclonus is helpful. In essen­
tial myoclonus, the EEG remains normal during the myoclonic jerk, 
differentiating it from myoclonic epilepsy.
DYSKINETIC CEREBRAL PALSY
Cerebral palsy is a descriptive term used for a motor disorder appear­
ing early in life, caused by a nonprogressive injury or lesion in the 
developing brain. The most common form of cerebral palsy affects 
tone (spastic hemiparesis, spastic quadriparesis, spastic diplegia). The 
second most common is dyskinetic (involuntary movements) cere­
bral palsy caused by nonprogressive abnormality or damage in the 
basal ganglia or thalamus. Often a child with cerebral palsy will have 
both spasticity and dyskinesias (mixed-­type cerebral palsy). Mixed-­
type cerebral palsy and dyskinetic cerebral palsy together account 
for a large portion of childhood movement disorders. The involun­
tary movements in dyskinetic cerebral palsy are commonly dysto­
nia, chorea, or both. Pure dyskinetic cerebral palsy appears to be the 
dominant type of cerebral palsy found in term babies with perinatal 
hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy.
The diagnosis of dyskinetic cerebral palsy is clinical and illustrates 
the contrast between adults and children with neurologic problems. In 
contrast to adults, the clinical picture in an infant or young child with 
motor dysfunction can evolve or change over time with brain matura­
tion. However, when there is an evolution of clinical symptoms over 
time, the concern for a progressive neurologic disorder or alternative 
diagnosis arises. The presence of an identifiable injury such as perinatal 
hypoxic ischemia, kernicterus, or MRI changes indicating old ischemia 
or a recognized malformation of the brain assists in confirming a non­
progressive insult. However, in the absence of an identifiable injury, 
diseases that “mimic” dyskinetic cerebral palsy including metabolic 
and other neurologic disorders should be considered. These disorders 
would include those listed under heredodegenerative causes of sec­
ondary dystonia as well as the disorders causing chronic chorea and 
chronic ataxia (see Tables 40.7, 40.11, and 40.15). In addition to these, 
Table 40.20 lists some of the conditions that mimic dyskinetic cerebral 
palsy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
735
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
TABLE 40.19  Etiologic Classification of Myoclonus
Physiologic Myoclonus (Normal Subjects)
Sleep jerks (hypnagogic jerks)
Anxiety-­induced
Exercise-­induced
Hiccup (singultus)
Benign infantile myoclonus with feeding
Essential Myoclonus (No Known Cause and No Other 
Gross Neurologic Deficit)
Hereditary (phenotype may be pure myoclonus or myoclonus-­dystonia)
Sporadic
Epileptic Myoclonus (No Known Cause and No Other 
Gross Neurologic Deficit)
Fragments of epilepsy
Isolated epileptic myoclonic jerks
Epilepsia partialis continua
Idiopathic stimulus-­sensitive myoclonus
Photosensitive myoclonus
Myoclonic absences in petit mal
Childhood myoclonic epilepsies
Infantile spasms
Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome)
Cryptogenic myoclonus epilepsy
Myoclonic epilepsy of Janz
Benign familial myoclonic epilepsy (Rabot syndrome)
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy: Baltic myoclonus (Unverricht-­Lundborg 
syndrome)
Symptomatic Myoclonus (Progressive or Static 
Encephalopathy Dominates)
Storage diseases
Lafora body disease
Lipidoses, such as GM2 gangliosidosis, Tay-­Sachs disease, Krabbe disease
Ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease, Kufs disease)
Sialidosis (cherry red spot)
Spinocerebellar degeneration
Ramsay Hunt syndrome (many causes)
Friedreich ataxia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Basal ganglia degenerations
Wilson disease
Torsion dystonia
Hallervorden-­Spatz disease
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Huntington disease
Parkinson disease
Corticobasal degeneration
Pallidal degenerations
Multiple system atrophy
Mitochondrial encephalopathies, including myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-­
red fibers
Dementias
Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease
Alzheimer disease
Viral encephalopathies
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
Encephalitis lethargica
Arbovirus encephalitis
Herpes simplex encephalitis
Postinfectious encephalitis
Metabolic
Hepatic failure
Renal failure
Dialysis syndrome
Hyponatremia
Hypoglycemia
Infantile myoclonic encephalopathy (polymyoclonus, with or without 
neuroblastoma)
Nonketotic hyperglycemia
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
Toxic encephalopathies
Bismuth
Heavy metal poisons
Methyl bromide, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
Drugs, including L-­dopa, tricyclic antidepressants
Physical encephalopathies
Posthypoxia (Lance-­Adams syndrome)
Post-­traumatic
Heat stroke
Electric shock
Decompression injury
Focal central nervous system damage
Poststroke
Post-thalamotomy
Tumor
Trauma
Olivo-­dentate lesions (palatal myoclonus)
Spinal cord lesions (segmental or spinal myoclonus) disease
From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:243, Box 23-­10.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
736
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
CONDITIONS THAT MIMIC MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Epilepsia Partialis Continua
Epilepsia partialis continua (EPC) is a condition in which focal non­
rhythmic jerking usually in one limb occurs for hours or weeks without 
alteration of consciousness. The phenomenology is that of myoclonus. 
Sometimes the movements can mimic chorea. However, the persistent, 
focal nature of the fragmented jerks affecting a single limb should raise 
the possibility of EPC. A high index of clinical suspicion followed 
by EEG helps confirm the diagnosis of EPC. Underlying conditions 
causing EPC include focal structural abnormalities of the cerebral 
cortex, focal infection (cerebritis), cerebral ischemia, and Rasmussen 
syndrome.
Psychogenic Movement Disorders
Tremor, dystonia, myoclonus, and gait difficulty have all been 
reported. The mean age at symptom onset is ∼14 years, with no patient 
younger than 7 years. Psychogenic movement disorders (PMDs) 
tend to be paroxysmal, abrupt in onset, with selective disability. 
Organic movement disorders that are often mistakenly diagnosed 
as PMDs include paroxysmal dystonia or paroxysmal dyskinesias, 
episodic ataxia, task-­specific dystonia, and drug-­induced dystonia. 
Little is known about the long-­term prognosis of childhood-­onset 
PMDs.
Chronic movement disorders not only affect motor function but 
also are often accompanied by behavioral, social, cognitive, academic, 
and psychiatric difficulties. Symptom treatment is aimed at the symp­
toms that impair daily function. Management in the chronic move­
ment disorders is usually multidisciplinary, with the management team 
consisting of pediatricians, physical medicine and rehabilitation spe­
cialists, physical and occupational therapists, geneticists and metabolic 
specialists, neurologists, orthopedics, developmental specialists, school 
counselors, and teachers.
TABLE 40.20  Diseases That Mimic 
Dyskinetic Cerebral Palsy
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Glutaric aciduria type 1
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Rett syndrome
Angelman syndrome
Dopa-­responsive dystonia
Glucose transporter deficiency
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency
Creatine transporter deficiency
Mitochondrial disorders
Familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification
Neuroacanthocytosis
Early-­onset Parkinson disease
Wilson disease
From Debopam S. Management of alternating hemiplegia of 
childhood: a review. Pediatr Neurol. 2020;103:12–20.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
737
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
Hypokinetic
(Parkinsonian syndrome)
VSGP
PSP
(SWJ also present)
and its mimics
such as CBS, NPC
Myoclonus
Movement disorder
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Saccadic breakdown of
smooth pursuit and/or
hypermetric saccades
MSA
PD
CBS
Chorea
Delayed initiation
of saccades
Opsoclonus
OMAS
Pendular
nystagmus
Palatal myoclonus
HD
Hyperkinetic
Other choreic disorders
such as
neuroacanthocytosis
Hypermetric saccades
Downbeat and/or GEN,
rebound nystagmus
Prominent macrosaccadic
FA oscillation without
cerebellar atrophy on MRI
Ataxia
Oculomotor
apraxia
Slow saccadic
velocity
Look for other
cerebellar eye
signs
AT*
AOA1
AOA2
SCA2
SCA8
SCA6
FA
Fig. 40.6  An algorithmic approach to movement disorders utilizing phenomenology and saccades. The 
approach starts with classifying the patient as hypokinetic or hyperkinetic. Various saccadic abnormalities can 
help lead to the final diagnosis in each phenomenology. *Cerebellar eye movement abnormalities including 
downbeat, upbeat, position, gaze-­evoked nystagmus, and saccadic dysmetria are also common in ataxia-­
telangiectasia. AOA1, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1; AOA2, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 2; 
AT, ataxia-­telangiectasia; CBS, corticobasal syndrome; FA, Friedreich ataxia; GEN, gaze-­evoked nystagmus; 
HD, Huntington disease; MSA, multiple system atrophy; NPC, Niemann-­Pick type C; OMAS, opsoclonus-­
myoclonus ataxia syndrome; PD, Parkinson disease; SCA2, spinocerebellar ataxia type 2; SCA6, spinocerebel­
lar ataxia type 6; SCA8, spinocerebellar ataxia type 8; SWJ, square wave jerks; VSGP, vertical supranuclear gaze 
palsy. Y = Yes; N = No. (From Termsarasab P, Thammongkolchai T, Rucker JC, et al., The diagnostic value of 
saccades in movement disorder patients: a practical guide and review. J Clin Move Disord. 2015;2:14, Fig. 4.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 40.22  Commonly Seen “Mixed” Movement Disorders
Combinations
Possible Etiology
Tremor and akinesia
Parkinson disease or atypical parkinsonism
Parkinsonism, ataxia, autonomic dysfunction, spasticity, myoclonus
Multiple system atrophy
Vertical supranuclear gaze palsy and falls, symmetric parkinsonism
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Akinesia, rigidity, myoclonus, dystonia and apraxia, asymmetric clinical phenotype
Corticobasal degeneration
Chorea, dystonia, and bradykinesia
Huntington disease
Dystonia plus tremor
Primary dystonia
Tremor (rest and postural), dystonia, akinetic–rigid syndrome
Wilson disease
Ataxia and myoclonus (Ramsay-­Hunt syndrome, “progressive myoclonic ataxia”)
Mitochondrial disease; celiac disease; Unverricht-­Lundborg disease
From Abdo WF, van de Warrenburg BPC, Burn DJ, et al. The clinical approach to movement disorders. Nature Rev Neurol. 2010;6:29–37 (Table 2, p. 36).
TABLE 40.23  Medications with Movement Disorder as Side Effects
Medication
Parkinsonism
Myoclonus
Dystonia
Ataxia
Tremor
Chorea
Anticonvulsants
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Antipsychotics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Antidepressants
✓
✓
✓
✓
Antihypertensives
✓
Antiparkinson drugs
✓
✓
Antibiotics
✓
✓
Antineoplastic
✓
✓
✓
Opiates
✓
Anxiolytics
✓
✓
Anaesthetics
✓
Oral contraceptives
✓
Antiemetics
✓
✓
Immunosuppressants
✓
✓
Corticosteroids
✓
✓
From Brandsma R, Vanegmond ME, Tijssen MA, et al. Diagnostic approach to paediatric movement disorders: a clinical practice guideline. Dev 
Med Child Neurol. 2020. doi:10.1111/dmcn.14721.
TABLE 40.21  Commonly Seen Movement Disorder Mimics
Mimics of Parkinsonism
 • Depression
 • Obsessive slowness
 • Hypothyroidism
 • Spasticity
 • Dystonic tremor
 • Frozen shoulder
 • Slowing due to normal aging
 • Catatonia
Mimics of Craniocervical Dystonia (Torticollis)
 • Retropharyngeal abscess
 • Atlantoaxial subluxation
 • Congenital muscular torticollis
 • Correcting head tilt in cranial nerve palsy (“ocular torticollis”)
 • Space-­occupying lesion in posterior fossa
 • Sandifer syndrome with head tilt
 • Dropped head syndrome in neuromuscular disease
Mimics of Limb Dystonia
 • Contracture
 • Spasticity
 • Abnormal posture due to paresis or atrophy
 • Myotonia or neuromyotonia
 • Sensory ataxia and/or pseudoathetosis
 • Stiff-­person syndrome
 • Tonic spasms
 • Seizures or epilepsia partialis continua
Mimics of Facial Dystonia
 • Ptosis or pseudoptosis
 • Trismus
 • Hemimasticatory spasm
 • Hemifacial spasm (tonic component)
 • Myotonia
 • Tetanic spasms
 • Apraxia of eyelid opening (levator inhibition)
Mimics of Myoclonus
 • Tics
 • Tremor
 • Fasciculations (spontaneous contractions of muscle fibers supplied by a 
single motor unit that are too small to cause movement across a joint)
 • Myokymia (involuntary, subtle, continuous, rippling quivering of muscles, 
which does not produce movement across a joint)
 • Chorea
From Abdo WF, van de Warrenburg BPC, Burn DJ, et al. The clinical approach to movement disorders. Nature Rev Neurol. 2010;6:29–37 (Box 2, p. 35).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
739
CHAPTER 40  Movement Disorders in Childhood
TABLE 40.24  Inborn Errors of Metabolism Presenting with Paroxysmal Movement Disorders
Ataxia
Dystonia
Chorea
Dyskinesia
 • Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency
 • BTD-­biotinidase deficiency
 • Hartnup disease
 • GLDC and AMT-­glycine encephalopathy
 • HTD-­tyrosinemia type III
 • SLC2A1-GLUT1 deficiency
 • SLC2A1-­GLUT1 deficiency
 • ECHS1-­mitochondrial short-­chain enoyl-­CoA 
hydratase 1 deficiency
 • HIBCH-­3-­hydroxyisobutyryl-­CoA hydrolase 
deficiency
 • Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency
 • OTC-­ornithine 
transcarbamylase 
deficiency
 • ABAT-­GABA transaminase deficiency
 • ALDH5A1-­succinic semialdehyde 
dehydrogenase deficiency
 • PARK2-­Parkin deficiency
From Ortigoza-­Escobar JD. A proposed diagnostic algorithm for inborn errors of metabolism presenting with movements disorders. Front Neurol. 
2020;11:582160, Table 3.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
A stepwise approach to the evaluation of a child with a movement dis­
order should be undertaken (see Fig. 40.1).
	1.	 Delineate the phenomenology.
	2.	 Determine whether symptoms are acute or chronic.
	3.	 Formulate differential diagnoses.
	4.	 Decide on urgency of evaluation and treatment based on differen­
tial diagnoses.
	5.	 Perform tiered testing in the child with a chronic movement disor­
der, with emphasis on the treatable conditions.
A diagnostic approach is noted in Fig. 40.6. Mimics and mixed 
movement disorders are noted in Tables 40.21 and 40.22, respectively. 
In addition, drugs may produce more than one pattern of movement 
disorder (Table 40.23). Furthermore, inborn errors of metabolism 
must be considered in the differential diagnosis (Table 40.24). Manage­
ment includes treatment of the underlying condition (when treatable), 
symptom treatment of the movement when necessary, and treatment 
of comorbid conditions.
Red flags include chronicity, developmental regression, intellec­
tual disability, seizures, syndromic phenotype, and systemic organ 
involvement.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
739.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anheim M, Fleury M, Monga B, et al. Epidemiological, clinical, paraclinical 
and molecular study of a cohort of 102 patients affected with autosomal 
recessive progressive cerebellar ataxia from Alsace, Eastern France: 
implications for clinical management. Neurogenetics. 2010;11:1–12.
Anselm IA, Alkuraya FS, Salomons GS, et al. X-­linked creatine transporter 
defect: a report on two unrelated boys with a severe clinical phenotype 
(published correction appears in J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006 Dec;29(6):764. 
Anselm, IM [corrected to Anselm, IA]). J Inherit Metab Dis. 
2006;29(1):214–219.
Ashwal S, Russman BS, Blasco PA, et al. Practice parameter: diagnostic 
assessment of the child with cerebral palsy: report of the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Practice 
Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology. 2004;62:851–863.
Baum PA, Barkovich AJ, Koch TK, et al. Deep gray matter involvement 
in children with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 1994;15(7):1275–1283.
Bayram AK, Gümüş H, Arslan D, et al. Neurological features and management 
of Wilson disease in children: an evaluation of 12 cases. Turk Pediatri Ars. 
2016;51(1):15–21.
Bhatia KP, Bain P, Bajaj N, et al. Consensus statement of classification of 
tremors from the task force of the International Parkinson and Movement 
Disorder Society. Mov Disord. 2018;33(1):75–87.
Blackburn JS, Mink JW, Augustine EF. Pediatric movement disorders. Five 
new things. Neurol Clin Pract. 2012;2(4):311–318.
Bloch MH, Leckman JF. Clinical course of Tourette syndrome. J Psychosom 
Res. 2009;67(6):497–501.
Breedveld GJ, Percy AK, MacDonald ME, et al. Clinical and genetic 
heterogeneity in benign hereditary chorea. Neurology. 2002;59:579–584.
Bressman SB. Genetics of dystonia: an overview. Park Relat Disord. 
2007;13:S347–S355.
Brockmann K. The expanding phenotype of GLUT1-­deficiency syndrome. 
Brain Dev. 2009;31:545–552.
Bruno MK, Hallett M, Gwinn-­Hardy K, et al. Clinical evaluation of idiopathic 
paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia: new diagnostic criteria. Neurology. 
2004;63(12):2280–2287.
Chinchilla D, Dulac O, Robain O, et al. Reappraisal of Rasmussen’s syndrome 
with special emphasis on treatment with high doses of steroids. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1994;57:1325–1333.
Cordeiro D, Bullivant G, Siriwardena K, et al. Genetic landscape of pediatric 
movement disorders and management implications. GNeurol Genet. 
2018;4(5):e265.
Debopam S. Management of alternating hemiplegia of childhood: a review. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2020;103:12–20.
Dubey S, Ghosh R, Jana Dubey M, et al. Bilateral thalamic changes in anti-­
NMDAR encephalitis presenting with hemichorea and dystonia and acute 
transient psychotic disorder. J Neuroimmunol. 2020;45:1–5.
Erenberg G, Cruse RP, Rothner AD. The natural history of Tourette syndrome: 
a follow-­up study. Ann Neurol. 1987;22(3):383–385.
Fahn S, Jankovic J. Principles and Practice of Movements Disorders. Churchill 
Livingstone Elsevier; 2007.
Feinstein E, Walker R. Treatment of secondary chorea: a review of the current 
literature. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov. 2020;10(1):1–14.
Fernandez-­Alvarez E, Nardocci N. Update on pediatric dystonia: etiology, 
epidemiology and management. Degener Neurol Neuromuscul Dis. 
2012;2:29–41.
Ferrara J, Jankovic J. Psychogenic movement disorders in children. Move Dis. 
2008;23(13):1875–1881.
Florance NR, Davis RL, Lam C, et al. Anti-­N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor 
(NMDAR) encephalitis in children and adolescents. Ann Neurol. 
2009;66(1):11–18.
Frucht S. Dystonia, athetosis, and epilepsia partialis continua in a patient with 
late-­onset Rasmussen’s encephalitis. Mov Disord. 2002;17:609–612.
Gardiner AR, Jaffer F, Dale RC, et al. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity or 
paroxysmal dyskinesias. Brain. 2015;138:3567–3580.
Garone G, Capuano A, Travaglini L, et al. Clinical and genetic overview 
of paroxysmal movement disorders and episodic ataxias. Int J Mol Sci. 
2020;21:3603.
Gilbert DL. Acute and chronic chorea in childhood. Sem Pediatr Neurol. 
2009;16:71–76.
Gupta R. Appleton RE. Cerebral palsy: not always what it seems. Arch Dis 
Child. 2001;85:356–360.
Hermann A, Walker RH. Diagnosis and treatment of chorea syndromes. Curr 
Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2015;15:1.
Himmelman K, Hagberg G, Wiklund LM, et al. Dyskinetic cerebral palsy: a 
population-­based study of children born between 1991 and 1998. Dev Med 
Child Neurol. 2007;49(4):246–251.
Jankovic J, Kurlan R. Tourette syndrome: evolving concepts. Mov Disord. 
2011;26:1149–1156.
Jinnah HA, Albanese A, Bhatia KP, et al. Treatable inherited rare movement 
disorders. Mov Disord. 2018;33(1):21–35.
Klein C, Lohmann K, Marras C, et al. Hereditary dystonia overview. In: 
GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2021. 2003 Oct 28 [updated 2017 Jun 22].
Koehn M, Zupanc ML. Unusual presentation and MRI findings in Rasmussen’s 
syndrome. Pediatr Neurol. 1999;21(5):839–842.
Kurlan R. Clinical practice: Tourette’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2332–
2338.
Kyncehodova A, Krsek P, Komarek V, et al. Frontal lobe epilepsy with atypical 
seizure semiology resembling shuddering attacks or wet dog shakes. 
Epileptic Disord. 2012;14(1):69–75.
Lang A. Ataxia-­telangiectasia: a review of movement disorders, clinical features 
and genotype correlations. Mov Disord. 2018;33(8):1238–1247.
Leach EL, Shevell M, Bowden K, et al. Treatable inborn errors of metabolism 
presenting as cerebral palsy mimics: systematic literature review. Orphanet 
J Rare Dis. 2014;9:197.
LeDoux MS. The genetics of dystonias. Adv Genetics. 2012;79:35–85.
Lee WW, Jeon BS. Clinical spectrum of dopa-­responsive dystonia and related 
disorders. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014;14(7):461.
Lohmann K, Klein C. Update on the genetics of dystonia. Curr Neurol Neurosci 
Rep. 2017;17:26.
Mameniskiene R, Wolf P. Epilepsia partialis continua: a review. Seizure. 
2017;44:74–80.
Manso-­Calderon R. The spectrum of paroxysmal dyskinesias. Future Neurol. 
2019;14(3):FNL26.
Mejia NI, Jankovic J. Tardive dyskinesia and withdrawal emergent syndrome in 
children. Expert Rev Neurother. 2010;10(6):893–901.
Mink JW. Special concerns in defining, studying and treating dystonia in 
children. Mov Disorder. 2013;28(7):921–925.
Mohammad SS, Paget SP, Dale RC. Current therapies and therapeutic 
decision making for childhood-­onset movement disorders. Move Disord. 
2019;34(5):637–656.
Monbaliu E, Himmelmann K, Lin JP, et al. Clinical presentation and 
management of dyskinetic cerebral palsy. Lancet Neurol. 2017;16(9):741–
749. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-­4422(17)30252-­1.
Moore DM, Rizzolo D. Sandifer syndrome. JAAPA. 2018;31(4):18–22.
Nutt JG, Nygaard TG. Response to levodopa treatment in dopa-­responsive 
dystonia. Arch Neurol. 2001;58(6):905–910.
Ozelius LJ, Lubarr N, Bressman SB. Milestones in dystonia. Mov Disord. 
2011;26(6):1106–1119.
Panamonta M, Chaikitpinyo A, Kaplan EL, et al. The relationship of carditis to 
the initial attack of Sydenham’s chorea. Int J Cardiol. 2004;94(2–3):241–248.
Pandian JD, Thomas SV, Santoshkumar B, et al. Epilepsia partialis continua—a 
clinical and electroencephalography study. Seizure. 2002;11(7):437–441.
Peall KJ, Kurian MA. Benign hereditary chorea: an update. Tremor Other 
Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2015;5:314.
Pearson TS. More than ataxia. Hyperkinetic movement disorders in childhood 
autosomal recessive ataxia syndrome. Tremor Other Hyperkinetic Mov 
(N.Y). 2016;6:368.
Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Move Disord. 
2019;34(5):625–636.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
739.e2
Piacentini J, Woods DW, Scahill L, et al. Behavior therapy for children 
with Tourette disorder: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc. 
2010;303:1929–1937.
Piña-Garza JE. Movement disorders. Fenichel’s Clinical Pediatric Neurology. 7th 
ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2013:277–294.
Pons R, Collins A, Rotstein M, et al. The spectrum of movement disorders in 
GLUT-­1 deficiency. Mov Disord. 2010;25(3):
275–281.
Pranzatelli MR, Tate ED, McGee NR. Multifactorial analysis of opsoclonus-­
myoclonus syndrome etiology (“tumor” vs. “no tumor”) in a cohort of 356 
US children. Pediatr Blood Canc. 2018;65(8):e27097.
Rothblum-­Oviatt C, Wright J, Lefton-­Greif MA, et al. Ataxia telangiectasia: a 
review. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016;11(1):159.
Sanger TD, et al. Definition and classification of hyperkinetic movements in 
childhood. Mov Disord. 2010;25(11):1538–1549.
Sanger TD, Chen D, Delgado MR, et al. Definition and classification of 
negative motor signs in childhood. Pediatrics. 2006;118:2159–2167.
Sanger TD, Delgado MR, Gaebler-­Spira D, et al. Classification and definition 
of disorders causing hypertonia in childhood. Pediatrics. 2003;111(1):
e89–e97.
Segawa M, Ohmi K, Itoh S, et al. Childhood basal ganglia disease with marked 
response to L-­dopa: hereditary progressive basal ganglia disease with 
marked diurnal variation. Shinryo. 1972;24:667–672.
Sullivan R, Yan Yau W, O’Connor E, et al. Spinocerebellar ataxia: an update. J 
Neurol. 2019;266(2):533–544.
Van der Veen S, Zutt R, Klein C, et al. Nomenclature of genetically determined 
myoclonus syndromes: recommendations of the International Parkinson and 
Movement Disorder Society task force. Mov Disord. 2019;34(11):1602–1611.
Wild EJ, Tabrizi SJ. The differential diagnosis of chorea. Pract Neurol. 
2007;7:360–373.
Yilmaz S, Mink JW. Treatment of chorea in childhood. Pediatr Neurol. 
2020;102:10–19.
Yin XM, Lin JH, et al. Familial Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is associated with 
mutations in the KCNA1 gene. Hum Mol Genet. 2018; 27(4):625–637.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
