Chapter Title One Line
Chapter Author
450
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
DEFINITIONS
Intellectual disability (ID) has replaced the older term mental retar­
dation (MR), reflecting a more enlightened and progressive attitude 
toward individuals with disabilities, both physical and cognitive. ID is 
characterized by significant limitations in intellectual functioning and 
in adaptive behavior that begin before age 18 years and are expressed 
in conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills. The impairments of 
ID extend beyond what is measured on a standardized test of intelli­
gence and must take into account the context of an individual’s typical 
environment and their cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Adaptive 
functioning includes three broad domains: conceptual, social, and 
practical. The conceptual domain involves academic competence, the 
acquisition of practical knowledge, and judgment in novel situations. 
The social domain involves awareness of others’ thoughts and feel­
ings, empathy, friendships, and social judgment. The practical domain 
involves the ability to manage one’s own affairs, including school and 
work responsibilities, money management, and recreation (Table 27.1). 
Although ID is a lifelong condition, it is recognized that “with appro­
priate personalized supports over a sustained period, the life function­
ing of the person with intellectual disability generally will improve.” In 
a long-­term study comparing ID and non-­ID siblings, those with mild 
ID (intelligence quotient [IQ] between 64 and 75) were just as likely to 
find stable employment, to have similar total family incomes, to have 
stable marriages, and to raise children as their siblings. However, they 
reported higher rates of psychologic distress and lower rates of par­
ticipation in formal organizations. Table 27.2 provides descriptions of 
typical adult functioning in individuals with varying degrees of ID.
The term developmental disability includes a diverse group of life­
long physical and mental impairments that negatively affect an individ­
ual’s ability to function as well as their peers. These conditions begin 
during childhood (before 22 years of age) and interfere with mobility, 
acquisition of self-­care ability, communication skills, social skills, gen­
eral learning ability, and independent living. The specific types of con­
ditions and categories of disabilities vary widely. The National Institute 
for Child Health and Development (NICHD) includes the following 
conditions: neurologic disorders: cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, 
epilepsy, genetic syndromes, autism, and degenerative disorders; sensory 
disorders: blindness and deafness; metabolic disorders: phenylketonuria 
(PKU); and cognitive disorders: intellectual impairment, learning dis­
abilities, and attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Develop­
mental disabilities may be isolated, as in a child with impaired vision, or 
may be multiple, as in a child with delays in motor, cognitive, language, 
and social functioning. There may be considerable overlap in specific dis­
orders in terms of the affected functions (Fig. 27.1). In young children, 
developmental delays may result from a wide range of causes, including 
early environmental understimulation, chronic physical illness, neuro­
muscular disorders, central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities, and 
genetic syndromes (Tables 27.3 and 27.4). Some etiologies are fully or 
partly amenable to early educational and medical interventions, while 
others may lead to permanent intellectual impairment or progressive 
deterioration of functioning. Therefore, until a young child has had the 
benefit of early intervention services and has matured to the point where 
formal cognitive, language, and adaptive measures are stable and predic­
tive of future functioning, the descriptive term global developmental 
delay (GDD) is preferred.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Intellectual Disability
The overall prevalence of ID varies from 1% to 3%, depending on the cri­
teria used and the age of the individual at the time of evaluation. Stan­
dardized tests of intelligence have a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 
15 points. Statistically, 2.5% of individuals should have an IQ score below 
2 standard deviations (70 points) and fit the cognitive criterion for ID. 
However, because the standard error of measurement is approximately 5 
points, extending the IQ score upward to 75 points would almost dou­
ble the prevalence of ID. This might be countered by secondary criteria 
involving deficits in adaptive behaviors, since many children with IQ 
scores in the mildly low range (55–70) will not qualify for a diagnosis of ID 
because they have adequate adaptive functioning. Many studies have doc­
umented a higher rate of mild ID in economically disadvantaged children 
that stems from a few highly significant sociodemographic risk factors.
Developmental Disability
Developmental disabilities affect approximately one in six children in 
the United States (16.9%). The prevalence rates vary by specific con­
dition: ADHD (9.54%), learning disability (7.86%), autism (2.49%), 
and ID (1.17%) are the most common, while epilepsy, deafness, cere­
bral palsy, and blindness each affect <1%. Males have more than twice 
the prevalence of any developmental disability, and children insured 
by Medicaid have a prevalence of disability that is approximately 1½ 
times greater than those with private insurance. The overall prevalence 
of disability increased by 9.5% between 2009–2011 and 2015–2017, 
Intellectual Developmental Disorders 
(Developmental Delay)
Mark Simms
27
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
451
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
mostly due to a 122.3% increase in autism (from 1.12% to 2.49%). In 
addition, the prevalence of ID increased 25.8% (from 0.93% to 1.17%).
Table 27.3 lists the prevalences of selected conditions.
DIAGNOSIS
Identification of a specific cause for delayed development in a child is 
important and may provide insight into prognosis, recurrence risk, ther­
apies, counseling, and linkage with a supportive group. Identification of 
the child’s functional abilities, strengths and weaknesses, overall physical 
health, and environmental factors is critical for optimizing the child’s 
health, development, and functioning. In addition, the origin of develop­
mental disability is not apparent in many children, or there may be mul­
tiple possible causal factors or multiple disabilities present. For example, 
23% of children with developmental disabilities have two disabilities, 
and 6% have three or more. Even if a specific diagnosis cannot be made, 
early identification of developmental delay can lead to a program of early 
intervention or remediation that may improve the child’s ultimate func­
tioning. To identify those disorders that are amenable to intervention, 
an international consortium has developed both a web-­based tool and 
a mobile application (app) to assist practitioners in the evaluation and 
management of children with ID (http://www.treatable-­id.org/).
IDENTIFICATION
Children who experience significant complications in the perinatal period 
or who are born with obvious congenital anomalies are at risk for develop­
mental disabilities. In addition, newborn screening programs may identify 
children with rare but significant problems who require early treatments 
and interventions. Children with no apparent risk factors or obvious phys­
ical or neurologic symptoms may be identified through a process of sur­
veillance and screening during routine child health care visits.
Developmental Risk Factors
Young children’s development may be adversely affected by biologic 
and/or sociocultural risk factors (Table 27.5). Many risk factors can 
be graded according to severity (e.g., degree of prematurity, intracra­
nial hemorrhage, intrauterine growth restriction), but it is often the 
cumulative effect of multiple factors that ultimately determines a child’s 
developmental outcome, even when one or more “severe” risks are pres­
ent. It has been shown that low 5-­minute Apgar scores, in the absence 
of other symptoms of neonatal encephalopathy, may correlate poorly 
with long-­term neurologic dysfunction. Sociocultural risks also can 
have profound effects on development and may interact with biologic 
TABLE 27.1  Diagnosis of Intellectual 
Disability
Diagnostic Criteria
All Three Criteria Must Be Met
	A. Deficits in intellectual function, such as reasoning, problem solving, 
planning, abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning 
from experience, confirmed by both clinical assessment and individualized 
standardized testing.
	B. Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet devel­
opmental and sociocultural standards for personal independence and 
social responsibility. Without ongoing support, the adaptive deficits limit 
functioning in one or more activities of daily life, such as communication, 
social participation, and independent living, across multiple environments, 
such as home, school, work, and community.
	C. Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental 
period.
Assumptions
	1.	Assessments performed on the child are sensitive to differences in culture, 
language, communication, and behavior.
	2.	The demands and constraints of the child’s environment (home, neighbor­
hood, school) must be considered.
	3.	Even children with limitations have strengths that should be considered.
Data from American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-­V). 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Association; 2013.
TABLE 27.2  Severity of Intellectual Disability and Adult Age Functioning
Level
Mental Age as an Adult*
Adult Adaptation
Mild
9–11 yr
Reads at fourth-­ to fifth-­grade level; simple multiplication/division; writes simple letters, lists; completes job 
applications; basic independent job skills (arrive on time, stay at task, interact with coworkers); uses public 
transportation, may qualify for driver’s license; keeps house, cooks using recipes
Moderate
6–8 yr
Sight-­word reading; copies information, e.g., address from card to job application; matches written number to 
number of items; recognizes time on clock; communicates; some independence in self-­care; housekeeping 
with supervision or cue cards; meal preparation, can follow picture recipe cards; job skills learned with much 
repetition; uses public transportation with some supervision
Severe
3–5 yr
Needs continuous support and supervision; may communicate wants and needs, sometimes with augmentative 
communication techniques
Profound
<3 yr
Limitations of self-­care, continence, communication, and mobility; may need complete custodial or nursing care
*International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems. 10th revision. World Health Organization; 2010.
From Schum RL. Grand Rounds Presentation at Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin; 2003.
Language disorder
Intellectual disability
Autism
Fig. 27.1  Relationship of autism, language disorders, and intellectual 
disability. (Modified from Simms MD, Schum RL. Preschool children 
who have atypical patterns of development. Pediatr Rev. 2000;21:147–
158.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
452
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
risk factors to create a greater effect than any single factor alone (so-­
called “double jeopardy”).
Developmental Protective Factors
During the process of developmental surveillance, the clinician should 
identify and acknowledge the influence of protective and supportive 
factors that may contribute to positive outcomes. Barring catastrophic 
circumstances, child-­rearing conditions that support and enrich early 
development may compensate for biologic deficits. Sociocultural fac­
tors, such as small family size, higher level of parental education, and 
fewer changes in residence, have a more powerful positive effect than 
many biologic risks and seem to be important predictors of develop­
mental functioning beyond infancy. The brains of infants and young 
children are remarkably resilient and normal cognitive and language 
outcomes are often seen, even in the face of perinatal stroke or sim­
ilar focal brain injuries. Neural plasticity also extends to situations of 
extreme environmental deprivation, providing interventions occur 
early enough. In addition, preschool early intervention programs that 
are designed to mitigate the factors that place children at risk for poor 
outcomes have been shown to have significant short-­ and long-­term 
educational, behavioral, and economic benefits.
SCREENING FOR SPECIFIC ABNORMALITIES
Deficits in vision, hearing, and language can have devastating effects 
on development; early intervention to ameliorate these problems can 
improve outcomes. All children should be screened on a regular basis for 
these conditions.
Visual Deficits
Children at high risk for development of deficits in vision (see Chapter 
43) include those with strabismus (especially after 4 months of age), 
hydrocephalus, congenital infection, neonatal encephalopathy, con­
genital anomaly of the CNS, prematurity with exposure to oxygen, and 
TABLE 27.3  Prevalence of Select Conditions Associated with Developmental Delay
Condition
Prevalence/100,000
Comments
Cerebral palsy
250–270
Represents many causes
Significant hearing loss
150
In neonatal period
Down syndrome
98–125
Prevalence at birth
Fragile X syndrome
117
Predominantly in boys
Meningomyelocele
60–100
Prevalence at birth
Klinefelter syndrome
100
15% have intelligence quotient (IQ) <80
Fetal alcohol syndrome
60–800
Present at birth
Congenital HIV infection
5–50
Preventable with maternal and neonatal therapy
Blindness
41–88
Syndromic, genetic, prematurity risks
Infantile hydrocephalus
64
Prevalence at birth
Neurofibromatosis
33
5% have intellectual disability
Trisomy 18
30
Prevalence at birth
Trisomy 13
20
Prevalence at birth
Turner syndrome
20
IQ may be normal
Prader-­Willi syndrome
13–20
In childhood
Galactosemia
14
In infancy
Phenylketonuria
6–12
In infancy
Anophthalmia
6
Consider other anomalies
Rett syndrome
4–5
In females 2–18 yr of age
Histidinemia
3
At birth
Acrocephalosyndactylia (Apert syndrome)
1–2
Present at birth
TABLE 27.4  Identification of Cause in 
Children with Significant Intellectual 
Disability
Cause
Examples
% of 
Total
Chromosomal 
disorder
Trisomies 21, 18, 13
Deletions 1p36, 4p, 5p, 11p, 12q, 17p
Microdeletions
Klinefelter, 47,XXX, and Turner syndromes
∼20
Genetic syndrome
Fragile X, Prader-­Willi, Angelman, and Rett 
syndromes
∼20
Nonsyndromic auto­
somal mutations
Variations in copy number; de novo mutations 
in SYNGAP1, GRIK2, TUSC3, oligosaccharyl 
transferase, and others
∼10
Developmental brain 
abnormality
Hydrocephalus ± meningomyelocele; 
schizencephaly, lissencephaly
∼8
Inborn errors of 
metabolism or 
neurodegenerative 
disorder
Phenylketonuria, Tay-­Sachs disease, 
various storage diseases
∼7
Congenital infections HIV, toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, 
syphilis, herpes simplex, Zika virus
∼3
Familial intellectual 
disability
Environment, syndromic, or genetic
∼5
Perinatal causes
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy, meningitis, 
intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular 
leukomalacia, fetal alcohol syndrome
4
Postnatal causes
Trauma (abuse), meningitis, hypothyroidism
∼4
Unknown
20
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st 
ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:284, Table 53.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
453
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
family history of a childhood onset of visual impairment. All neonates 
should routinely undergo an evaluation of their fundi for the presence 
of a red reflex, which can be obscured by cataract or tumor, as well 
as inspection of the globe, which may be enlarged by congenital glau­
coma. Infants with nystagmus who do not follow (tract) visually by 
3 months of age, who have dissociation between visual behavior and 
motor behavior, or whose parents express concern about their vision 
should undergo a formal ophthalmologic evaluation.
Preschool children should undergo periodic evaluations of extraoc­
ular movements to rule out strabismus and amblyopia; the evaluation 
should include visual inspection of the child’s eyes, the Hirschberg light 
test, and the cover-­uncover test. As early in the child’s development as 
possible, specific tests of monocular and binocular vision such as Allen 
cards (3–5 years), the Snellen chart (>5 years), or the Titmus test (>4 
years) should be performed.
Loss of Hearing
Early detection of hearing loss is critical for optimizing the language 
development of these children. Universal newborn hearing screening 
programs (UNHSPs) can detect infants born with moderate, severe, 
or profound bilateral hearing impairment. Although the prevalence 
of congenital deafness is low in the general population (1–3/1,000 
infants), it is higher in infants who require neonatal intensive care 
services (2–4/100 infants). More than half of babies with permanent 
congenital hearing impairment do not have prospectively identifi­
able risk factors and would be missed without UNHSPs. They would 
not receive hearing intervention within the first 6 months of life, a 
period that is critical for speech, language, and later learning devel­
opment. Hearing loss can be acquired during infancy or childhood 
from infection (cytomegalovirus [CMV], meningitis), trauma (par­
ticularly basal skull and temporal bone fractures), ototoxic drugs 
(aminoglycosides, furosemide), or damaging noise levels. A number 
of genetic syndromes are associated with deafness (Waardenburg, 
Alport, Pendred, and Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen), and progressive 
or late-­onset hearing loss can occur in neurofibromatosis, Usher 
syndromes, Hunter syndrome, Friedreich ataxia, or Charcot-­Marie-­
Tooth syndrome (Table 27.6). Children with one or more “risk fac­
tors” should have hearing screening again at 24–30 months, even if 
they passed the newborn screening test. In addition, parental con­
cern about hearing loss has a sensitivity of approximately 44%. If 
parents express concern about their child’s ability to hear and if the 
child has had recurrent episodes of otitis media, mastoiditis, or one 
of the perinatal or familial risk factors, a formal audiometric screen­
ing should be performed. Table 27.7 lists the latest acceptable age 
(“limit ages”) for the appearance of skills related to hearing; absence 
of these milestones may indicate a disorder of hearing. Deaf infants 
may smile, coo, and babble; however, their vocalizations usually cease 
after 8 months of age.
Speech and Language Disorders
Disorders of speech and language development, prevalent in 3–20% 
of preschool children, are the most common reason for referral to 
early intervention programs and are correlated with subsequent 
learning problems. Speech refers to the mechanics of oral commu­
nication (sound production); language includes the understanding, 
TABLE 27.6  Risk Indicators Associated with 
Permanent Congenital, Delayed-­Onset, and/or 
Progressive Hearing Loss in Children
	 1.	Caregiver concern* regarding hearing, speech, language, or developmen­
tal delay
	 2.	Family history* of permanent childhood hearing loss
	 3.	Neonatal intensive care stay of >5 days or any of the following, regard­
less of length of stay: ECMO,* assisted ventilation, exposure to ototoxic 
medications (gentamicin and tobramycin) or loop diuretics (furosemide/
Lasix), and hyperbilirubinemia that requires exchange transfusion
	 4.	In utero infections such as CMV,* herpes, rubella, syphilis, Zika virus, 
and toxoplasmosis
	 5.	Craniofacial anomalies, including those that involve the pinna, ear canal, 
ear tags, ear pits, and temporal bone anomalies
	 6.	Physical findings, such as a white forelock, that are associated with 
a syndrome known to include sensorineural or permanent conductive 
hearing loss
	 7.	Syndromes associated with hearing loss or progressive or late-­onset 
hearing loss,* such as neurofibromatosis, osteopetrosis, and Usher 
syndromes; other frequently identified syndromes include Waardenburg, 
Alport, Pendred, and Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen
	 8.	Neurodegenerative disorders* such as Hunter syndrome or sensory 
motor neuropathies such as Friedreich ataxia and Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth 
syndrome
	 9.	Culture-­positive postnatal infections associated with sensorineural 
hearing loss,* including confirmed bacterial and viral (especially herpes 
viruses and varicella) meningitis
	10. Head trauma, especially basal skull/temporal bone fracture* that 
requires hospitalization
	11. Chemotherapy*
	12. Recurrent or persistent otitis media for at least 3 mo
CMV, cytomegalovirus; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
*Risk indicators that are of greater concern for delayed-­onset hearing 
loss.
From American Academy of Pediatrics, Joint Committee on Infant 
Hearing. Pediatrics. 2007;120(4):898–921.
TABLE 27.5  Risk Factors for 
Developmental Disabilities
Biologic
Sociocultural
Male
Maternal age above 30 yr old
Multiple pregnancies
High birth order
Preterm birth
Low birthweight (<750 g)
Intrauterine growth restriction
Small head circumference
Brain malformations
Holoprosencephaly
Schizencephaly
Lissencephaly
Neonatal complications
Neonatal encephalopathy
Intracranial hemorrhage
Symptomatic hypoglycemia
Severe hyperbilirubinemia
Congenital infections
Acquired central nervous system 
infections
Iron and iodine deficiencies
Brain injury
Malnutrition
Low parental education
Maternal depression
Maternal substance abuse
Low socioeconomic status
Lack of prenatal care
Inadequate environmental stimulation
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
454
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
processing, and production of communication (words). Speech 
problems may include articulation (pronunciation) deficits (pho­
nologic or apraxic speech disorders), fluency disorders (stutter­
ing), or unusual voice quality. Language delays may be confined 
to expression with normal receptive abilities or may involve both 
expressive and receptive abilities. Language delays may be a feature 
of GDD/ID, autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), or hearing impair­
ment, or may be the result of an isolated disorder (specific language 
impairment).
Children with speech and language delays often experience emo­
tional and social adjustment difficulties related to their inability to 
communicate effectively with parents and peers. In general, children 
with normal comprehension of language and normal nonverbal cog­
nitive abilities have an excellent prognosis, while those with receptive 
delays are at risk for language-­based learning disabilities (reading com­
prehension and writing disorders) (Table 27.8).
Prenatal and Newborn Screening Programs
Prenatal Screening
Prenatal screening has undergone significant changes with the advent 
of next-­generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. The traditional 
screening takes the form of biochemical and ultrasound tests, which 
may detect fetuses at high risk for chromosome anomalies and neu­
ral tube defects. In the first trimester (11–14 weeks’ gestation), mea­
surement of maternal serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG) and pregnancy-­associated plasma protein A (PAPP-­A) and a 
sonogram measurement of the fluid underneath the skin along the 
back of the fetus’s neck (nuchal translucency) may identify Down 
syndrome, trisomy 13, or trisomy 18. In the second trimester (15–22 
weeks’ gestation), a quad screen (α-­fetoprotein, hCG, estriol, and 
inhibin A levels) may identify Down syndrome and neural tube 
defects (spina bifida, encephalocele). An abnormal result on these 
screenings is typically followed by high-­resolution ultrasonography, 
chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, genetic testing (chromo­
some analysis or microarray), and genetic counseling. NGS technol­
ogies allow for noninvasive prenatal screening (NIPS) on maternal 
blood samples, also called cell-­free fetal DNA prenatal screening. 
These technologies identify possible chromosomal and microdele­
tion disorders through maternal blood screening. If an abnormality 
is detected, a confirmatory test is still required through more invasive 
techniques such as amniocentesis. In addition, prenatal genetic car­
rier screening can be performed for a large number of disorders; at 
present, these are the only standard of care for individuals at high risk 
for certain genetic conditions (e.g., Tay-­Sachs).
Newborn Screening
Uniform newborn screening is highly successful in identifying chil­
dren with rare but serious conditions who can benefit from early 
intervention. All 50 states, U.S. territories, and the U.S. military 
routinely test for inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs), congeni­
tal hypothyroidism, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, severe T-­cell 
immunodeficiency (SCID), cystic fibrosis, and hemoglobinopa­
thies. Test samples should be collected between 24 and 48 hours of 
age, but results may be influenced by a variety of maternal and infant 
factors. Tests for congenital adrenal hyperplasia are sensitive to the 
weight of the infant and the use of steroids. Screening for hypothy­
roidism (thyroid-­stimulating hormone [TSH]) may be falsely low 
in premature or low birthweight infants. The use of antibiotics and 
total parenteral nutrition (TPN) may interfere with interpretation 
of newborn metabolic screening tests. While all states screen for 
a “core panel” of 29 conditions, they vary in testing for other con­
ditions. An additional 26 conditions have been recommended for 
inclusion in the U.S. Health and Human Services Recommended 
Uniform Screening Panel. Normal newborn screening test results 
do not eliminate the possibility that a clinically symptomatic child 
could have one of the disorders in the state’s panel.
IDENTIFICATION OF CHILDREN WITH 
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES IN PRIMARY 
HEALTH CARE SETTINGS
Not all developmentally disabling conditions can be identified at or 
shortly after birth through newborn screening programs. Many disor­
ders may not manifest until children are preschool or school age, and 
some infrequent disorders cause regression or deterioration of func­
tion beginning at different ages (Table 27.9). Therefore, identification 
of children with developmental disabilities is a continuous process that 
should take place throughout childhood.
TABLE 27.7  Latest Acceptable Age for Skills 
Related to Hearing*
Age (mo)†
Activity
3
Not startling to loud sounds
6
Not smiling to voice; not vocalizing
9
Does not localize speech or other sounds
12
Not babbling multiple sounds and syllables
18
No words
24
<50% of speech understandable
*A child who does not demonstrate the activity by the stated age should 
have formal audiometry performed.
†Corrected for gestational age.
Modified from the Arizona Speech, Language, Hearing Association.
TABLE 27.8  Speech-­Language Screening 
for Pediatricians
Refer for a Speech-­Language Evaluation If:
At Age
Receptive
Expressive
15 mo
Does not look/point at 5–10 
objects/people named by a 
parent
Not using three words
18 mo
Does not follow simple directions 
(“Get your shoes”)
Not using Mama, Dada, or 
other names
24 mo
Does not point to pictures or body 
parts when they are named
Not using 25 words
30 mo
Does not verbally respond or nod/
shake head to questions
Not using unique two-­word 
phrases, including noun-­
verb combinations
36 mo
Does not understand prepositions 
or action words; does not follow 
two-­step directions
Vocabulary <200 words; 
does not ask for things 
by name; echolalia to 
questions; regression of 
language after acquiring 
two-­word phrases
From Schum RL. Language screening in the pediatric office setting. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 2007;54:425–436.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
455
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
Parents, caretakers, or teachers who have concerns about the child’s 
behavior or failure to meet age-­appropriate developmental expecta­
tions often identify children with developmental disabilities. Multiple 
studies have found parental concern to identify correctly 74–80% of 
preschool-­age children (0–6 years old) with cognitive delays, speech 
and language delays, and learning disabilities. Conversely, the absence 
of parental concern correctly identified 70–80% of children without 
a significant disability. Thus, reliance on parental concern alone as a 
means of identification matches acceptable standards for more formal 
developmental screening tests. However, sole reliance on parental con­
cerns will miss a substantial number of children with developmental 
concerns, especially those with more subtle disabilities, for a variety of 
reasons. Parents may be unaware of their child’s delays, they may lack 
the confidence to raise their concerns to the health care provider, or 
the provider may dismiss these concerns and not pursue further inves­
tigation. Children without obvious physical impairments may not be 
identified until they enter a formal school program. Complicating mat­
ters further, children with developmental disabilities may experience 
significant behavioral or emotional difficulties that “mask” (or distract 
from) their underlying developmental difficulties.
Developmental Screening
Developmental screening involves the routine application of a brief 
standardized tool when there is no obvious concern. Physicians often 
rely on their own clinical judgment, which detects fewer than 30% of 
children with significant developmental disabilities, or on informal and 
nonstandardized lists of developmental milestones. A more practical 
and widely accepted alternative is the use of parent-­completed devel­
opmental questionnaires, such as the Ages and Stages Questionnaire 
(ASQ) or the Parents’ Evaluations of Developmental Status (PEDS) that 
can be scored by nonphysician staff and interpreted by the health care 
provider.
Developmental Surveillance
Developmental surveillance is a “flexible, continuous process whereby 
knowledgeable professionals perform skilled observations of children 
throughout all encounters during child health care.” The goal of devel­
opmental surveillance is to identify children who may benefit from 
further diagnostic evaluations and early intervention services. To be 
effective, surveillance requires clinicians to be knowledgeable about 
child development and to recognize both variations of and deviations 
from normal patterns. Identification of children in need of further 
evaluation is believed to be improved by incorporating into the pro­
cess developmental risk factors based on the child’s medical history 
and family history, as well as social and environmental circumstances. 
Additionally, clinicians are encouraged to include the observations and 
impressions of preschool teachers, public health nurses, and other pro­
fessionals involved in the child’s care.
A combination of both developmental surveillance at every well-­
child visit and standardized developmental screening at the 9-­, 18-­, and 
30-­month visits is recommended (Fig. 27.2). At any point in this pro­
cess, children who elicit concern about their development should be 
referred for further diagnostic evaluations and for early intervention 
and educational programs.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENTAL ASSESSMENT
Children identified with developmental delays should receive a com­
prehensive, multidisciplinary evaluation including assessments of neu­
rodevelopmental, cognitive, and communication functioning. These 
assessments should focus both on the child’s strengths and functional abil­
ities and on weaknesses and disabilities. Based on the findings from these 
evaluations, further subspecialty consultations (e.g., neurology, genetics, 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, ophthalmology, occupational and 
physical therapy, speech therapy) can be arranged, and a plan for spe­
cific laboratory investigations developed. The goals of the evaluations are 
to identify a specific etiologic diagnosis, prognosis, recurrence risk, and 
interventions to promote the child’s optimal development. Parents may 
also benefit from associating with a disease-­specific support group.
Neurodevelopmental Pediatric Assessment
History
Pediatric evaluation of a child with GDD or ID consists of a complete 
history and physical examination. Schedule the evaluation as a separate 
visit with sufficient uninterrupted time (at least 45–60 minutes) to focus 
on issues related to the child’s behavior and development. Unless the 
child’s and family’s histories are well known to the provider, parents can 
be asked to complete detailed history questionnaires and developmental 
and behavioral rating scales, and to provide any additional information 
from outside sources (e.g., prior medical records, consultation reports, 
educational evaluations) prior to this visit that will contribute to assem­
bling a complete record of the child’s care. Previsit preparation may help 
parents to refresh their memory regarding their child’s development and 
to focus their questions and concerns during the evaluation.
Many disabilities have their origin in the prenatal period, so the 
pregnancy and birth history are reviewed carefully for possible develop­
mental risk factors (Table 27.10). Difficulty in conception or history of 
recurrent pregnancy loss may suggest the presence of an inherited chro­
mosome anomaly. Maternal illnesses (toxoplasmosis, other [syphilis, 
varicella-­zoster, Zika virus, parvovirus B19], rubella, CMV, and herpes 
[TORCH] infections; HIV infection) preceding or continuing through 
pregnancy or exposure to potentially harmful or teratogenic substances 
(tobacco, alcohol, illicit drugs, radiation exposure, or medications) 
should be noted. Other pregnancy complications such as intrauterine 
growth restriction (which may reflect chronic placental insufficiency, 
uterine anatomic abnormality, or fetal genetic anomaly); bleeding (espe­
cially in the third trimester), which can be caused by placenta previa, 
placental abruption, or hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low plate­
lets (HELLP) syndrome; hypertension (especially leading to eclampsia); 
complications of maternal diabetes; or limited prenatal care may be asso­
ciated with poor fetal outcomes. In the perinatal period, signs of fetal 
distress during labor (heart rate and movement abnormalities associated 
TABLE 27.9  Common Presentations of 
Intellectual Disability by Age
Age
Area of Concern
Newborn
Dysmorphic syndromes (multiple congenital 
anomalies), microcephaly
Major organ system dysfunction (e.g., feeding, 
breathing)
Early infancy (2–4 mo)
Failure to interact with the environment
Concerns about vision and hearing impairments
Later infancy (6–18 mo)
Gross motor delay
Toddlers (2–3 yr)
Language delays or difficulties
Preschool (3–5 yr)
Language difficulties or delays
Behavior difficulties, including play
Delays in fine motor skills: cutting, coloring, 
drawing
School age (>5 yr)
Academic underachievement
Behavior difficulties (e.g., attention, anxiety, mood, 
conduct)
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st 
ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:287, Table 53.4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
456
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
with uterine contractions), low Apgar scores, neonatal seizures, or the 
need for extensive neonatal resuscitation may be the result of acute fetal 
CNS injury or pre-­existing congenital abnormalities that first manifest 
at the time of birth. The method of delivery and the reason(s) for non­
vaginal delivery may reflect on fetal status at the time of birth. Neona­
tal physical measurements (weight, length, and head circumference) 
when compared with gestational age are helpful in determining whether 
the child experienced intrauterine growth restriction. Severe medical 
complications in the neonatal period such as the presence of neonatal 
encephalopathy syndrome including seizures and multiorgan com­
promise, intraventricular hemorrhage, neonatal infections, prolonged 
requirement for mechanical ventilation, need for extracorporeal mem­
brane oxygenation (ECMO), the presence of complex cardiac anomalies, 
and necrotizing enterocolitis may be associated with increased risk of 
developmental disabilities (Table 27.11). Conversely, an infant who did 
not require care in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) or prolonged 
stay in the hospital following birth likely experienced no significant 
perinatal developmental risk factors. When available, reviewing medi­
cal records from the neonatal period may be helpful in clarifying what 
transpired at the time of the infant’s birth.
The social and economic circumstances of the family may reveal fac­
tors that place the infant at risk for developmental disabilities. The cli­
nician should ask about the highest educational levels achieved by both 
parents, marital status or stability of the parents’ relationship, parental 
mental health concerns, history of “high-­risk behaviors” (illicit drug 
use), housing status, and presence of a parental support system (close 
friends and extended family members) to help with care of the infant.
The first weeks and months of life are a “transition period” for both 
the infant and the family. Children with developmental disabilities may 
begin to manifest symptoms in this period with difficulties nursing, exces­
sive colic, poor weight gain, onset of seizures, or delayed achievement of 
motor milestones. Review of prior growth records may help differentiate 
Pediatric patient at
preventive care visit
Perform
surveillance
Administer
screening tool
Administer
screening tool
Is this a 9-, 18-,
or 24-30-mo
visit?
Schedule early
return visit
Developmental
and medical
evaluations
Related evaluation and follow-up visits
Stop
Decision
Action/process
Start
Make referrals for:
Developmental and
medical evaluations
and
early developmental
intervention/early
childhood services
Are the screening
tool results positive/
concerning?
Is a
developmental
disorder
identified?
Visit
complete
Identify as a child with
special health care
needs
Initiate chronic condition
management
Schedule next
routine visit
Visit
complete
Visit
complete
3
2
1
4
5a
5b
6b
6a
Yes
Are the screening
tool results positive/
concerning?
Yes
No
No
No
8
7
9
10
No
Increasing Developmental Concern
Yes
Yes
Yes
Does surveillance
demonstrate
risk?
Visit
complete
Schedule early
return visit
Fig. 27.2  Developmental surveillance and screening algorithm within a pediatric preventive care visit. Num­
bers refer to steps in the algorithm. (From Council on Children with Disabilities, et al. Identifying infants and 
young children with developmental disorders in the medical home: an algorithm for developmental surveil­
lance and screening. Pediatrics. 2006;118:407.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
457
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
TABLE 27.10  Information to Obtain About a Child with Suspected Developmental Disabilities
Item
Possible Significance
Parental Concerns
Parents are quite accurate in identifying developmental problems
Current Levels of Developmental Functioning
Used to monitor child’s progress
Temperament
May interact with disability or be confused with developmental delay
Prenatal History
Alcohol ingestion
Fetal alcohol syndrome; an index of caretaking risk
Illegal drug, toxin, medication exposure
Developmental toxin (e.g., phenytoin); may be an index of caretaking risk
Radiation exposure
Damage to the CNS
Nutrition
Inadequate fetal nutrition
Prenatal care
Index of the social situation
Injuries, hyperthermia
Damage to the CNS
Smoking
Possible CNS damage
Maternal PKU
Maternal PKU effect
Maternal infections
Toxoplasmosis, rubella, CMV, HIV, herpesvirus infections, Zika virus
Perinatal History
Gestational age, birthweight
Biologic risk from prematurity and small for gestational age
Labor and delivery
Hypoxia or index of abnormal prenatal development
Apgar scores
Hypoxia, cardiovascular impairment
Specific perinatal adverse events; see Table 27.11
Increased risk for CNS damage
Neonatal History
Illness: seizures, respiratory distress, hyperbilirubinemia, metabolic disorder; 
see also Table 27.11
Increased risk for CNS damage
Malformations
May represent syndrome associated with developmental delay
Family History
Consanguinity
Autosomal recessive condition more likely
Mental functioning
Increased hereditary and environmental risks
Illnesses (e.g., metabolic disease)
Hereditary illness associated with developmental delay
Family member died young or unexpectedly
May suggest inborn errors of metabolism or storage disease
Family member requires special education
Hereditary causes of developmental delay
Social History
Resources available (e.g., financial, social support)
Necessary to maximize child’s potential
Educational levels of parents
Family may need help to provide stimulation
Mental health problems
May exacerbate child’s conditions
High-­risk behaviors (illicit drug use, sexual promiscuity)
Increased risk for congenital infection; index of caretaking risk
Other stressors (e.g., marital discord)
May exacerbate child’s conditions or compromise care
Other History
Sex of the child
Important for X-­linked conditions
Developmental milestones
Index of developmental delay, regression may indicate a progressive condition
Head injury
Even moderate trauma may be associated with developmental delay or learning 
disabilities
Serious infections (e.g., meningitis)
May be associated with developmental delay
Toxic exposure (e.g., lead)
May be associated with developmental delay
Physical growth
May indicate malnutrition; obesity, growth failure caused by genetic disorder
Recurrent otitis media
Associated with hearing loss and abnormal speech development
Visual and auditory functioning
Sensitive index of impairments in vision and hearing
Nutrition
Malnutrition during infancy may lead to delayed development
Chronic conditions such as renal or cyanotic cardiac
May be associated with delayed development
CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system; PKU, phenylketonuria.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
458
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
between a congenital or acquired disorder. A history of recurrent illness, 
family/social or environmental stress, trauma (especially to the CNS), or 
epilepsy may be associated with poor development. True regression, the 
loss of previously acquired skills, should be distinguished from failure of 
development (see Chapter 28). Newly emerging skills may fluctuate until 
they are firmly established. In cases of true regression, multiple areas of 
functioning are affected and do not re-­emerge over time.
Ages of achievement of common milestones in motor, language, 
cognitive, and social development should be reviewed. Parents of 
infants and toddlers may have more accurate recollections of their 
child’s milestones than parents of older children. In some cases, parents 
may recall comparing their child’s milestones to another child’s (sib­
ling, relative, neighbor) or may only recall their child’s “major” mile­
stones, such as ages at which the child began walking independently, 
waving “bye-­bye,” using first words, or talking in sentences.
A three-­generation family pedigree should be reviewed to identify 
other individuals with conditions similar to the child’s, developmen­
tal/learning disabilities, or early deaths. Consanguinity may increase 
the risk of a recessive disorder. A family’s ethnic ancestry may suggest 
potential etiology, since a number of conditions occur at increased fre­
quency among certain ethnic groups (e.g., Tay-­Sachs disease among 
Ashkenazi Jews).
Social and environmental factors such as parental physical or men­
tal illness (including substance abuse), death of a close family mem­
ber, divorce, domestic abuse, parental incarceration, multiple changes 
of dwelling, placement in foster care, or having a sibling with a seri­
ous chronic illness may have significant adverse effects on a child’s 
development.
It is important to know whether the child has received any type of 
educational or therapeutic interventions and the impact those pro­
grams have had on the child’s behavior and development.
For young children, a description of their play interests, self-­help skills, 
and social interactions with parents, peers, and caretakers/teachers may 
provide valuable information about the child’s level of overall develop­
ment. A review of common activities of daily living (ADLs), including 
dressing, eating, toileting, and motor skills, often provides insight about 
the integrity of the child’s cognitive, communication, and neuromotor 
development. School experiences, academic readiness skills, educational 
achievement, and behavior patterns at home and school often reflect 
the cognitive and language development of school-­age children and 
adolescents.
Physical Examination
The physical examination should begin with observations of the gen­
eral appearance of the child, including overall state of health, visual 
and auditory responsiveness to the surroundings, and interactions with 
parents. When the child is at rest, subtle abnormalities of body pro­
portions and movement patterns may be observed. Careful attention 
should also be paid to physical measurements (length/height, weight, 
and head circumference) with values plotted on standard reference 
curves. Both poor growth and excessive growth may be associated with 
metabolic disorders or genetic syndromes. Head circumference mea­
surements may be abnormal (greater or less than 2 standard deviations 
from the mean) or disproportionate for body size (head circumference 
should correlate with length/height of the child). Although large or 
small head size may be associated with significant pathology, a benign 
form of familial micro-­ and macrocephaly may be ruled out if one or 
both parents share the same trait. Dysmorphic features may suggest 
a recognizable pattern of deformation or malformation (Table 27.12) 
(see Chapter 29). If the child has an unusual appearance, biologic fam­
ily members should be examined either directly or from photographs 
to determine any resemblance. Additionally, examining serial pho­
tographs of a child at different ages can help to identify “coarsening” 
of facial features due to a storage disease (mucopolysaccharidosis). 
Abnormalities of skin pigmentation may suggest the presence of a neu­
rocutaneous disorder (phakomatosis) associated with developmental 
disability (neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, Sturge-­Weber syn­
drome) (see Chapter 60). A Wood’s lamp examination may be helpful 
if a depigmented lesion is identified (ash-­leaf spots in tuberous sclero­
sis). Measurements of facial features, such as inner canthal distance, 
palpebral fissure length, auricular size and position, and development 
of the philtrum and upper lip, may be associated with structural anom­
alies of craniofacial development caused by genetic or teratogenic 
exposure (fetal alcohol syndrome). The oral structures should be 
examined for the presence of cleft palate (velocardiofacial syndrome, 
Stickler syndrome), macroglossia (Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome), 
or recessed jaw (Pierre-­Robin sequence). Anomalies of the neck may 
indicate vertebral abnormalities (Klippel-­Feil syndrome) or genetic 
disorders (Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Down syndrome). 
Cardiac anomalies are associated with a large number of syndromes. 
The abdominal exam may reveal evidence of an enlarged liver (asso­
ciated with glycogen storage diseases, sphingolipidoses, or mucopoly­
saccharidoses). Examination of the back should include the “forward 
bend test” for scoliosis, and the presence of dimpling or a hirsute area 
in the lower spine that could represent an occult form of spinal dys­
raphism (tethered cord or other spinal cord anomaly). Anomalies of 
the extremities (limb proportions, hands, feet, and nails) are associated 
TABLE 27.11  Findings That May Be Used 
to Identify Neonates at Increased Risk for 
Developmental Delay
Item
Comment
Apgar scores
<3 at 5 min or <5 at 10 min, and HIE
Abnormal EEG
Neonatal seizures
Hypoglycemia, hypoxia, intracranial hemorrhage, 
or infection confer high risk
Intracranial
Grade III or higher; PVL hemorrhage
Hydrocephalus
Especially with other anomalies, thin cortical 
mantle, or parenchymal lesions
Central nervous system
Seen on CT scan or ultrasonography system 
anomalies
Prematurity
<32 wk
Small for gestational age
<3rd percentile (intrauterine growth restriction)
Dysmorphic
Three or more minor or one or more major 
features
Chromosomal
Trisomies, fragile X, XO anomaly
Ventilation required
Longer than 2 wk
Small head
<3rd percentile circumference
Meningitis/encephalitis
Bacterial (group B streptococci, Escherichia coli)
Viral (herpes simplex)
Hypoglycemia
Symptomatic
Congenital infection
Cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, 
rubella, herpes simplex, varicella-­zoster, HIV
Hyperbilirubinemia
Requiring exchange transfusions
Associated medical 
problems
Such as retinopathy of prematurity, heart dis­
ease, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, necrotizing 
enterocolitis
HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy; PVL, periventricular leukomalacia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
459
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
Item
Possible Significance
General appearance
May indicate significant delay in development or 
obvious syndrome
Stature
Short stature
Malnutrition; many genetic syndromes are 
associated with short stature (e.g., Turner, 
Noonan)
Obesity
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Large stature
Sotos syndrome
Head
Macrocephaly
Alexander syndrome, Canavan disease, Sotos 
syndrome, gangliosidosis, hydrocephalus, 
mucopolysaccharidosis, subdural effusion
Microcephaly
Virtually any condition that can restrict 
brain growth (e.g., malnutrition, Angelman 
syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, fetal 
alcohol effects)
Face
Coarse, triangular, round, 
or flat face; hypotelorism 
or hypertelorism; slanted 
or short palpebral fissure; 
unusual nose, maxilla, and 
mandible
Specific measurements may provide clues to 
inherited, metabolic, or other diseases such 
as fetal alcohol syndrome, cri du chat (5p−) 
syndrome, or Williams syndrome
Eyes
Prominent
Crouzon, Seckel, and fragile X syndromes
Cataract
Galactosemia, Lowe syndrome, prenatal rubella, 
hypothyroidism
Cherry-­red spot in macula
Gangliosidosis (GM1), metachromatic leuko­
dystrophy, mucolipidosis, Tay-­Sachs disease, 
Niemann-­Pick disease, Farber lipogranuloma­
tosis, sialidosis type III
Chorioretinitis
Congenital infection with cytomegalovirus, 
toxoplasmosis, Zika virus, or rubella
Corneal cloudiness
Mucopolysaccharidosis types I and II, Lowe 
syndrome, congenital syphilis
Ears
Low-­set or malformed pinnae
Trisomies such as Down syndrome, Rubinstein-­
Taybi syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, 
cerebro-oculofacioskeletal syndrome, fetal 
phenytoin effects
Hearing
Loss of acuity in mucopolysaccharidosis; 
hyperacusis in many encephalopathies
Heart
Structural anomaly or 
hypertrophy
CHARGE syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, 
glycogenosis type II, fetal alcohol effects, 
mucopolysaccharidosis type I; chromosomal 
anomalies such as Down syndrome; maternal 
PKU; chronic cyanosis may impair cognitive 
development
Item
Possible Significance
Liver
Hepatomegaly
Fructose intolerance, galactosemia, glycogeno­
sis types I–IV, mucopolysaccharidosis types I 
and II, Niemann-­Pick disease, Tay-­Sachs dis­
ease, Zellweger syndrome, Gaucher disease, 
ceroid lipofuscinosis, gangliosidosis
Genitalia
Macro-orchidism
Fragile X syndrome
Hypogenitalism
Prader-­Willi, Klinefelter, and CHARGE syn­
dromes
Extremities
Hands, feet; dermatoglyphics, 
creases
May indicate a specific entity such as 
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome or may be associ­
ated with chromosomal anomaly
Joint contractures
Signs of muscle imbalance around the joints; 
e.g., with meningomyelocele, cerebral palsy, 
arthrogryposis, muscular dystrophy; also 
occurs with cartilaginous problems such as 
mucopolysaccharidosis
Skin
Café-­au-­lait spots
Neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, 
chromosomal aneuploidy, ataxia-­
telangiectasia, multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 2b
Fanconi anemia, Gaucher disease
Syndromes: basal cell nevus, McCune-­Albright, 
Silver-­Russell, Bloom, Chediak-­Higashi, 
Hunter, Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba, Maffucci
Seborrheic or eczematoid 
rash
PKU, histiocytosis
Hemangiomas and telangi­
ectasia
Sturge-­Weber syndrome, Bloom syndrome, 
ataxia-­telangiectasia
Hypopigmented macules, 
streaks, adenoma seba­
ceum
Tuberous sclerosis, hypomelanosis of Ito
Hair
Hirsutism
De Lange syndrome, mucopolysaccharidosis, fetal 
phenytoin effects, cerebro-oculofacioskeletal 
syndrome, trisomy 18, Wiedemann-­Steiner 
syndrome (hypertrichosis cubiti)
Neurologic
Asymmetry of strength and tone
Focal lesion, hemiplegic cerebral palsy
Hypotonia
Prader-­Willi, Down, and Angelman syndromes; 
gangliosidosis; early cerebral palsy; muscle 
disorders (dystrophy or myopathy)
Hypertonia
Neurodegenerative conditions involving white 
matter, cerebral palsy, trisomy 18
Ataxia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia, metachromatic leukodys­
trophy, Angelman syndrome
TABLE 27.12  Physical Examination of a Child with Suspected Developmental Disabilities
CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, ear anomalies (deafness); PKU, phenylketonuria.
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:285, Table 53.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
460
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
with a wide range of birth defects and syndromes. The presence of mul­
tiple malformations may be an important key to identifying a specific 
developmental disorder or syndrome. Although minor physical anom­
alies may be associated with developmental delay, most children with 
minor anomalies develop normally (Table 27.13).
The neuromotor examination should include observation of muscle 
bulk and presence or absence of muscle atrophy associated with myopathy. 
The assessment of cranial nerves includes evaluation for visual responsive­
ness, pupillary reactivity, presence of red reflexes, fullness of eye move­
ments, and evidence of strabismus. Ptosis, asymmetry of facial expression, 
or abnormal tongue movement (deviation or fasciculation) suggests 
muscle weakness or partial paralysis. Muscle strength may be assessed by 
observing the child move about and manipulate objects. In the first year of 
life, motor milestones include the ability to sit independently, crawl, cruise, 
and walk. By 18 months, children should be able to squat and recover. The 
Gowers maneuver is helpful in assessing strength of the quadriceps mus­
cles (see Chapter 35). Decreased muscle tone may be reflected in poor pos­
ture or hypermobile joints. Decreased stretch reflex responsiveness may be 
due to lower motor neuron disease or myopathy. In infants, the persistence 
of primitive reflexes or the absence of protective postural reflexes is sug­
gestive of neuromotor dysfunction. In older children, the presence of 
increased stretch reflexes, clonus, and positive Babinski reflexes are signs 
of upper motor neuron dysfunction associated with spasticity. Normal gait 
requires intact and coordinated motor and sensory ability. Unsteady gait 
or tremor may be a sign of muscle weakness or abnormal cerebellar func­
tion or basal ganglia disease. Asymmetry of gait may reflect hemiplegia. 
Observing the child reaching for objects, extending the arms outstretched, 
or performing the finger-­to-­nose test may reveal tremors or difficulty with 
eye-­hand coordination.
FORMAL NEURODEVELOPMENTAL ASSESSMENTS
Psychologic Evaluation
Evaluation by a child psychologist can provide an assessment of a 
child’s strengths and weaknesses across a broad range of cognitive 
areas. For infants and young children, global measures of develop­
ment are the most valuable, since the structure of intelligence develops 
from relatively “general” and homogeneous ability to more complex 
TABLE 27.13  Examples of Minor Anomalies and Associated Syndromes*,†
Head
Flat occiput: Down syndrome, Zellweger syndrome; prominent 
occiput: trisomy 18
Delayed closure of sutures: hypothyroidism, hydrocephalus
Craniosynostosis: Crouzon syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome
Delayed fontanel closure: hypothyroidism, Down syndrome, 
hydrocephalus, skeletal dysplasias
Face
Midface hypoplasia: fetal alcohol syndrome, Down syndrome
Triangular facies: Russell-­Silver syndrome, Turner syndrome
Coarse facies: mucopolysaccharidoses, Sotos syndrome
Prominent nose and chin: fragile X syndrome
Flat facies: Apert syndrome, Stickler syndrome
Round facies: Prader-­Willi syndrome
Eyes
Hypertelorism: fetal hydantoin syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome
Hypotelorism: holoprosencephaly sequence, maternal phenylketon­
uria effect
Inner canthal folds/Brushfield spots: Down syndrome; slanted 
palpebral fissures: trisomies
Prominent eyes: Apert syndrome, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Lisch nodules: neurofibromatosis
Blue sclera: osteogenesis imperfecta, Turner syndrome, hereditary 
connective tissue disorders
Ears
Large pinnae/simple helices: fragile X syndrome
Malformed pinnae/atretic canal: Treacher Collins syndrome, 
CHARGE syndrome
Low-­set ears: Treacher Collins syndrome, trisomies, multiple disorders
Nose
Anteverted nares/synophrys: de Lange syndrome; broad nasal 
bridge: fetal drug effects, fragile X syndrome
Low nasal bridge: achondroplasia, Down syndrome
Prominent nose: Coffin-­Lowry syndrome, Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz 
syndrome
Mouth
Long philtrum/thin vermilion border: fetal alcohol effects
Cleft lip and palate: isolated or part of a syndrome
Micrognathia: Pierre-­Robin sequence, trisomies, Stickler syndrome
Macroglossia: hypothyroidism, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Teeth
Anodontia: ectodermal dysplasia
Notched incisors: congenital syphilis
Late dental eruption: Hunter syndrome, hypothyroidism
Talon cusps: Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Wide-­spaced teeth: de Lange syndrome, Angelman syndrome
Hair
Hirsutism: Hurler syndrome
Low hairline: Klippel-­Feil sequence, Turner syndrome
Sparse hair: Menkes disease, argininosuccinic acidemia
Abnormal hair whorls/posterior whorl: chromosomal aneuploidy 
(e.g., Down syndrome)
Abnormal eyebrow patterning: Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Neck
Webbed neck/low posterior hairline: Turner syndrome, Noonan 
syndrome
Chest
Shield-­shaped chest: Turner syndrome
Genitalia
Macro-orchidism: fragile X syndrome
Hypogonadism: Prader-­Willi syndrome
Extremities Short limbs: achondroplasia, rhizomelic chondrodysplasia
Small hands: Prader-­Willi syndrome
Clinodactyly: trisomies, including Down syndrome
Polydactyly: trisomy 13, ciliopathies
Broad thumb: Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Syndactyly: de Lange syndrome
Transverse palmar crease: Down syndrome
Joint laxity: Down syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos 
syndrome
Phocomelia: de Lange syndrome
Spine
Sacral dimple/hairy patch: spina bifida
Skin
Hypopigmented macules/adenoma sebaceum: tuberous scle­
rosis
Café-­au-­lait spots and neurofibromas: neurofibromatosis
Linear depigmented nevi: hypomelanosis of Ito
Facial port-­wine hemangioma: Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Nail hypoplasia or dysplasia: fetal alcohol syndrome, trisomies
*Increased incidence of minor anomalies has been reported in cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, learning disabilities, and autism.
†The presence of three or more minor anomalies implies a greater chance that the child has a major anomaly and a diagnosis of a specific syndrome.
CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, ear anomalies (deafness).
Modified from Levy SE, Hyman SL. Pediatric assessment of the child with developmental delay. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1993;40:465–477.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
461
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
and differentiated functions over time. Few tasks on measures used 
for preschool children reflect “pure” abilities in any particular skill. 
Rather, tasks for infants reflect the child’s ability to utilize a combi­
nation of cognitive, language, and motor skills to respond. However, 
tests vary in their ability to separate these component functions. The 
Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development-­3rd Edition (Bayley 
III) is a widely used tool for assessing children 0–42 months of age. 
There are several normed measures of verbal and nonverbal abilities 
that can be used with children older than 2 years of age. Many fac­
tors can contribute to the child’s performance. Observing how the 
child responds to a task can be as informative as the accuracy of the 
response. It is generally recognized that intelligence testing prior to 
age 6 years is not highly predictive of test results at older ages, but the 
evaluation provides a measure of the child’s abilities at that point in 
time. In addition, a psychologist is able to observe the child’s behav­
ior, attention span, organizational skills, persistence, and frustration 
tolerance during the evaluation. These informal observations may 
help to determine the presence or absence of emotional or behavioral 
problems that stem from, or coexist with, the child’s developmental 
disabilities.
Results of psychologic tests are not indicative of specific etiolo­
gies (genetic or acquired biologic conditions) and cannot determine 
whether a child has suffered a “brain injury,” even in the context of 
a potentially traumatic event. Serial cognitive measures, particularly 
when there is premorbid information that has changed over time, may 
suggest the effects of trauma or a progressive disease process.
Speech-­Language and Oral Motor Evaluation
The ability to understand and communicate with others has a very 
strong influence on a child’s emotional, behavioral, and social func­
tioning. Communication abilities may or may not reflect the child’s 
intellectual ability. A speech-­language pathologist can evaluate a wide 
range of communication and oral motor skills in children. Even prior 
to the use of words, infants display “preverbal” communication abilities 
(gestures) and may recognize a number of spoken words. Older chil­
dren may suffer from delays in understanding of language (language 
disorders) or from disorders of speech sound production (apraxia, 
dysarthria). Many children with neurologic disabilities have oral 
motor coordination disorders (dysphagia) that interfere with chew­
ing and swallowing and place them at risk for poor weight gain and/
or pulmonary aspiration. Drooling management is also a problem for 
many children with oral motor coordination delays. While it is more 
common for receptive language ability to exceed expressive language 
ability, children with Williams syndrome and with spina bifida/hydro­
cephalus may display conversational skills that exceed their cognitive 
deficits (“cocktail conversation”). In both conditions, “basic” language 
abilities (vocabulary and grammar) are relatively well developed, while 
“higher-­level” language functions (semantic knowledge and pragmatic 
aspects of communication) are deficient.
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGY
Once a comprehensive profile of the child’s strengths and weaknesses 
has been identified through neurodevelopmental, psychologic, and 
speech-­language evaluations, the next step is to establish a develop­
mental diagnosis.
Cognitive, language, and motor abilities typically develop in a coor­
dinated fashion. Discrepancies in development between different areas 
of function may point to a specific area of concern or suggest possi­
ble clinical diagnoses (Table 27.14). Many disorders can be identified 
by their characteristic pattern of development over time (e.g., infan­
tile hypotonia evolving into hyperphagia and obesity in Prader-­Willi 
syndrome, regression/microcephaly/hand-­wringing behavior in Rett 
syndrome). In general, motor milestones do not correlate well with 
intellectual ability, since most children with ID walk at a normal age. 
Language abilities, when well developed, are usually an excellent indi­
cator of intellectual function. Problem-­solving skills (referred to as 
“adaptive” or “visual-­motor” skills) often correlate with nonverbal cog­
nitive abilities. Finally, psychosocial milestones often reflect language 
ability. A child with delays in all areas likely has a cognitive deficit, 
while a child whose communication skills are at variance with nonver­
bal cognitive abilities likely has a language disorder.
Delays isolated to a single, specific area such as expressive language 
are more likely to be transient than are generalized delays. If the child’s 
development has regressed, a progressive encephalopathy may be pres­
ent (see Chapter 28).
Genetic Considerations
More than 800 genes have been implicated in GDD/ID as well as 
more than 1,000 additional “candidate” genes. Of these, more than 
400 are autosomal recessive, 180 are autosomal dominant, and 140 
are X-­linked. Many genes are associated with “syndromic” GDD/ID 
(i.e., cases in which abnormalities are identified on examination such 
as micro-­ or macrocephaly, dysmorphic features, congenital anoma­
lies, failure to thrive, short stature, abnormal neurologic examina­
tion, seizures, structural brain abnormalities, sensory deficits [vision 
or hearing]). Variability of clinical features is the rule, rather than the 
exception, for most syndromes that cause GDD/ID. Of the more than 
200 genes that have been associated with “nonsyndromic” GDD/ID, at 
least 30 are also associated with syndromic GDD/ID and at least 60 are 
also associated with other neurologic (i.e., epilepsy) or neuropsychiat­
ric (i.e., autism, schizophrenia) disorders.
A distinction should be made between a clinical diagnosis that is 
based on descriptions and measurements of various functional abilities 
and an etiologic diagnosis that attributes the problem(s) to a specific 
cause. For most developmental disabilities, a specific etiology cannot 
be established with absolute certainty. Clinical diagnoses such as cere­
bral palsy or ID can result from multiple etiologies, and, conversely, the 
same etiology can manifest in a variety of ways. As medical diagnostic 
TABLE 27.14  Differential Diagnosis of Atypical Patterns of Development
Intellectual 
Disability
Developmental 
Language Disorder
Specific Language 
Impairment
Autism Spectrum 
Disorder
Social Pragmatic 
Communication Disorder
Cognitive ability
Delayed
Normal/delayed
Normal
Normal/delayed
Normal
Language ability
Delayed
Disordered
Disordered
Disordered
Normal
Social ability
Normal
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
Abnormal
Family history
Negative
Speech/language
Speech/language
Affective disorder
Social deficits
Modified from Simms MD, Schum RL. Preschool children who have atypical patterns of development. Pediatr Rev. 2000;21:147–158.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
462
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
technologies have improved, the number of individuals for whom an 
etiologic diagnosis can be established has increased. Even when a spe­
cific etiologic diagnosis cannot be determined, an accurate clinical diag­
nosis is often helpful in designing treatment recommendations because 
most treatments are based on an educational-­developmental model 
and are successful for a range of underlying etiologies.
Although most parents will pursue further evaluations when they 
are concerned about their child’s development, not all are willing or 
able to have their child undergo medical diagnostic testing procedures 
when they are very young. Instead, parents typically want to know 
what they can do to help their child “catch up” with their peers. This 
concept is often reinforced by referring to the problem as a develop­
mental “delay.” Unless there are signs of regression or failure to thrive 
that would make diagnostic testing urgent, “watchful waiting” while 
the child enters a program of interventions is an accepted strategy. If, 
despite these measures, developmental concerns persist, families may 
be more willing to obtain further diagnostic testing. It is often helpful 
to share with parents that the probability of establishing a medical diag­
nosis with current technology is 30–40%, unless specific syndromes 
or disorders are suspected from the history and physical examination. 
While in most situations a specific diagnosis will not result in a cure 
for the underlying disorder, if a specific etiology can be established, it 
may result in effective treatments and preventive measures for other 
medical concerns associated with the diagnosis. Medical treatment 
for the circadian rhythm dysfunction associated with Smith-­Magenis 
syndrome can be very successful in improving sleep patterns and day­
time behaviors. In addition, children can be monitored on an expectant 
basis for complications that occur frequently with specific disorders 
(Wilms tumor in Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome).
LABORATORY TESTING
When a specific diagnosis is suspected based on the history and physical 
examination, a “targeted” approach to confirm that condition (single-­
gene tests, specific metabolic studies, neuroimaging) is warranted (Tables 
27.15 and 27.16). If no clinical diagnosis is suspected, current guidelines 
for comprehensive evaluation recommend a “tiered approach” (Fig. 27.3).
Genetic Tests
The first-­tier test for all children with “nonspecific” GDD/ID is a chro­
mosomal microarray (CMA). If a specific diagnosis is not established by 
CMA, referral for consultation with a geneticist should also be arranged.
NGS with broad screening panels within a group of phenotypes 
(e.g., X-­Linked Intellectual Disability [XLID] panel) and whole exome 
sequencing (WES) are transforming the diagnostic process for children 
with disabilities. While the diagnostic yield of CMA in unexplained ID 
is 10–15%, diagnosis in approximately 36% of affected children with 
GDD/ID can be achieved with WES. The diagnostic rate is higher for 
syndromic GDD/ID and lower for isolated ASD (see Fig. 27.3). Some 
genomic sequencing (exome/genome) labs are able to report large 
chromosomal deletions and duplications (if they span multiple exons), 
complementing CMA testing.
There are disease-­causing variants that are not detected by WES 
or CMA. Karyotype will detect balanced translocations if there is no 
loss or gain of chromosomal material. Fragile X repeat expansions are 
not covered on either technology. The yield of testing for fragile X is 
low unless there are typical clinical features (long face with large ears, 
prominent forehead and prominent jaw; hypotonia, joint laxity) or a 
suggestive family history (X-­linked intellectual disability with antici­
pation, premature ovarian failure, or adult-­onset neurologic disease). 
Whole genome sequencing is an emerging option for cases unsolved 
by WES and increases the diagnostic rate by up to 10% by detecting 
variants missed by both WES and CMA (small deletions/duplications, 
intronic and intergenic single nucleotide variants, structural variants, 
and some repeat expansions). There is always the possibility of finding 
variants of uncertain significance that have not yet been associated with 
GDD/ID or that may not cause any medical problems. In this case, it 
may be necessary to test both parents to determine if the variant was 
inherited or de novo. If the variant is de novo in the child, it is more 
likely to be significant. If the same variant is found in an unaffected 
parent, it is more challenging to interpret the significance of the vari­
ant. There are numerous examples of unaffected parent carriers with 
chromosomal deletions (reduced penetrance) and wide variability in 
phenotypic expression within affected families who have the same vari­
ant (variable expressivity). Including parents in WES (Trio sequencing) 
TABLE 27.15  Chromosomal Abnormalities in Which Developmental Delay Is a Major Feature
Condition
Incidence
Comments
Trisomy 21
1/700
Down syndrome
Fragile X syndrome
1/800
Macro-orchidism, hyperactivity, autistic-­like behavior
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome)
1/1,000
Small testes, problems in language skills
47,XXX
1/1,000
Females with learning and language problems may have 48,XXXX
45,X (Turner syndrome)
1/2,000
Females with short stature, broad neck, gonadal dysgenesis; 
visuospatial deficits common
Prader-­Willi syndrome (abnormality of contiguous genes on chromosome 15; 
inherited from deletions of paternal chromosomes—monoparental disomy)
1/5,000
Hypotonia in infancy, obesity, short stature, mild intellectual 
disability
Angelman syndrome (chromosome anomaly similar to that in Prader-­Willi 
syndrome; inherited from maternal deletion in chromosome 15—
monoparental disomy)
Unknown
Ataxia, prognathism, absence of speech, severe intellectual 
disability, inappropriate laughter
Trisomy 18
1/8,000
Multiple congenital anomalies, severe developmental delay
Trisomy 13
1/20,000
Multiple congenital anomalies, severe developmental delay
5p– (cri du chat syndrome)
1/100,000
High-­pitched cry, small stature, speech and language delays
4p– (Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome)
1/100,000
Midline deficiencies, profound intellectual disability, seizures
11p– (Wilms tumor, aniridia)
1/100,000
Ambiguous genitalia, aniridia, cataracts
17p– (Miller-­Dieker syndrome)
1/100,000
Lissencephaly, microcephaly, seizures, cryptorchidism
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
463
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
is preferred and improves diagnostic outcomes, increasing yield and 
decreasing variants of uncertain significance. No patient who remains 
undiagnosed after genomic sequencing should be lost to follow-­up 
because WES/whole genome sequencing data can be reanalyzed every 
1–2 years until a diagnosis is made.
Metabolic Tests
Inborn errors of metabolism may present with progressive neuro­
logic impairment (see Chapter 28). There is, however, great vari­
ability, and consideration for broad metabolic screening should 
always be considered if a causative etiology for ID/GDD remains 
unresolved. The current standard for static encephalopathy includes 
screening plasma amino acids, serum acylcarnitines, and urine 
organic acids. There are certain specific clinical presentations that 
should raise the question for treatable metabolic disorders (such 
as language impairment in the context of seizures associated with 
creatine transport disorders).
Neuroimaging
Ultrasonography
An ultrasound study of the head performed before the anterior fon­
tanel closes can provide a general anatomic picture of the brain, 
including a view of the posterior fossa. This technique is insensitive 
to lesions involving the subdural space, and its success depends more 
on the skill of the interpreter than that of the other imaging studies. 
It does not expose the child to radiation, nor is sedation required in 
most instances. Its primary uses include identifying and monitoring 
TABLE 27.16  Suggested Evaluation of the Child with Intellectual Disability/Global 
Developmental Delay
Test
Comments
In-­depth history
Includes pre-­, peri-­, and postnatal events (including seizures); developmental attainments; and three-­generation pedigree in 
family history
Physical examination
Particular attention to minor or subtle abnormalities; neurologic examination for focality and skull abnormalities
Behavioral phenotype
Vision and hearing evaluation
Essential to detect and treat; can mask as developmental delay
Gene microarray analysis
A 7.8% yield overall (10% in syndromic and 6.5% in nonsyndromic intellectual disability)
Better resolution than karyotype. May identify up to twice as many abnormalities as karyotyping. Excellent in detecting 
de novo microdeletions or microduplications
Karyotype
Yield: 4% in global developmental delay/intellectual disability
Best for inversions and balanced insertions, reciprocal translocations, and polyploidy
Fragile X screen
Combined yield: 2%
Preselection on clinical grounds can increase yield to 7.6%
X-­linked candidate intellectual 
disability genes
May explain up to 10% of intellectual disability
Yield may be as high as 42% if there is a definite family history and as high as 17% from a possibly linked kindred
Exomic gene sequencing
Detects inherited and de novo point mutations, especially in nonsyndromic severe intellectual disability
Neuroimaging
MRI preferred. Positives increased by abnormalities of skull contour or microcephaly and macrocephaly, or focal neurologic 
examination. Overall, has a higher yield than CT
Identification of specific etiologies is rare. Most conditions that are found do not alter the treatment plan. Need to weigh risk 
of sedation against possible yield
Thyroid (T4, TSH)
Near 0% in settings with a universal newborn screening program
Serum lead
If there are identifiable risk factors for excessive environmental lead exposure
Metabolic testing
Yield: 0.2–4.6% based on clinical indicators and tests performed
Urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, ammonia, lactate, and a capillary blood gas. Focused testing based on clinical 
findings is warranted
Tandem mass spectrometry newborn screening has allowed for identification of many disorders in the perinatal period and 
has decreased yield in older children. Other disorders have emerged; e.g., congenital disorders of glycosylation and disor­
ders of creatine synthesis and transport
MECP2 for Rett syndrome
1.5% of females with severe intellectual disability
0.5% of males
EEG
May be deferred in absence of history of seizures
Repeated history and physical 
examination
Can give time for maturation of physical and behavioral phenotype. New technology may be available for evaluation
MECP2, methyl CpG-­binding protein 2; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
Modified from Michelson DJ, Shevell MI, Sherr EH, et al. Evidence report: genetic and metabolic testing on children with global developmental 
delay: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of The American Academy of Neurology and The Practice Committee of Child Neurology. 
Neurology. 2011;77:1629–1635; Curry CJ, Stevenson RE, Aughton D, et al. Evaluation of mental retardation: recommendations of a consensus 
conference: American College of Medical Genetics. Am J Med Genet. 1997;12:72:468–477; Shapiro BK, Batshaw ML. Mental retardation. In: Burg 
FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Gellis and Kagan’s Current Pediatric Therapy. 18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2005, used with permission; 
and Shevell M, Ashwal S, Donley D, et al. Practice parameter: evaluation of the child with global developmental delay. Neurology. 2003;60:367–
380.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
464
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus; these functions are 
useful, especially in the preterm infant.
Computed Tomography Scans
CT provides more detail than ultrasonography, including details of 
bone structures and the subdural space. Using contrast material will 
further delineate structures such as tumors or differentiate white from 
gray matter. However, CT exposes the child to radiation, and most 
young children require sedation to undergo this procedure.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI provides the greatest detail of the nonbone aspects of the CNS. 
The scanning time is longer than for CT, and most young children 
require sedation. The contrast material used, gadolinium, is generally 
safer than the contrast agents used for CT. MRI is superior to CT in the 
evaluation of the posterior fossa. MRI is used for imaging the spinal 
cord. MRI can differentiate abnormalities of gray and white matter, as 
well as deep and cortical gray matter lesions. Special techniques include 
magnetic resonance angiography, which can identify blood flow, and 
cerebrospinal fluid flow imaging, which can identify flow in conditions 
such as Chiari malformation. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy identi­
fies metabolites in the brain such as lactate, N-­acetylaspartate, and cho­
line. Conditions such as phenylketonuria, maple syrup urine disease, 
and Canavan disease have distinctive patterns on spectroscopy.
Indications for Various Imaging Modalities
Many studies have identified abnormalities in the brains of children 
with developmental delay on MRI that were not evident on CT. These 
abnormalities include delayed myelination, focal lesions, and hypoplas­
tic white matter. In approximately 33% of children with developmental 
delay, the MRI is abnormal. This increases if the child has microcephaly 
or associated neurologic findings such as focal motor deficits, seizures, 
or a pattern of regression/degeneration. Neuroimaging in children 
with GDD may reveal evidence of cerebral injury, brain malforma­
tion, or markers of cerebral dysgenesis. Injury may be due to hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy (“watershed” or deep gray matter lesions in 
term infants and periventricular leukomalacia common in premature 
infants) or signs of intrauterine infection. Malformations may result 
from disorders of ventral induction (holoprosencephaly, agenesis of 
the corpus callosum, septo-­optic dysplasia), migrational abnormali­
ties (lissencephaly, schizencephaly, pachygyria, polymicrogyria, band 
heterotopias), and aberrant white matter development (demyelinat­
ing/dysmyelinating syndromes). At times, neuroimaging may provide 
information about the possible timing of the event (whether injury 
or dysgenesis). Serial imaging studies may help to distinguish a static 
from a progressive course and aid in prognosis. However, in many 
instances, abnormal findings may not be sufficient for determining the 
specific underlying cause of the disability. Furthermore, there may be 
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
First Tier Tests to Consider
Diagnoses
A. Known perinatal risk
factors
B. Dysmorphic features
D. Absence of known risk
factors; normal neurologic
examination; nondysmorphic
“nonspecific global
developmental delay”
C. Abnormal neurologic
examination
Microarray
Fragile X
Brain MRI
Microarray
Brain MRI
Metabolic tests†
Microarray
Radiologic and/or
metabolic tests*
Microarray
Brain MRI
1. Chromosome anomaly
2. CNS malformation
1. CNS malformation
2. Chromosome anomaly
3. Metabolic disorder
1. Chromosome anomaly
2. Birth defect syndrome
3. Metabolic disorder
1. Antenatal diseases
(malformations/fetal infections)
2. Perinatal diseases
Results
Normal
Abnormal
Refer for expert consultation
and genetic counseling and
management
Refer for further genetic
evaluation
Fig. 27.3  Evaluation of infants with developmental delay without regression. *Mucopolysaccharide screen­
ing. †Urine organic acids; plasma amino acids; acylcarnitine profile. CNS, central nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
465
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
a very weak correlation between neuroimaging findings and the child’s 
clinical picture. As an unintended consequence, neuroimaging studies 
may reveal incidental findings that are unrelated to the child’s devel­
opmental delay, for example, nonspecific findings such as mild ven­
triculomegaly and enlargement of the subarachnoid spaces, or patchy 
areas of white matter gliosis of uncertain origin (Table 27.17). In many 
instances, these are benign variations of normal or clinically insignifi­
cant anomalies. In some cases, these findings may require consultation 
with a pediatric neurosurgeon, but it is important to avoid unnecessary 
additional tests or interventions whenever possible.
Other Tests
Most neurometabolic disorders can be identified through serum, 
plasma, and urine tests in conjunction with neuroradiologic inves­
tigations. However, other tests can be helpful for identifying specific 
diseases. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid for elevated protein levels may 
help in the diagnosis of a disease affecting white matter; the presence 
of measles antibody can help identify subacute sclerosing panenceph­
alitis. On occasion, cerebrospinal fluid evaluation of lactate, pyruvate, 
and amino acids may be helpful. Peripheral nerve conduction tests and 
electromyography may help confirm that the condition is associated 
with peripheral neuropathy. Diminished deep tendon reflexes and pro­
longed nerve conduction times are noted in Krabbe disease, Refsum 
disease, metachromatic and adrenal leukodystrophy, and infantile neu­
roaxonal dystrophy (see Chapter 35).
Skin and muscle biopsies may identify conditions in which abnor­
mal material is stored in cells, such as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. 
Brainstem auditory evoked response is useful as an evaluation of hear­
ing in infants and is used to evaluate brainstem functioning. Visual 
evoked response can be useful in determining the integrity of the visual 
pathways; however, it cannot determine visual acuity.
Discussing a Developmental Diagnosis with Parents
When a specific developmental diagnosis is established, it should be 
shared with the family in an objective but sensitive manner. Facts about 
the condition and prognostic information should be presented with an 
explanation of the margin of uncertainty around any disorder. Each 
child is unique; therefore, making a prognosis for an individual child 
solely based on data is risky. When appropriate, parents should be reas­
sured that they did not do anything to cause the child’s disease, since 
feelings of guilt in this situation are universal. All parents want some 
measure of hope and assurance that they will have help from compe­
tent professionals who will care for their child.
When the child is an infant or toddler, a frank discussion about the 
child’s profile of developmental strengths and weaknesses relating skills to 
a “developmental age” may help parents to align their expectations to the 
child’s functional abilities. All parents want to help their child grow and 
develop to their potential, and the clinician should make a plan for fol­
low-­up to evaluate the child’s progress. For children under age 3 years, fol­
low-­up in 6 months will provide a time frame in which significant change 
can be observed. For older children, yearly intervals are appropriate.
SPECIFIC CONDITIONS
Cerebral Palsy
Cerebral palsy (CP) is the leading cause of motor disability in chil­
dren. CP is a clinical diagnosis characterized by significant impairment 
of movement and posture that begins in infancy or early childhood. 
Worldwide, CP affects 1–5 in every 1,000 live births. The cause is often 
brain dysgenesis or injury (prenatal or perinatal from hypoxic-­ischemic 
encephalopathy, intraventricular hemorrhage, or periventricular leu­
komalacia). There is an inverse relationship between birthweight and 
CP, ranging from 51–73/1,000 in very low birthweight (<1,500 g) neo­
natal survivors to 1–2/1,000 in normal birthweight (>2,500 g) infants. 
The effects of improvements in neonatal intensive care have both 
increased the survival of low birthweight and premature infants and 
have decreased the incidence of CP among survivors. However, more 
than half of children diagnosed with CP were born at term or near 
term, and there has not been a decrease in CP prevalence over time. 
In a large population-­based study in Western Australia, approximately 
76% of children with CP were born at term after an uncomplicated 
perinatal course without evidence of neonatal encephalopathy. One 
study identified clinically significant copy number variants in 31% of 
children with no obvious etiology (so-­called “cryptogenic” CP). Thus, 
the etiology of CP appears to be multifactorial with a largely prenatal 
onset including genetic, environmental, inflammatory, and infectious 
influences on fetal development.
Although the underlying pathology is nonprogressive, the clinical 
manifestations may change over time. An infant with CP may initially 
present as hypotonic but then develop spasticity, and functional dis­
ability may increase if joint contractures or scoliosis develops. CP is 
associated with a wide range of other disabilities, including sensory 
impairment (hearing and vision), dysphagia, epilepsy, and ID (40–65%).
Some IEMs present with features of CP (“CP mimics”) and are 
amenable to treatment that can improve the neurologic outcome. A 
number of symptoms should raise the “index of suspicion” that an IEM 
may be responsible for the clinical picture of CP (Tables 27.18 and 
27.19 and Fig. 27.4).
Important “mimics” include pediatric-­onset hereditary spastic 
paraplegia syndromes (Table 27.20) and dopa-­responsive (Segawa dis­
ease) and other monoamine-­related dystonias (Fig. 27.5).
Autism Spectrum Disorder
(See Chapter 32.)
Fragile X Syndrome
Fragile X (FRAXA) syndrome is the most commonly diagnosed 
genetic cause of ID in males. It affects 1 in 4,000 males and 1 in 8,000 
TABLE 27.17  Types of Abnormalities 
Identified by Neuroimaging
 • Malformations of cortical development:
 • Midline defects: holoprosencephaly; callosal agenesis; cerebellar 
hypoplasia
 • Migration defects: lissencephaly; bands; schizencephaly; pachygyria/
microgyria
 • Hydrocephalus, hemimegalencephaly
 • Neurocutaneous syndromes: tuberous sclerosis; neurofibromatosis
 • Trauma: hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy; stroke
 • Metabolic and neurodegenerative disorders:
 • Cortical gray matter: lysosomal enzyme defects (lipidoses: GM1 ganglio­
sidosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis) and mucolipidoses
 • Corpus striatum (caudate and putamen): mitochondrial disorders, 
organic acidopathies, aminoacidopathies, Wilson disease, juvenile 
Huntington disease
 • Globus pallidus: Hallervorden-­Spatz disease, methylmalonic acidemia, 
hyperbilirubinemia
 • White matter (leukoencephalopathies): peroxisomal disorders (adreno­
leukodystrophies), lysosomal leukodystrophies (metachromatic, globoid 
cell); other white matter diseases (Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher, Canavan, 
Alexander, Cockayne, Aicardi Goutières syndrome)
 • Congenital infection: cytomegalovirus; HIV; toxoplasmosis
 • Neoplastic disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
466
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
females. FRAXA syndrome is found in all racial and ethnic groups. 
The disorder is the result of an inheritable unstable DNA in the FMR1 
gene of the X chromosome. Normal individuals may have fewer than 
40 triplet repeats. Females with between 55 and 200 repeats are said 
to have FMR1 premutation, since the number of repeats is likely to 
expand in cells that become eggs. Males with >200 repeats are clin­
ically symptomatic and will likely have a moderate degree of ID. In 
addition, speech and language delays, attention difficulty, anxiety 
disorder, and autism are associated with FRAXA syndrome. Full-­
mutation females may have a mild degree of ID. Because character­
istic physical symptoms of FRAXA are difficult to identify in infants 
and young children, routine molecular testing for the FMR1 gene 
may identify 2–6% of males and 2–4% of females with nonspecific 
ID. In older children and adults, characteristic physical features and 
a distinct “behavioral phenotype” may suggest a diagnosis of FRAXA 
syndrome (Table 27.21).
Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Storage Diseases
IEMs may manifest in variable ways but should always be considered 
in the differential diagnosis if there is an atypical progression or lack of 
response to proven interventions (see Chapter 28).
Congenital Infections
Bacteria, parasites, or viruses acquired before, during, or after birth 
may cause CNS infection and injury. The diagnosis is based on the 
clinical manifestations (Table 27.22) and polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), culture, or serologic evidence of infection (Table 27.23).
Postnatal Infections
CNS infection during infancy or childhood may cause encephalitis 
or meningoencephalitis with resultant ID. Bacterial (pneumococcus, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, meningococcus) and viral (herpes sim­
plex type 1 or 2, eastern or western equine encephalitis virus, West 
Nile virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, HIV; in rare cases, mumps, 
enteroviruses, or California encephalitis virus) cases occur in infancy 
and early childhood and variably have neurodevelopmental sequelae. 
Secondary problems caused by the infection such as hearing or visual 
loss must also be considered. Late sequelae or prior viral infection such 
as measles or rubella panencephalitis may appear 10–20 years after 
the initial CNS disease and manifest as dementia, poor school perfor­
mance, and progressive encephalopathy.
TREATMENT
The treatment of a child with a developmental or intellectual disabil­
ity includes routine health maintenance, treatment of the underlying 
condition (if possible), treatment of associated conditions (such as 
hyperactivity, seizures, or drooling), relief of symptoms, anticipatory 
guidance to prevent secondary conditions, and environmental, educa­
tional, and family support. The overriding goal is to optimize the func­
tional status and prognosis of the child.
Health maintenance for children with developmental disabilities 
should be the same as that provided for all children, including immu­
nizations, regular monitoring of physical growth and development, 
and screening for conditions such as anemia, tuberculosis, and lead 
intoxication. Use of standardized growth charts will reflect the child’s 
individual pattern over time. Specific growth charts are available for 
some conditions, including Down syndrome, Prader-­Willi syndrome, 
and FRAXA syndrome. Nutritional recommendations are available for 
children with CP.
Very few conditions that lead to developmental delay can be 
“cured.” However, medical treatment of associated conditions can 
help reduce pain and discomfort. For example, many children with 
CP have drooling and spasticity. Drooling can be controlled by the 
use of glycopyrrolate, scopolamine patch, or surgery to the salivary 
glands. Spasticity can be managed with oral baclofen, periodic injec­
tions of botulinum toxin, tizanidine, or dorsal root rhizotomy. Behav­
ioral or psychiatric problems may benefit from counseling, support, 
or psychopharmacologic medications. These medications can be used 
TABLE 27.18  Clinical Features That Should 
Prompt Evaluation for Genetic and Metabolic 
Conditions in a Patient Presenting with 
Symptoms of Cerebral Palsy
Absent history of any perinatal risk factor for brain injury
Family history of sibling with similar neurologic symptoms
Motor symptom onset after an initial period of normal development
Developmental regression
Progressive neurologic symptoms
Paroxysmal motor symptoms or marked fluctuation of motor symptoms
Clinical exacerbation in the setting of a catabolic state (e.g., febrile illness)
Isolated generalized hypotonia
Prominent ataxia
Signs of peripheral neuromuscular disease (reduced or absent reflexes, 
sensory loss)
Eye movement abnormalities (e.g., oculogyria, oculomotor apraxia, or parox­
ysmal saccadic eye-­head movements)
From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetics of cerebral palsy. 
From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral 
palsy. Mov Disord. 2019;34:625–636 (Table 1, p. 628).
TABLE 27.19  Brain MRI Findings 
Suggestive of Selected Genetic CP Mimics
Finding
Selected Conditions
Hypomyelination
PLP1-­related dysmyelinating disorders
H-­ABC (TUBB4A mutation)
AGS (may also have basal ganglia and WM calci­
fication)
GM1 gangliosidosis
Demyelination
Krabbe disease
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Thin corpus callosum
HSP (i.e., SPG4, SPG11, SPG15, and others)
Globus pallidus lesions T2-­hypointense: NBIA (SN also involved in BPAN, 
MPAN), fucosidosis
T2-­hyperintense: MMA, PDH deficiency, creatine 
deficiency syndromes
Focal atrophy or 
hypoplasia
Glutaric aciduria type 1 (frontotemporal), 
H-­ABC (cerebellum ± putamen), 
Joubert syndrome (cerebellum)
AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; BPAN, β-­propeller protein-­associated 
neurodegeneration; CP, cerebral palsy; H-­ABC, hypomyelination with 
atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum; HSP, hereditary spastic 
paraplegia; MMA, methylmalonic aciduria; MPAN, mitochondrial mem­
brane protein-­associated neurodegeneration; NBIA, neurodegeneration 
with brain iron accumulation; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; WM, 
white matter.
From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral 
palsy. Mov Disord. 2019;34:625–636 (Table 2, p. 628).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
History/exam inconsistent with CP
due to perinatal brain injury
MRI brain +/– spinal cord
Consider multi-gene panel or WES based on
phenotype, clinical and family history
Infantile developmental delay,
mixed motor syndrome
Spasticity
Dystonia/chorea
Initial biochemical and genetic studies to consider
Ataxia
Abnormal
Normal/nonspecific
Directed genetic testing
based on specific findingsa
• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum amino acids
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Urine organic acids
• CSF studiesb
• SNP-CGH microarray
• Serum ammonia
• Serum lactate
• Serum amino acids
  (including arginine, serine)
• Urine organic acids
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Genetic testing for HSP
• SNP-CGH microarray
• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum biotinidase
  activity
• Urine organic acids
• Mitochondrial genetic
  analysis, CoQ10 level
• SNP-CGH microarray
• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Urine organic acids
• Urine purines, pyrimidines
• Urine creatine, GAA
• CSF studiesb
• Genetic testing for NKX2.1
• SNP-CGH microarray
Fig. 27.4  General diagnostic approach to the patient with an infantile-­onset, apparently nonprogressive 
motor disorder. Studies are grouped by predominant clinical presentation; it may be appropriate to consider 
investigations from more than one group depending on the specific clinical context. aSee examples in Table 
27.19. bCSF studies: glucose (+serum glucose), lactate, pyruvate, neurotransmitter metabolites (biogenic 
amines + γ-­aminobutyric acid), pterins, 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate. AFP, α-­fetoprotein; CP, cerebral palsy; CSF, 
cerebrospinal fluid; GAA, guanidinoacetate; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; SNP-­CGH, single-­nucleotide 
polymorphism-­comparative genomic hybridization; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. (From Pearson TS, Pons 
R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Mov Disord. 2019;34:625–636 [Fig. 1, p. 627].)
TABLE 27.20  Clinical and Neuroimaging Findings in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) 
with Pediatric Onset*
HSP Form
HSP Type
Inheritance
Gene
Childhood 
Onset
Disease Characteristics†
Neuroimaging Findings 
(Brain)
Pure
SPG3A
Aut. dom
ATL1
+++
None
Normal
Pure
SPG4
Aut. dom
SPAST
++
None
Leukoencephalopathy, thin 
corpus callosum
Pure
SPG6
Aut. dom
N1PA1
+
None
Normal
Pure
SPG10
Aut. dom
KIFSA
+++
Neuropathy
Normal
Pure
SPG12
Aut. dom
RTN2
+++
None
Normal
Pure
SPG31
Aut. dom
REEP1
++
None
Normal
Complicated
SPG1
X-­linked
L1CAM
+++
Intellectual disability, adducted thumb
Thin corpus callosum
Complicated
SPG2
X-­linked
PLP1
++
Intellectual disability, epilepsy
Normal
Complicated
SPG7
Aut. rec
SPG7
+
Optic atrophy, neuropathy, cerebellar ataxia
Cerebellar atrophy
Complicated
SPG11
Aut. rec
Kl AA 1840
+++
Intellectual disability, neuropathy
Leukoencephalopathy, thin 
corpus callosum
Complicated
SPG15
Aut. rec
ZFYVE26
+++
Intellectual disability, retinopathy, cerebellar 
ataxia
Leukoencephalopathy, thin 
corpus callosum
Complicated
SPG17
Aut. rec
BSCL2
+
Neuropathy
Normal
*Onset before 18 yr of age.
†Other than the classic HSP symptoms, including spastic paraparesis, atrophy of the distal lower extremities, and neurogenic bladder dysfunction.
Aut. dom, autosomal dominant; Aut. rec, autosomal recessive; +, occasional; ++, common; +++, characteristic.
From Lee RW, Poretti A, Cohen JS, et al. A diagnostic approach for cerebral palsy in the genomic era. Neurol Med. 2014;16:821–844 (Table 5, p. 
832); and Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3171, Table 616.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
468
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
to reduce arousal symptoms and to improve affect, perceptual func­
tioning, cognitive processing, communication, and behavior (Table 
27.24). Attention must be paid to the use of medications in specific 
conditions. Valproic acid is more likely to cause hepatotoxicity in GM2 
gangliosidosis, spinocerebellar degeneration, Friedreich ataxia, Lafora 
body disease, Alpers disease, and myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red 
fibers. Parents and capable children should be informed about the 
medication prescribed, including side effects. Some written guide­
lines for parents and youth are available for psychopharmacologic 
medications.
Anticipatory guidance for parents of children with developmental 
disabilities involves the same categories used in all children but may be 
modified because of the unique features of the child’s condition. For 
example, parents of children with CP should be aware of the possibil­
ity that their child may be at risk for poor weight gain and aspiration 
pneumonia because of oral motor dysphagia; strabismus, spinal scolio­
sis, and deformities (contractures) of the foot, knee, and hip because of 
muscle spasticity; osteoporosis; decubitus ulcers; epilepsy; and learn­
ing difficulties.
Although there are many different causes, children with develop­
mental disabilities and their families share many common charac­
teristics, including chronicity of the condition (with no cure in most 
instances); inability to participate in peer activities; parental feelings 
of guilt and loss of the “ideal” child; increased expense to care for a 
disabled child; lost economic opportunities (such as the inability of a 
parent to return to work because they must care for the child at home); 
need for personal care (because the child cannot be left alone or with a 
sitter); confusing systems of health care, insurance coverage, and gov­
ernmental agencies and rules; and social isolation.
The monoamine neurotransmitter disorders
Vitamin B6
deficiency
Cofactor deficiency
Enzyme deficiency
Defective monoamine
transport
DTDS
TH-D
AADC-D
Phenylalanine
level normal
PLP-DE
P-DE
AD GTPCH-D
SR-D
AR GTPCH-D
PTPS-D
DHPR-D
Phenylalanine
level abnormal
BH4 deficiency
Primary monoamine
neurotransmitter disorders
Secondary monoamine neurotransmitter
defects in neurologic disorders
Monoamine neurotransmitter
disorders of unknown origin
Disorders of selective serotonin
deficiency
DNRD
ldiopathic focal dystonia
PKD
Mitochondrial diseases
Rett syndrome
Epileptic encephalopathies
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia
Perinatal asphyxia
Disorders of folate metabolism
Phenylketonuria
Lesch-Nyhan disease
Opsoclonus-myoclonus
Leukodystrophies
Neuropsychiatric disorders
Dystonic disorders
Neuromuscular disorders
Spontaneous periodic hypothermia
and hyperhidrosis
Pelizeaus-Merzbacher
HIE
PKAN
Cerebral palsy
Autistic spectrum disorder
Nonspecific developmental delay
Fig. 27.5  Classification of the monoamine neurotransmitter disorders. AADC-­D, aromatic L-­amino acid decarbox­
ylase deficiency; AD GTPCH-­D, autosomal dominant GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency; AR GTPCH-­D, autosomal 
recessive GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency; BH4, tetrahydrobiopterin; DHPR-­D, dihydropteridine reductase defi­
ciency; DNRD, dopa-­nonresponsive dystonia; DTDS, dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome; HIE, hypoxic 
ischemic encephalopathy; P-­DE, pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy; PKAN, pantothenate kinase-­associated neu­
rodegeneration; PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia; PLP-­DE, pyridoxal-­phosphate–dependent epilepsy; 
PTPS-­D, 6-­pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase deficiency; SR-­D, sepiapterin reductase deficiency; TH-­D, tyrosine 
hydroxylase deficiency. (From Kurian MA, Gissen P, Smith M, et al. The monoamine neurotransmitter disorders: 
an expanding range of neurological syndromes. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:721–731, Fig. 1.)
TABLE 27.21  Scoring System for Screening 
Individuals for Fragile X Syndrome*
Category
Score
Criteria
Family history
2
Intellectual disability in sibling, maternal uncle, 
aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin
1
Any other affected relative
0
No family history of retardation
Personality
2
Shyness, lack of eye contact followed by friendli­
ness, verbosity, and echolalia
1
Some of these characteristics
0
No characteristic
Ears
2
Large and protruding
1
Large, not protruding
0
Other
Face
2
Long jaw, high and wide forehead
1
Only one finding
0
No findings
Body habitus
2
Slim, tall, rounded shoulders, hyperextensible 
fingers, lack of body hair, or obese with female 
fat distribution, striae, soft skin, lack of body 
hair (in males)
2
Slim or obese (females)
1
Only some features
0
No features
*A score of 5 or greater has a sensitivity of 0.88 and specificity of 0.98 
in comparison with chromosome analysis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
469
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
Environmental support may be needed and may take the form 
of family therapy, financial counseling, and referral to a disease-­
oriented volunteer support group or in a “Big Brothers/Big Sisters” 
program. Formal support includes early intervention for children 
from birth to 3 years of age, preschool intervention through the 
school district for children 3–5 years of age, and special education 
services provided under the Individuals with Disabilities Education 
Act (IDEA) and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act for school-­
age children. Families may also need assistance in transitioning 
their adolescent child from school to a work or independent liv­
ing situation. At each stage in the child’s life, the clinician should 
review the services the child is receiving and determine whether 
the family might benefit from additional support. The mnemonic 
“MD’s DD BASICS” provides a list of content areas for review at 
each visit (Table 27.25). Checklists to monitor the care of children 
with specific problems such as Down syndrome are also available 
(Table 27.26).
PITFALLS AND HAZARDS IN DEVELOPMENTAL 
DIAGNOSIS
The identification of “risk factors” does not imply a specific etiology or 
diagnosis. It is important to avoid a logical fallacy (post hoc attribu­
tion) and not base a diagnosis on a specific cause unless there is posi­
tive evidence to confirm that cause. A history of a low 5-­minute Apgar 
score with no other symptoms of neonatal encephalopathy is not likely 
to be the cause of a child’s subsequent developmental disability.
Dysmorphic and physically disabled children are often assumed 
to have GDD/ID, and, conversely, children with normal facial 
appearance and motor skills may not be identified early as having 
TABLE 27.22  Maternal Infections Affecting the Fetus or Newborn
Infection
Mode(s) of Transmission
Neonatal Outcome
Bacteria
Group B streptococcus
Ascending cervical
Sepsis, pneumonia
Escherichia coli
Ascending cervical
Sepsis, pneumonia
Listeria monocytogenes
Transplacental
Sepsis, pneumonia
Mycoplasma hominis
Ascending cervical
Pneumonia
Chlamydia trachomatis
Vaginal passage
Conjunctivitis, pneumonia
Syphilis
Transplacental, vaginal passage
Congenital syphilis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Vaginal passage
Ophthalmia (conjunctivitis), sepsis, meningitis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Transplacental
Prematurity, fetal demise, congenital tuberculosis
Virus
Rubella
Transplacental
Congenital rubella
Cytomegalovirus
Transplacental, breast milk (rare)
Congenital cytomegalovirus or asymptomatic
HIV
Transplacental, vaginal passage, breast milk
Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Hepatitis B
Vaginal passage, transplacental, breast milk
Neonatal hepatitis, chronic hepatitis B surface antigen carrier state
Hepatitis C
Transplacental and vaginal passage
Rarely neonatal hepatitis. −5% chronic carrier state possible
Herpes simplex type 2 or 1
Intrapartum exposure
Neonatal herpes simplex virus
Neonatal encephalitis, disseminated viremia, or cutaneous infection
Varicella-­zoster
Transplacental:
Early
Congenital anomalies
Late
Neonatal varicella
Parvovirus
Transplacental
Fetal anemia, hydrops
Coxsackievirus B
Fecal-­oral
Myocarditis, meningitis, hepatitis
Rubeola
Transplacental
Abortion, fetal measles
West Nile
Transplacental (rare)
Possible perinatal
Uncertain, possible rash, encephalitis
Zika
Transplacental
Congenital microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, brain abnormalities, 
retinal lesions
Chikungunya
Transplacental (rare), perinatal
Neonatal encephalitis
Dengue
Transplacental, perinatal
Neonatal sepsis-­like symptoms
Parasites
Toxoplasmosis
Transplacental
Congenital toxoplasmosis
Malaria
Transplacental
Abortion, prematurity, intrauterine growth restriction
Fungi
Candida
Ascending, cervical
Sepsis, pneumonia, rash
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:879, Table 114.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
470
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
GDD/ID. Cognitive development is usually unaffected in a num­
ber of striking dysmorphic syndromes (e.g., Treacher Collins syn­
drome, achondroplasia).
Children with physical disabilities, language disorders, ADHD, 
or anxiety disorder may be misdiagnosed as having an intellec­
tual disorder unless appropriate measures are used to account for 
these comorbid conditions. A child with mild cerebral palsy may 
score low on tasks that require motor responses. In this situation, a 
motor-­free cognitive test should be used to judge intellectual ability. 
Similarly, a child with low language abilities may show a wide dis­
crepancy between subnormal verbal scores and average nonverbal 
scores, making a “composite IQ” score invalid. Alternatively, a non­
verbal test of cognitive ability can be used. Evaluation of children 
with behavioral and/or emotional challenges should include appro­
priate accommodations, such as frequent breaks during testing or 
extending testing over several sessions, to ensure that the results 
reflect the child’s innate ability and not the impact of other, extra­
neous, factors.
Identifying a child as being “at risk” for developmental delay may alter 
the family’s perceptions, making the child vulnerable. This might lead 
to constraints on the child’s experiences and diminished expectations of 
TABLE 27.23  Laboratory Tests in the Diagnosis of Specific Perinatal Infections
Infectious Agent
Acceptable Specimen(s) from 
Infant Unless Otherwise Indicated Laboratory Test
Chlamydia trachomatis
Conjunctiva, nasopharyngeal swab, tracheal 
aspirate
Culture using special transport media
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) are not U.S. Food and Drug Adminis­
tration approved for specimens from neonates*
Genital mycoplasmas (Mycoplasma 
hominis, M. genitalium, Ureaplasma 
urealyticum)
Tracheal aspirate, blood, or cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF)
Culture using special transport media
Real-­time polymerase chain reactions (PCRs)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Conjunctiva, blood, CSF, or synovial fluid
Finding gram-­negative intracellular diplococci on Gram stain is suggestive
Culture on special media establishes the diagnosis
Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)
Serum (mother)
Serum CSF
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and, if reactive, a specific treponemal test† RPR
Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Urine, saliva, blood, or CSF
PCR for detection of CMV DNA
Obtain within 2–4 wk of birth
Enteroviruses
Blood, nasopharyngeal swab, throat swab, 
conjunctival swab, tracheal aspirate, urine, 
stool, rectal swab, or CSF
PCR
Cell culture (sensitivity depends on serotype and cell lines used)
Hepatitis B
Serum (mother)
Serum
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
If mother’s HBsAg is positive, at age 9 mo, test the infant for HBsAg and 
hepatitis B surface antibody
Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2
Conjunctiva, skin vesicle scraping, whole 
blood, or mouth vesicles
CSF
“Surface cultures” (mouth, nasopharynx, 
conjunctiva, and anus)
PCR or cell culture
PCR
PCR or cell culture
HIV
Serum (mother)
Whole blood
Fourth-­generation HIV antigen/antibody test HIV DNA PCR
Candida species
Blood, skin biopsy, or CSF
Culture
Zika virus
Blood, urine, CSF
NAAT and serum immunoglobulin M (IgM)
NAAT may be falsely negative
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies may reflect maternal exposure
Antibodies may cross-­react with other flaviviruses
*Published evaluations of NAATs for these indications are limited, but sensitivity and specificity are expected to be at least as high as those for culture.
†Treponemal tests include the T. pallidum particle agglutination (TP-­PA) test, T. pallidum enzyme immunoassay (TP-­EIA), T. pallidum chemilumines­
cent assay (TP-­CIA), and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-­ABS) test.
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme J. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1012, Table 131.6.
TABLE 27.24  Psychopharmacologic Agents 
That May Be Useful in the Treatment of 
Children with Developmental Disabilities
Medication
Possible Indications
Carbamazepine
Mania, bipolar disorder, impulsivity, aggression, 
seizures, trigeminal neuralgia
Clomipramine
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder, depression
Clonazepam
Mania, bipolar disorder, seizure
Clonidine, guanfacine
Manic episodes, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder, aggression
Sertraline, other SSRIs, 
risperidone, olanzapine, 
aripiprazole
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder, depression, 
anxiety
Aggressive, self-­injurious behavior
Methylphenidate
Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder: dextro­
amphetamine
Aggression, impulsivity
Valproic acid
Bipolar disorder, especially rapidly cycling
SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
471
CHAPTER 27  Intellectual Developmental Disorders (Developmental Delay)
performance. When a child is born with a single risk factor, such as pre­
maturity, the parents may be afraid to place demands on the child, cre­
ating a vicious cycle of “learned helplessness” and immature behaviors.
Parents of children who are informed that their child is not normal 
often grieve for their “lost” (typically developing) child. This process of 
grieving involves stages that include denial, sadness, anger, and guilt. 
One parent may be experiencing persistent anger while another is still 
sad or depressed. This difference in stages may make communication 
between them exceedingly difficult. Grieving may occur at times other 
than the initial diagnosis, for example, on the first day of kindergarten. 
These feelings may be expressed in nonfunctional ways, such as denial 
that leads to unending shopping for professionals who will “cure” the 
child or anger that is expressed at the clinician, thereby thwarting efforts 
at building a trusting and supportive relationship. However, many 
authorities believe that these emotions are essential steps that allow the 
parents to release the old dreams and secure new ones. The goal of the 
therapeutic clinician is to accept the parents at whatever stage they are 
in and to help them understand the normalcy of the stages.
TABLE 27.25  Providing Primary Care to 
Children with Developmental Disabilities 
Using the Mnemonic “MD’S DD BASICS”
MD’S DD 
BASICS
Things to Check
Potential Consultant(s)
Motor
Ambulation, seating, posi­
tion, spine
Orthopedist, physiatrist, PT, 
OT
Diet
Weight, fat stores, diet, 
feeding problems
Nutritionist/dietitian, speech 
pathologist, OT
Seizures
Seizure record; drug levels 
and side effects
Neurologist
Dermatology
Skin breakdown
Nursing, plastic surgeon
Dentistry
Teeth, gums
Dentist
Behavior
Aggression, self-­injury, 
sleep, pica, interfering 
behavior
Psychologist, psychiatrist
Advocacy
Finances, family support, 
program aid
Social worker
Sensory
Vision, hearing
Ophthalmologist, audiologist
Infections
Immunizations, environ­
ment, lungs, urine
Infection control nurse
Constipation
Stools, gastroesophageal 
reflux
Gastroenterologist
Sexuality
Menses, sexual activity, 
masturbation, contra­
ception, prevention of 
sexually transmitted 
diseases
Gynecologist, habilitation 
program
OT, occupational therapist; PT, physical therapist.
Modified from Sulkes S. MD’s DD BASICS: identifying common prob­
lems and preventing secondary disabilities. Pediatr Ann. 1995;24:245–
254.
TABLE 27.26  Medical Checklist for a Child 
with Down Syndrome
Age
Condition
Monitoring
Birth to 2 mo
Etiology, recurrence 
risk
Chromosome analysis and genetic 
counseling
Hypothyroidism
TSH, T3, and T4
Congenital heart 
defect
Pediatric cardiology evaluation, 
including echocardiography
Family stress
Referral to Down Syndrome Asso­
ciation
2–12 mo
Refractive errors, 
cataracts
Pediatric ophthalmologic evaluation
Hearing loss; recur­
rent otitis media
Auditory brainstem evoked response
Delayed develop­
ment
Formal developmental evaluations
1–12 yr
Delayed develop­
ment
Enrollment in early intervention 
program
Hypothyroidism
Annual TSH
Hearing loss
Auditory testing: annually between 1 
and 3 yr and every 2 yr between 3 
and 13 yr
Refractive error
Ophthalmologic examination every 
2 yr
Atlantoaxial insta­
bility
Cervical spine roentgenography at 2 
and 12 yr
Routine care
Dental examination at 2 yr, then every 
6 mo (prophylaxis for subacute 
bacterial endocarditis, if indicated)
12–18 yr
Hypothyroidism
TSH annually
Decreased hearing
Auditory testing every 2 yr
Refractive error
Ophthalmologic examination every 
2 yr
Mitral valve prolapse
Echocardiography
T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Developmental disabilities are common. Identifying children with 
developmental delay involves both specific attention to children with 
biologic and/or sociocultural risks and routine developmental sur­
veillance and screening during well-­child visits. All children with 
suspected developmental delay should receive a formal multidisci­
plinary assessment that includes a systematic diagnostic approach 
with a “tiered” strategy for laboratory and neuroimaging evalua­
tions. Developmental regression, vomiting, seizures, or lethargy 
suggests the presence of a potentially life-­threatening metabolic 
disorder. Parents need to understand that it is not always possible 
to identify a single defined disease process responsible for their 
child’s developmental disability. Even if a specific etiology is not 
found, comprehensive clinical assessments can identify the child’s 
profile of strengths and weaknesses. Children with developmental 
disabilities will require meticulous monitoring over time and coor­
dination of care to optimize their functional status. All children 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
472
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
with developmental disabilities will benefit from early intervention, 
therapeutic, and special education services to help maximize their 
developmental potential and to promote independence and personal 
autonomy.
Red flags include developmental regression (see Chapter 28), dys­
morphology, developmental delay associated with vomiting or lethargy 
(consider IEMs), failure to thrive, seizures, and recognition of a treat­
able cause of delay or CP (http://www.treatable-­id.org/).
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
472.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aase JM. Diagnostic Dysmorphology. New York: Plenum Medical Book; 1990.
Akins RS, Krakowiak P, Angkustsiri K, et al. Utilization patterns of conven­
tional and complementary/alternative treatments in children with autism 
spectrum disorders and developmental disabilities in a population-­based 
study. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2014;35:1–10.
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn and 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Committee on Ob­
stetric Practice. The Apgar score. Pediatrics. 2006;117:1444–1447.
American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Newborn and Infant Hearing. 
Newborn and infant hearing loss: detection and intervention. Pediatrics. 
1999;103:527–530.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-­V). 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Associa­
tion; 2013.
Aylward GP. The relationship between environmental risk and developmental 
outcome. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 1992;13:222–229.
Badawi N, Felix JF, Kurinczuk JJ, et al. Cerebral palsy following term new­
born encephalopathy: a population-­based study. Dev Med Child Neurol. 
2005;47:293–298.
Ballantyne AO, Spilkin AM, Hesselink J, et al. Plasticity in the developing 
brain: intellectual, language and academic functions in children with 
ischaemic perinatal stroke. Brain. 2008;131:2975–2985.
Baron IS, Leonberger KA. Assessment of intelligence in the preschool period. 
Neuropsychol Rev. 2012;22:334–344.
Battaglia A, Carey JC. Diagnostic evaluation of developmental delay/mental 
retardation: an overview. Am J Med Genet. 2003;117C:3–14.
Battaglia A, Doccini V, Bernardini L, et al. Confirmation of chromosom­
al microarray as a first-­tier clinical diagnostic test for individuals with 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and 
dysmorphic features. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2013;17:589–599.
Berry SA. Newborn screening. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:441–453.
Bick J, Zhu T, Stamoulis C, et al. Effect of early institutionalization and foster 
care on long-­term white matter development: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169:211–219.
Blasco PA. Pitfalls in developmental diagnosis. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1991;38:1425–1438.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Economic costs associated with 
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, hearing loss, and vision impairment, 
United States, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2004;53(03):57–59.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence of autism spectrum 
disorder among children aged 8 years—autism and developmental dis­
abilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(SS02):1–21.
Chan E. The role of complementary and alternative medicine in attention-­
deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2002;23:S37–S45.
Council on Children with Disabilities, Section on Developmental Behavioral 
Pediatrics, Bright Futures Steering Committee, et al. Identifying infants 
and young children with developmental disorders in the medical home: 
an algorithm for developmental surveillance and screening. Pediatrics. 
2006;118:405–420.
Curry CJ, Stevenson RE, Aughton D, et al. Committee of the ACMG. Evalua­
tion of mental retardation: recommendations of a consensus conference. 
Am J Med Genet. 1997;72:468–477.
Day RE, Schutt WH. Normal children with large heads—benign familial mega­
lencephaly. Arch Dis Child. 1979;54:512–517.
De Leersnyder H, Bresson JL, de Blois MC, et al. Beta-­1-­adrenergic antagonists 
and melatonin reset the clock and restore sleep in a circadian disorder, 
Smith-­Magenis syndrome. J Med Genet. 2003;40:74–78.
Dudova I, Kasparova M, Markova D, et al. Screening for autism in preterm 
children with extremely low and very low birth weight. Neuropsychiatr Dis 
Treat. 2014;10:277–282.
Dworkin PH. British and American recommendations for developmental 
monitoring: the role of surveillance. Pediatrics. 1989;84:1000–1010.
Editorial. Developmental surveillance. Lancet. 1986;1:950–­951.
Escalona SK. Babies at double hazard: early development of infants at biologic 
and social risk. Pediatrics. 1982;70:670–676.
Fletcher JM, Barnes M, Dennis M. Language development in children with 
spina bifida. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2002;9:201–208.
Frankenburg WK, Dodds JB. The Denver Developmental Screening Test. J 
Pediatr. 1967;71:181–191.
Gesell A, Amatruda C. Developmental Diagnosis. New York: Paul Hoeber; 
1941.
Glascoe FP. Early detection of developmental and behavioral problems. Pediatr 
Rev. 2000;21:272–280.
Glascoe FP. The value of parents’ concerns to detect and address developmen­
tal and behavioural problems. J Paediatr Child Health. 1999;35:1–8.
Graham JM. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Deformation. 3rd ed. 
Elsevier; 2007.
Harlor AD, Bower C. The Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine, 
et al. Clinical report—hearing assessment in infants and children: recom­
mendations beyond neonatal screening. Pediatrics. 2009;124:1252–1263.
Henderson LB, Applegate CD, Wohler E, et al. The impact of chromosomal 
microarray on clinical management: a retrospective analysis. Genet Med. 
2014;16:657–664.
Hickson GB, Altemeier WA, O’Connor S. Concerns of mothers seeking care in 
private pediatric offices: opportunities for expanding services. Pediatrics. 
1983;72:619–624.
Hreidarsson SJ, Shapiro BK, Capute AJ. Age of walking in the cognitively 
impaired. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1983;22:248–250.
Huffman LC, Sutcliffe TL, Tanner ISD, et al. Management of symptoms of 
children with autism spectrum disorders: a comprehensive review of 
pharmacologic and complementary-­alternative medicine treatments. J Dev 
Behav Pediatr. 2011;32:56–68.
Idring S, Magnusson C, Lundberg M, et al. Parental age and the risk of autism 
spectrum disorders: findings from a Swedish population-­based cohort. Int 
J Epidemiol. 2014;43:107–115.
James HE, Perszyk A. Concepts on childhood microcrania: a clinical overview 
for the neurosurgeon who is evaluating a child with a small head. Pediatr 
Neurosurg. 2011;47:354–358.
Johnson CP, Myers SM. Council on Children with Disabilities. Identification 
and evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 
2007;120:1183–1215.
Jones KL, Jones MC, del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation. 7th ed. Elsevier; 2013.
Karoly LA, Kilburn MR, Cannon JS. Proven Benefits of Early Interventions. 
Rand Corporation; 2005. www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_
briefs/2005/RAND_RB9145.pdf.
Kemper KJ, Vohra S, Walls R. The use of complementary and alternative medi­
cine in pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2008;122:1374–1386.
Kuzniewicz MW, Wi S, Qian Y, et al. Prevalence and neonatal factors 
associated with autism spectrum disorders in preterm infants. J Pediatr. 
2014;164:20–25.
Lathi RB, Hazard FK, Heerema-­McKenney A, et al. First trimester miscarriage 
evaluation. Semin Reprod Med. 2011;29:463–469.
Leach EL, Shevell M, Bowden K, et al. Treatable inborn errors of metabolism 
presenting as cerebral palsy mimics: systematic literature review. Orphanet 
J Rare Dis. 2014;9:197.
Lee RW, Poretti A, Cohen JS, et al. A diagnostic approach for cerebral palsy in 
the genomic era. NeuroMolecular Med. 2014;16:821–844.
Linver MR, Brooks-­Gunn J, Kohen DE. Family processes as pathways from 
income to young children’s development. Dev Psychol. 2002;38:719–734.
Luckasson R, Borthwick-­Duffy S, Buntinx WHE, et al. Mental Retardation: 
Definition, Classification, and Systems of Supports. 9th ed. Washington, DC: 
American Association on Mental Retardation; 1992.
Maher CO, Piatt JH, Section on Neurologic Surgery. Incidental findings on 
brain and spine imaging in children. Pediatrics. 2015;135:e1084–e1096.
Martin GR, Beekman RH, Mikula EB, et al. Implementing recommended screen­
ing for critical congenital heart disease. Pediatrics. 2013;132:e185–e192.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
472.e2
Michelson DJ, Shevell MI, Sherr EH, et al. Evidence report: genetic and 
metabolic testing on children with global developmental delay. Neurology. 
2011;77:1629–1635.
Miller DT, Adam MP, Aradhya S, et al. Consensus statement: chromosom­
al microarray is a first-­tier clinical diagnostic test for individuals with 
developmental disabilities or congenital anomalies. Am J Hum Genet. 
2010;86:749–764.
Moeschler JB, Shevell M, Committee on Genetics, American Academy 
of Pediatrics. Clinical report. Comprehensive evaluation of the child 
with intellectual disability or global developmental delays. Pediatrics. 
2014;134:e903–e918.
Montgomery TR. The dysmorphology examination. In: Accardo PJ, ed. Capute 
and Accardo’s Neurodevelopmental Disabilities in Infancy and Childhood. 
3rd ed. Vol. 1. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes; 2008:311–320.
Moster D, Lie RT, Markestad T. Joint association of Apgar scores and early 
neonatal symptoms with minor disabilities at school age. Arch Dis Child 
Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2002;86:F16–F21.
Murphy CC, Yeargin-­Allsopp M, Decoufle P, et al. The administrative 
prevalence of mental retardation in 10-­year-­old children in metropolitan 
Atlanta, 1985 through 1987. Am J Public Health. 1995;85:319–323.
Nelson HD, Bougatsos C, Nygren P. Universal newborn hearing screening: 
systematic review to update the 2001 US Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendations. Pediatrics. 2008;122:e266–e276.
Newborn Screening Authoring Committee. Newborn screening expands: 
recommendations for pediatrician and medical homes—implications for 
the system. Pediatrics. 2008;121:192–217.
Nordenbaek C, Jorgensen M, Kyvik KO, et al. A Danish population-­based 
twin study on autism spectrum disorders. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2014;23:35–43.
Pakula AT, Van Naarden Braun K, Yeargin-­Allsopp M. Cerebral palsy: classifi­
cation and epidemiology. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2009;20:425–452.
Palfrey JS, Singer JD, Walker DK, et al. Early identification of children’s special 
needs: a study in five metropolitan communities. J Pediatr. 1987;111:651–
659.
Pimperton H, Blythe H, Kreppner J, et al. The impact of universal newborn 
hearing screening on long-­term literacy outcomes: a prospective cohort 
study. Arch Dis Child. 2016;101:9–15.
Purser HRM, Thomas MSC, Snoxall S, et al. Definitions versus categorization: 
assessing the development of lexico-­semantic knowledge in Williams 
syndrome. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2011;46:361–373.
Rapin I, Segalowitz SJ. On the nature and scope of child neuropsychology. In: 
Segalowitz SJ, Rapin I, eds. Handbook of Neuropsychology. 2nd ed. Vol. 8, 
Part I. Child neuropsychology. New York: Elsevier; 2002:1–6.
Riggs ER, Wain KE, Riethmaier D, et al. Chromosomal microarray impacts 
clinical management. Clin Genet. 2014;85:147–153.
Rodriguez DP, Poussaint TY. Neuroimaging of the child with developmental 
delay. Top Magn Reson Imaging. 2007;18:75–92.
Sand N, Silverstein M, Glascoe FP, et al. Pediatricians’ reported practices 
regarding developmental screening: do guidelines work? Do they help? 
Pediatrics. 2005;116:174–179.
Schaefer GB, Bodensteiner JB. Radiological findings in developmental delay. 
Semin Pediatr Neurol. 1998;5:33–38.
Schaefer GB, Sheth RD, Bodensteiner JB. Cerebral dysgenesis: an overview. 
Neurol Clin. 1994;12:773–788.
Schalock RL, Luckasson RA, Shogren KA, et al. The renaming of mental 
retardation: understanding the change to the term intellectual disability. 
Intellect Dev Disabil. 2007;45:116–124.
Scheiner AP, Sexton ME. Prediction of developmental outcome using a perina­
tal risk inventory. Pediatrics. 1991;88:1135–1143.
Segel R, Ben-­Pazi H, Zeligson S, et al. Copy number variations in cryptogenic 
cerebral palsy. Neurology. 2015;84:1660–1668.
Seltzer MM, Floyd F, Greenberg J, et al. Life course impacts of mild intellectual 
deficits. Am J Ment Retard. 2005;110:451–468.
Shevell M, Ashwal S, Donley D, et al. Practice parameter: evaluation of the 
child with global developmental delay. Neurology. 2003;60:367–380.
Silove N, Collins F, Ellaway C. Update on the investigation of children with 
delayed development. J Paediatr Child Health. 2013;49:519–525.
Smith RD. The use of developmental screening tests by primary-­care pediatri­
cians. J Pediatr. 1978;93:524–527.
Soden SE, Saunders CJ, Willig LK, et al. Effectiveness of exome and genome 
sequencing guided by acuity of illness for diagnosis of neurodevelopmental 
disorders. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(265):265ra168.
Srour M, Shevell M. Genetics and the investigation of developmental delay/
intellectual disability. Arch Dis Child. 2014;99:386–389.
Stevenson RE, Schwartz CE. X-­linked intellectual disability: unique vulnerabil­
ity of the male genome. Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2009;15:361–368.
Stiles J. Neural plasticity and cognitive development. Dev Neuropsychol. 
2000;18:237–272.
Tarini BA, Zikmund-­Fisher BJ, Saal HM, et al. Primary care providers’ initial 
evaluation of children with global developmental delay: a clinical vignette 
study. J Pediatr. 2015;167:1404–1408.
Tarpey PS, Smith R, Pleasance E, et al. A systematic, large-­scale resquencing 
screen of X-­chromosome coding exons in mental retardation. Nat Genet. 
2009;41(5):535–543.
Thorpe HS, Werner EE. Developmental screening of preschool children: a 
critical review of inventories used in health and educational programs. 
Pediatrics. 1974;53:362–370.
Valente EM, Ferraris A, Dallapiccola B. Genetic testing for paediatric neuro­
logical disorders. Lancet. 2008;7:1113–1126.
Van Karnebeek CD, Jansweijer MC, Leenders AG, et al. Diagnostic investiga­
tions in individuals with mental retardation: a systematic literature review 
of their usefulness. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005;13:6–25.
Van Karnebeek CDM, Scheper FY, Abeling NG, et al. Etiology of mental retar­
dation in children referred to a tertiary care center: a prospective study. Am 
J Ment Retard. 2005;110(4):253–267.
Van Karnebeek CDM, Shevell M, Zschocke J, et al. The metabolic evaluation of 
the child with an intellectual developmental disorder: diagnostic algorithm 
for identification of treatable causes and new digital resource. Mol Genet 
Metab. 2014;111:428–438.
Van Karnebeek CDM, Stockler S. Treatable inborn errors of metabolism caus­
ing intellectual disability: a systematic literature review. Mol Genet Metab. 
2012;105:368–381.
Yeargin-­Allsopp M, Drews CD, Decoufle P, et al. Mild mental retardation in 
black and white children in metropolitan Atlanta: a case-­control study. Am 
J Public Health. 1995;85:324–328.
Zablotsky B, Black LI, Maenner MJ, et al. Prevalence and trends of devel­
opmental disabilities among children in the United States: 2009-2017. 
Pediatrics. 2019;144:e20190811.
Zouvelou V, Yubero D, Apostolakopoulou L, et al. The genetic etiology in 
cerebral palsy mimics: the results from a Greek tertiary care center. Eur J 
Paediatr Neurol. 2019;23:427–437.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
