353
An abdominal mass or abdominal fullness in a child usually becomes 
apparent when it enlarges enough to be visualized during bathing or 
palpable on physical examination. Masses may arise from intraperito­
neal, retroperitoneal, or abdominal wall locations and emanate from 
both solid and hollow viscera (Figs. 20.1 and 20.2). An abdominal mass 
may prove life threatening (e.g., malignant neoplasm, splenic seques­
tration crisis in sickle cell disease), arise from congenital malformation 
or disorganized development (e.g., mesenteric cyst, enteric duplica­
tion), or be benign or correctable nonoperatively (e.g., fecaloma, sple­
nomegaly associated with infectious mononucleosis). Hepatomegaly 
and splenomegaly often indicate systemic illnesses such as infection, 
hemolysis, storage disease, or malignancy (see Chapter 17). A child 
with an abdominal mass requires a prompt and thorough work-­up 
with testing guided by history, physical examination findings, age, and 
gender. Early surgical referral may assist in this work-­up following a 
directed screening approach.
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGIES
Clinical History
A child’s age, gender, and thorough clinical history help to identify the 
most likely disease category (Tables 20.1 and 20.2). The duration and 
character of associated symptoms are important for narrowing the dif­
ferential diagnosis (e.g., fatigue, fever, appetite changes, vomiting, stool­
ing history, weight loss, night sweating, character and frequency of pain, 
hematuria, flushing, palpitations, lower extremity swelling, lymph nodal 
prominence, and jaundice). A history of abdominal trauma should be 
elicited, as solid organ injuries may result in hematoma, seroma, per­
sistent pseudocyst, or arteriovenous malformation. Infectious disease 
may have sequelae of cyst, lymphadenopathy, or intraabdominal abscess. 
Some systemic diseases (e.g., glycogen storage, hereditary spherocyto­
sis), genetic syndromes (e.g., Beckwith-­Wiedemann, Peutz-­Jeghers, 
von Hippel-­Lindau, familial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary pheo­
chromocytoma, PTEN hamartoma tumor), and anomalies (aniridia 
with Wilms tumor, isolated hemihypertrophy with neuroblastoma and 
Wilms tumor, Hirschsprung with neuroblastoma) are associated with 
intraabdominal tumors. A family history is pertinent as is a menstrual 
and sexual history, particularly in adolescent females. Prenatal imaging 
frequently identifies congenital malformations and neoplasms, requiring 
postnatal imaging and surgical assessment.
Physical Examination
A complete physical exam should be performed in children with 
abdominal masses. Attention should be paid to the general condition 
(fever, pallor, petechiae, cachexia) of the child and to signs of metastatic 
disease. Enlarged lymph nodes and their locations should be noted, the 
skin inspected, and the lungs and heart auscultated. Extremities should 
be evaluated for evidence of swelling, venous phlegmasia, or evidence 
of embolic disease to bone, muscle, or skin. Genitourinary exam 
should make note of any inappropriate virilization, testicular changes, 
and hymenal patency in the case of a female with a low pelvic mass. 
In addition, a neurologic examination may reveal signs of central or 
peripheral nervous system involvement. The eyes should be carefully 
inspected for periorbital ecchymosis, proptosis, squint, opsoclonus-­
myoclonus syndrome, heterochromia of the iris, Horner syndrome, 
and scleral icterus. The patient’s blood pressure must be determined 
and may be elevated in patients with Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, or 
pheochromocytoma.
To successfully perform abdominal palpation in a child, the clini­
cian must approach the patient calmly and gently, as the most reliable 
exams are completed in cooperative and relaxed children. Enlarged 
organs may be missed in a struggling child who does not lie quietly. 
When cooperation proves difficult in an infant, the examining hand 
should be placed and remain static on the abdomen and the exam com­
pleted between cries or as the child calms in the parent’s arms. Creative 
play is sometimes necessary, with the use of pacifiers or bottles to dis­
tract the child from the exam. Re-­examination after voiding or defecat­
ing elucidates contributions of constipation and urinary retention in 
the child’s presentation.
The abdominal quadrants should be examined systematically (Table 
20.3; see Figs. 20.1 and 20.2). With the patient in the supine position, 
the symmetry of the abdomen should be inspected, and any visible 
masses or the presence of ascites should be noted. A very enlarged 
spleen is frequently visible, with fullness of the left side of the abdomen. 
The presence of tense fluid-­filled hernias or prominent periumbilical 
veins as sequelae of portal hypertension should be noted. The mass 
should be localized, and its size, shape, texture, mobility, tenderness, 
and relation to midline noted. The umbilical position is a useful marker 
of abdominal asymmetry.
Signs of peritoneal inflammation must be sought (see Chapter 13). 
Dull visceral pain conducted by slow C nerve fibers may be reported 
for inflammatory processes in the vascular distributions of the celiac, 
superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric arteries and referred 
to the epigastrium, umbilical region, or hypogastrium, respectively. 
When the inflamed process contacts the peritoneum, peritoneal fast A 
nerve fibers allow discrete localization of sharp pain to the abdominal 
wall. Ultrasound is often a very useful adjunct in the evaluation of an 
abdominal mass and is often available at the bedside.
Approximately half of abdominal masses in older children are caused 
by enlargement of the liver or spleen, or both. The liver is normally pal­
pated in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium extending 1–2 cm 
below the costal margin. The inferior hepatic margin may be palpated in 
a thin child, is usually nontender, and moves with respiration. Detection 
of liver edge by auscultation using skin scratches has been proven unre­
liable and has been supplanted by the use of readily available ultrasound. 
Hepatomegaly is discussed in detail in Chapter 17. The spleen is located 
Abdominal Masses
John C. Densmore and Emily M. Densmore
20
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
354
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Multicystic, polycystic
(autosomal dominant or 
recessive) renal disease
Hydronephrosis
Neuroblastoma
Lymphoma
Pancreatic
pseudocyst
Wilms tumor
Fig. 20.2  Location of select retroperitoneal tumors and masses.
Benign hepatic tumors
Liver abscess
Bezoar
Splenomegaly
Splenic cyst
Intestinal
duplication
Ovarian cyst/neoplasm,
abscess
Hydrometrocolpos
Tuboovarian
abscess
Mesenteric cyst
Appendiceal
abscess
Choledochal cyst
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metastatic cancer
Intestinal
obstruction, lymphoma
Fig. 20.1  Location of select intraabdominal tumors and masses.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
355
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
in the left upper quadrant and is nonpalpable in most healthy children. 
To locate an enlarged spleen, the examiner must begin palpation in 
the patient’s left iliac fossa (to avoid missing a grossly enlarged spleen 
or liver with extension of the left hepatic lobe into the splenic area in 
the left upper quadrant); the examiner’s right hand should move toward 
the patient’s left upper quadrant to find the spleen’s lower pole or medial 
border. The examiner’s left hand is placed in the patient’s left flank, and 
gentle displacement of the thoracic cage toward the examiner’s right 
hand often displaces the spleen forward enough to make it appreciable. 
The spleen has a rounded tip and should move downward with inspira­
tion and is more superficial than a renal mass. It is equally important for 
the examiner to palpate the spleen as it is for the spleen to “touch” the 
examiner during its descent with inspiration. Overaggressive palpation 
may push the spleen away, whereas gentle or light palpation permits the 
examiner to feel the spleen’s edge passively. Because the extent to which 
the spleen extends below the costal margin depends heavily on the 
patient’s position, the extent of the spleen below the costal margin should 
be measured with the patient in the supine position. Measurement from 
the left costal margin to the lower pole of the spleen defines the splenic 
axis. Ordinarily, the long axis of the spleen is along the length of the 10th 
rib. As it enlarges, it extends medially and downward. Masses in the left 
upper quadrant, especially left renal masses, may be difficult to distin­
guish from an enlarged spleen. In general, a splenic notch, if present, 
helps identify the mass as a spleen, but nodular masses, such as Wilms 
tumors of the kidney, neuroblastomas, and retroperitoneal teratomas, 
may masquerade as splenomegaly. Many enlarged spleens are not palpa­
ble on physical examination because of their relationship to other organs 
and the thoracic cage. Hyperinflation of the lungs (as occurs in asthma, 
bronchiolitis, and ipsilateral pneumothorax) may make a normal-­sized 
liver or spleen palpable.
Flank masses are the next most frequent, particularly in newborn 
to toddler-­aged children. Renal masses extend caudally, are fixed 
with respiration, and cause abdominal asymmetry. Lower abdominal 
masses are most commonly caused by constipation or urinary reten­
tion. These may be functional or secondary to neurogenic dysfunction. 
A perforated appendix with resulting abscess formation may create a 
tender right lower quadrant mass. Ovarian or uterine tumors often 
TABLE 20.1  Stepwise Evaluation of an 
Abdominal Mass
Clinical History
Age and gender
General symptoms
Pain
Gastrointestinal symptoms
Urogenital symptoms
Pulmonary symptoms
Family history
Sexual history
Weight loss
Travel
Physical Examination
General condition
Lymph nodes
Associated physical findings
Cachexia
Abdominal Palpation
Quadrant of the abdomen
Organ most likely to be affected
Characteristics (soft or hard, mobile or nonmobile, crosses midline, moves 
with respiration, tender)
Ultrasonography
Location
Solid or cystic
Depending on the Clinical Suspicion, Evaluation Can Be 
Continued with One or More of the Following:
Laboratory studies: CBC, urinalysis, tumor markers
Imaging studies: plain radiography of chest and abdomen, contrast 
radiography of the gastrointestinal tract, CT, MRI, angiography, PET scan
TABLE 20.2  Age-­Related Etiology of 
Abdominal Masses
Age
Benign
Malignant
Neonate 
(0–1 mo)
Congenital hydronephrosis
Cystic or dysplastic kidney 
disease
Intestinal duplication
Mesenteric/omental cyst
Neurogenic bladder
Ovarian cyst
Renal vein thrombosis
Choledochal cyst
Mesoblastic nephroma
Meconium ileus
Hematoma (adrenal, hepatic, 
splenic)
Neuroblastoma
Infant 
(0–1 yr)
Intestinal duplication
Mesenteric/omental cyst
Ovarian cyst
Hydronephrosis
Mesoblastic nephroma
Cystic-­dysplastic kidney
Liver hamartomas
Hepatic cavernous hemangioma
Liver hemangioendothelioma
Teratoma
Lymphatic malformation
Intussusception
Hepatosplenomegaly
Choledochal cyst
Megacolon
Urachal cyst
Neuroblastoma
Hepatoblastoma
Wilms tumor (rare)
Teratoma
Child
Mesenteric/omental cyst
Choledochal cyst
Appendiceal abscess
Lymphatic malformation
Neuroblastoma (2–10 yr)
Hepatoblastoma
Wilms tumor
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Adolescent
Bezoar
Hematocolpos
Hydrometrocolpos
Pregnancy
Inflammatory bowel disease
Retroperitoneal hematoma 
(hemophilia)
Castleman disease
Mesenteric fibromatosis 
(dermoid)
Neuroblastoma (11–16 yr)
Adrenal cortical carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Ovarian or testicular 
neoplasm
Lymphoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Inflammatory myofibroblastic 
tumor
Desmoplastic small round 
cell tumor
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
356
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
grow undetected in the pelvis until large enough to exit the pelvis as a 
large palpable abdominal mass.
Laboratory and Imaging Studies
Screening laboratory data, including CBC with differential and cell mor­
phology, measurements of serum electrolytes, urinalysis, urine pregnancy 
test when appropriate, and inflammatory markers, are broadly applicable. 
Liver function tests, serum amylase, tumor marker levels (Table 20.4), and 
renal function tests are often important initial objective data points.
Plain abdominal radiographs may reveal tumor calcifications, 
organomegaly, excess fecal load, and mass effect upon intestines. Views 
in at least two different positions should be obtained to appreciate asci­
tes or intestinal obstruction. As a screening modality, ultrasonography 
is a highly efficient, low-­cost, and widely available test. It is noninvasive, 
is nonirradiating, and can give detailed information on the location, 
vascularity, and nature of the mass and adjacent structures (Fig. 20.3). 
The most widely used defining imaging technique is CT (Fig. 20.4), 
followed by MRI. These modalities often provide radiologic diagnosis, 
are invaluable for surgical planning, and are unhampered by bowel gas, 
a common limitation of ultrasound. MRI or CT when combined with 
functional PET scanning can define primary, metastatic, and recurrent 
disease (Figs. 20.5 and 20.6).
SPLENOMEGALY
Unlike many other abdominal masses, splenomegaly is usually sec­
ondary to a systemic process; it can be caused by diseases that result 
in hyperplasia of the lymphoid and reticuloendothelial systems (infec­
tions, inflammatory disorders), infiltrative disorders (Gaucher disease, 
TABLE 20.3  Location and Nature of Abdominal Masses
Organ
Congenital
Benign
Malignant
Acquired
Liver and biliary tract
Hemangioma
Hemangioendothelioma
Hepatoblastoma
Abscess
Choledochal cyst
Hamartoma
Lymphoma
Hematoma
Leukemia
Parasitic disease
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hydrops of the gallbladder
Spleen
Cyst
Sarcoma
Splenomegaly (e.g., mononucleosis)
Kidney
Hydronephrosis
Cystic disease
Duplication
Wilms tumor
Hematoma
Adrenal gland
Neuroblastoma
Pheochromocytoma
Neuroblastoma
Hematoma
Pheochromocytoma
Stomach
Duplication
Leiomyoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Bezoar
Teratoma
Inflammatory pseudotumor
Adenocarcinoma
Intestines
Duplication
Lymphangioma
Carcinoma
Appendiceal abscess
Megacolon
Hemangioma
Lymphoma
Intussusception
Obstipation
Mesentery
Mesenteric/omental cyst
Inflammatory bowel disease
Parasitic disease
Tuberculosis
Pancreas
Cyst
Carcinoma
Pseudocyst
Uterus
Hydrometrocolpos
Myoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Pregnancy
Ovaries
Cyst
Cyst
Yolk sac tumor
Tuboovarian abscess
Teratoma
Cystic teratoma
Embryonal carcinoma
Cystic adenoma
Dysgerminoma
Granulosa cell tumor
Choriocarcinoma
Bladder
Urachal cyst
Posterior urethral valve
Inflammatory pseudotumor
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Urinary retention
Retroperitoneum
Presacral teratoma
Ganglioneuroma
Neuroblastoma
Psoas abscess
Anterior myelomeningocele
Aortic aneurysm
Abdominal wall
Hernia
Hemangioma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Hematoma
Omphalocele
Rectus sheath hematoma
Gastroschisis
Abscess
TABLE 20.4  Tumor Markers
Tumor
Tumor Markers
Neuroblastoma
Urinary catecholamines
LDH
Ferritin
Neuron-­specific enolase
Wilms tumor
Erythropoietin
Hepatoblastoma, pancreatoblastoma, 
yolk sac tumors
α-­Fetoprotein (AFP, AFP-­L3), PIVKA
Germ cell tumors
β-­hCG, α-­fetoprotein, LDH
Pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma
Plasma metanephrine, normetanephrine
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; 
PIVKA, protein induced by vitamin K absence.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
357
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
Fig. 20.3  An ultrasonic longitudinal view of the pelvis reveals hydromet­
rocolpos. The uterus and cervix are readily seen superior to the large 
collection of fluid in the vagina located at the right of the image.
Fig. 20.4  CT revealing a large Wilms tumor replacing the right kidney. 
Notice that the renal cortex, enhanced by contrast medium, is splayed 
out around the mass. This characteristic helps differentiate Wilms tumor 
from neuroblastoma, which would displace a normal-­appearing kidney.
Fig. 20.5  Recurrent anaplastic Wilms tumor with multiple sites of 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-­avid disease. 
Standard CT scan (top). PET scan (middle). PET/CT scan (bottom). (From Murphy JJ, Tawfeeq M, Chang B, 
et al. Early experience with PET/CT scan in the evaluation of pediatric abdominal neoplasms. J Pediatr Surg. 
2008;43:2186–2192 [Fig. 2, p. 2188].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
358
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
leukemia, lymphoma, histiocytosis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocy­
tosis), hematologic disorders (thalassemia, hereditary spherocytosis), 
and conditions that cause distention of the sinusoids whenever there is 
increased pressure in the portal or splenic veins (portal hypertension) 
(Table 20.5). In addition, palpable spleens in children and adolescents 
are not always indicative of disease. A palpable spleen (≤2 cm below the 
left costal margin) is a normal finding in a child younger than 3 years 
and may be a normal finding in an older child. Up to 15% of full-­term 
neonates, 10% of children, and 3% of college freshmen have palpable 
spleens unassociated with an increase in lymphoreticular malignancy 
and with equivalent health. However, a spleen that is palpable >2 cm 
below the left costal margin should be evaluated further. Masses that 
may be mistaken for splenomegaly include the left lobe of the liver, a left 
upper quadrant tumor such as Wilms or neuroblastoma, a spleen that 
is displaced by obstructive lung disease such as asthma or bronchiolitis, 
or a gastric bezoar. Painful splenomegaly generally follows stretching of 
the splenic capsule with rapid enlargement of the spleen. Malfixed “wan­
dering” spleens may undergo torsion, presenting the upper pole to the 
abdominal wall as a prominent painful abdominal mass. Splenic enlarge­
ment that is noted not in the context of an acute illness (i.e., it is noted 
incidentally, for instance, on a well-­child examination or checkup) is 
more likely to be caused from a chronic process such as a storage disease 
than splenomegaly that is noted in the context of an acute illness. Acute 
onset of splenomegaly is most characteristic of an acute infection or a 
rapidly progressive malignancy (acute leukemia, lymphoma). Chronic 
splenomegaly (present for ≥1 month) is much more likely to represent 
a chronic process, such as storage diseases, congestive processes (portal 
hypertension, congestive heart failure), hemolysis, chronic infection, or 
inflammation. Massive splenomegaly (a spleen that crosses the midline 
or reaches the pelvis) indicates leukemia, lymphoma or other lymph­
oproliferative syndromes (post-­transplant, familial hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis), hemoglobinopathy, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 
visceral leishmaniasis, or a storage disease.
History
Birth and medical history, including transplacentally acquired infec­
tions, especially congenital syphilis, are often associated with splenic 
enlargement. History of a neonatal umbilical venous catheter, perhaps 
accompanied by occult portal venous injury or thrombosis, may pro­
gressively obstruct the extrahepatic portal vein, leading to congestive 
splenomegaly. Recurrent infections suggest immunodeficiency. Liver 
disease may lead to portal hypertension, which may in turn lead to 
splenomegaly. Congestive heart failure and associated congenital car­
diac malformations have an increased risk of abdominal heterotaxia 
A
B
Fig. 20.6  CT (A) and PET/CT (B) of the abdomen and pelvis, showing multiple FDG-avid peritoneal masses 
throughout the abdominal cavity. (From Kruger E, Obasaju P, Dunn E, et al. Desmoplastic small round cell 
tumor presenting as an inguinal mass in a 2-year old boy. J Pediatr Surg Case Rep. 2020;58:101479. Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
359
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
TABLE 20.5  Differential Diagnosis of Splenomegaly by Pathophysiology
ANATOMIC LESIONS
Cysts, pseudocysts
Hamartomas
Polysplenia syndrome
Hemangiomas and lymphangiomas
Hematoma or rupture (traumatic)
Peliosis
Parasitic
Malaria
Toxoplasmosis, especially congenital
Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati (visceral larva migrans)
Leishmaniasis (kala-­azar)
Schistosomiasis (hepatic-­portal involvement)
Trypanosomiasis
Fascioliasis
Babesiosis
HYPERPLASIA CAUSED BY HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Acute and Chronic Hemolysis*
Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease in infancy with or without 
sequestration crisis and side variants, thalassemia major, unstable 
hemoglobins)
Erythrocyte membrane disorders (hereditary spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, 
pyropoikilocytosis)
Erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies (severe G6PD deficiency, pyruvate kinase 
deficiency)
Immune hemolysis (autoimmune and isoimmune hemolysis)
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Chronic Iron Deficiency
Extramedullar Hematopoiesis
Myeloproliferative diseases: CML, juvenile CML, myelofibrosis with myeloid 
metaplasia, polycythemia vera
Osteopetrosis
Patients receiving granulocyte and granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating 
factors
IMMUNOLOGIC AND INFLAMMATORY PROCESSES*
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Systemic vasculitis
Serum sickness
Drug hypersensitivity, especially to phenytoin
Graft versus host disease
Sjögren syndrome 
Cryoglobulinemia 
Amyloidosis
Sarcoidosis
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease
Large granular lymphocytosis and neutropenia
Histiocytosis syndromes
Hemophagocytic syndromes (nonviral, familial)
INFECTIONS†
Bacterial
Acute sepsis: Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus 
influenzae type b, Staphylococcus aureus
Chronic infections: infective endocarditis, chronic meningococcemia, 
brucellosis, tularemia, cat-­scratch disease
Local infections: splenic abscess (S. aureus, streptococci, less often Salmonella 
spp., polymicrobial infection), pyogenic liver abscess (anaerobic bacteria, 
gram-­negative enteric bacteria), cholangitis
Viral*
Acute viral infections
Congenital CMV, herpes simplex, rubella
Hepatitides A, B, and C; CMV
EBV
Viral hemophagocytic syndromes: CMV, EBV, HHV-­6 
HIV
Spirochetal
Syphilis, especially congenital syphilis
Leptospirosis
Rickettsial
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Q fever
Typhus
Fungal/Mycobacterial
Miliary tuberculosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis
South American blastomycosis
Systemic candidiasis (in immunosuppressed patients)
MALIGNANCIES
Primary: leukemia (acute, chronic), lymphoma, angiosarcoma, Hodgkin disease, 
mastocytosis
Metastatic
STORAGE DISEASES
Lipidosis (Gaucher disease, Niemann-­Pick disease, infantile GM1 
gangliosidosis)
Mucopolysaccharidoses (Hurler, Hunter-­type)
Mucolipidosis (l-­cell disease, sialidosis, multiple sulfatase deficiency, 
fucosidosis)
Defects in carbohydrate metabolism: galactosemia, fructose intolerance, 
glycogen storage disease IV
Sea-­blue histiocyte syndrome
Tangier disease
Wolman disease
Hyperchylomicronemia type 1, IV
CONGESTIVE DISEASE*
Heart failure
Intrahepatic cirrhosis or fibrosis
Extrahepatic portal (thrombosis), splenic, and hepatic vein obstruction 
(thrombosis, Budd-Chiari syndrome)
*Common.
†Chronic or recurrent infection suggests underlying immunodeficiency.
CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HHV-­6, human 
herpesvirus 6.
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2620, Table 513.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
360
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
with splenic malformation and splenomegaly. Abdominal trauma may 
acutely produce a splenic hematoma (Fig. 20.7) or may be followed by 
development of a chronic splenic pseudocyst.
A family history of anemia, transfusions, early biliary stones, 
cholecystectomy, and splenectomy may indicate hemolytic anemia. 
Identification of Mediterranean (thalassemia, glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency), African (sickle cell disease, G6PD 
deficiency), southern Asian (thalassemia, G6PD deficiency), or Ashke­
nazi Jewish (storage disease) ancestry in patients with splenomegaly is 
helpful in identifying an inherited process.
Social and behavioral issues of parents, children, and adoles­
cents heavily affect certain risks and exposures. Sexual encounters 
and intravenous and illicit drug exposure may expose patients to 
hepatitis, cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sexual abuse may place even 
young children at risk; it may be difficult to elicit an accurate 
history.
A review of systems in a patient with splenomegaly should elucidate 
related conditions. Systemic symptoms, such as fever or weight loss, are 
seen in many disorders that manifest splenomegaly, particularly infec­
tions, malignancies, and inflammatory or granulomatous processes, 
such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) and sarcoidosis. 
When fever is acute in onset, infection is most likely. Chronic fever, 
often gradual in onset and not associated with chills, is more likely to 
be caused by inflammatory processes (systemic lupus erythematosus 
[SLE], juvenile idiopathic arthritis [JIA], sarcoidosis, Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis) or tumors (lymphomas, especially Hodgkin disease, or 
leukemia). Exposure to infectious agents or a travel history that might 
result in exposure to infectious agents unusual for the patient’s com­
munity (malaria, leishmaniasis, schistosomiasis, trypanosomiasis for 
U.S. citizens with a travel history to an endemic country) should be 
determined. Pallor suggests anemia (hemolysis, bone marrow infil­
tration, hypersplenism); purpura and petechiae suggest thrombocy­
topenia (bone marrow failure, autoimmune disorder, hypersplenism, 
bone marrow infiltration); and jaundice and conjunctival icterus sug­
gest hemolytic anemia, liver dysfunction, or both. Rashes caused by 
a variety of acute and chronic infections and inflammatory diseases 
(SLE, JIA, infective endocarditis, HLH) and hemangiomata that are 
part of a systemic process involving the spleen may provide clues to 
splenic disease. Dyspnea, cough, orthopnea, and fatigue suggest respi­
ratory disease (Langerhans cell histiocytosis or sarcoidosis), anemia, 
congestive heart failure, or malignancy (Hodgkin disease). Diarrhea 
caused by Salmonella infection or inflammatory bowel disease may be 
accompanied by splenic enlargement. Abdominal pain accompanied 
by splenomegaly may be attributable to acute splenic capsule disten­
tion or caused by coincident gallstones, hepatitis, or trauma. Joint pain 
resulting from SLE, JIA, and other autoimmune inflammatory diseases 
may be associated with splenomegaly. Bone pain is a feature of bone 
marrow infiltrative processes, particularly leukemia or neuroblastoma 
or storage disease (Gaucher disease). Poor vision in an infant with 
splenomegaly suggests osteopetrosis (with deafness) or uveitis-­iritis 
(sarcoidosis, JIA). Loss of developmental milestones occurs with stor­
age diseases. Splenomegaly may accompany neurologic paraneoplas­
tic syndromes (such as myasthenia gravis) secondary to lymphoma or 
lymphoproliferative syndromes.
Physical Examination
Nutritional status and growth parameters provide clues to disorders 
that affect the patient’s metabolic state and tissue oxygenation. Mal­
nutrition (as evidenced by such problems as weight loss and failure 
to thrive) in a child with splenomegaly suggests malignancy, chronic 
hemolysis, immunodeficiency or chronic infection, a metabolic disor­
der, or liver disease. Pallor, petechiae, purpura, jaundice, hemangio­
mata, septic emboli to the skin, infiltrative lesions (leukemia cutis, solid 
tumors), seborrhea, or eczema (as occurs in Langerhans cell histiocyto­
sis and immunodeficiency) should be noted. Cherry-­red retinal spots 
or cloudy corneas suggest storage diseases. Conjunctival pallor, scleral 
icterus, fundal hemorrhages, evidence of sinus infection or otitis media, 
condition of gingivae, and evidence of salivary gland enlargement 
should be noted. The clinician should look for signs of heart failure or 
new or changing murmurs, which suggest valvular or other structural 
heart disease or endocarditis. Any respiratory distress, rales, rhonchi, or 
suggestion of pneumonia or asthma should be noted. Abdominal dis­
tention, prominent veins on the abdomen, hepatomegaly, fluid wave, 
tenderness, or rebound should be noted, as should specific character­
istics and size of the spleen itself. A hard or nodular spleen suggests 
malignancy or chronic hemolysis. A tender spleen suggests either acute 
enlargement or infection, or both. A spleen that is more than 5 cm 
below the left costal margin is usually not transient and represents sig­
nificant disease. Arthritis, splinter hemorrhages, and poor bone growth 
(as occurs in storage diseases and osteopetrosis) should be noted. Size, 
texture, mobility, tenderness, and distribution of lymph nodes should 
be noted. Enlarged (>1 cm), firm, fixed lymph nodes are suggestive of 
lymphoma or leukemia. Tender enlarged lymph nodes are suggestive of 
more common infections. Developmental delay suggests chronic infec­
tion, immunodeficiency, or storage diseases.
Approach to the Child with Splenomegaly
The most common cause of splenomegaly in childhood is viral infec­
tion, which should induce only moderate splenomegaly (<5 cm below 
the left costal margin) that is transient, lasting <4–6 weeks. Other com­
mon causes include autoimmune disorders and destruction of abnor­
mal blood cells (such as brisk hemolysis). The approach to the child 
with splenomegaly is affected by several key factors, each of which 
indicates the probability of significant disease necessitating diagnosis 
and intervention (Fig. 20.8A and B).
Laboratory Investigation
Table 20.6 summarizes key diagnostic laboratory investigations.
Fig. 20.7  The subcapsular splenic hematoma (arrow) in a 15-­year-­old 
boy who had been in a motor vehicle crash was best seen on coronal 
scans through the left intercostal spaces.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
361
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
TABLE 20.6  Summary of Laboratory Investigations for Suspected Diagnosis 
with Splenomegaly
Suspected Diagnosis
Tests to Be Performed
Hemolysis
CBC, reticulocyte count, blood smear, serum bilirubin measurement, Coombs test, osmotic fragility study, RBC enzyme assays, 
hemoglobin electrophoresis
Infection
CBC, differential, blood cultures, viral studies (EBV, CMV, HIV), toxoplasmosis, Bartonella titers, TB test, malaria blood smear, PCR 
testing and/or blood smear for babesiosis, CRP, procalcitonin
Liver disease
Liver function tests, albumin measurement, prothrombin time, α1-­antitrypsin, serum copper, ceruloplasmin
Portal hypertension
Liver function tests; albumin measurement; prothrombin time; ultrasonography/CT of portal veins, liver, and spleen
Immunologic and 
inflammatory disease
ESR, CRP, C3, C4, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor measurements; ferritin, urinalysis; BUN, serum creatinine, and 
immunoglobulin measurements
Infiltrative disease
CT, enzyme assay for Gaucher disease, tests as indicated for other storage diseases
Malignancy
CBC with differential, peripheral smear, CXR, uric acid, LDH, CT, bone marrow aspiration
Genetic syndrome
Molecular DNA testing or whole exome sequencing
CMV, cytomegalovirus; CXR, chest x-ray; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RBC, red blood cell; 
TB, tuberculosis.
Features suggestive
of infectious or viral
etiology present:
Pharyngitis
Fever
Lymphadenopathy
CBC with differential
Serology for EBV
± Testing for CMV, toxoplasmosis
± HIV testing
Obtain CBC with differential
Peripheral smear
Reticulocyte count
Observe 4–6 weeks
(unless clinically ill)
Splenomegaly
resolved
Splenomegaly persistent
(or patient ill)
US/abdominal CT/MRI
EBV
CMV
Toxoplasmosis
HIV
Other infection
Bacterial (Salmonella typhi, infective 
endocarditis, splenic abscess)
Spirochetal (syphilis, leptospirosis)
Rickettsial (Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, Q fever, typhus)
Fungal (blastomycosis, systemic
candidiasis)
Mycobacterial (tuberculosis)
Parasitic (malaria, toxoplasmosis,
Toxocara canis, leishmaniasis)
Infection
Histiocytosis
Malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma, 
Hodgkin disease, metastases)
Collagen vascular disease (systemic
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid
arthritis)
Acute viral
infection
Lymphoproliferative syndrome
A
SPLENOMEGALY
Perform History and 
Physical
see Panel B
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
YES
NO
Fig. 20.8  A and B, Approach to the child with splenomegaly. CMV, cytomegalovirus; CXR, chest x-­ray; EBV, 
Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; MAS, macrophage activation syndrome; 
RBC, red blood cell; US, ultrasonography. (Adapted from Pomeranz A, Sabnis S, Busey S, et al. Splenomegaly: 
Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:106–109.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
362
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Complete Blood Cell Count
A CBC is the first test indicated in all patients with undiagnosed spleno­
megaly. This count provides extensive information about hematologic, 
infectious, and inflammatory processes; the result may also be abnor­
mal in patients with hypersplenism caused by portal hypertension.
Leukocyte Count, Differential, and Procalcitonin
A white blood cell (WBC) count above or below the normal range for age, 
the neutrophil count, the lymphocyte count, and the presence of abnormal 
cells (atypical lymphocytes, blasts) should be noted. Viral infection is the 
most common cause of splenomegaly in children, and atypical lymphocy­
tosis may be a clue. Viral infections may be associated with an increased 
(early) or decreased WBC count. Most significant bacterial infections pro­
duce neutrophilia and reactive changes in the neutrophils. Infections with 
intracellular bacteria or some viruses may produce neutropenia. Addition­
ally, an elevated procalcitonin level may indicate bacterial infection. Leu­
kemia can manifest with an increased or decreased total WBC count. The 
presence of blasts is confirmatory, but they are not always present.
Hemoglobin, Erythrocyte Morphology, and Reticulocyte Count
Hemolytic anemia may be unsuspected without examination of the 
blood smear and the reticulocyte count (see Chapters 49 and 50). 
Malarial parasites may be seen on the blood smear but may be missed 
unless a thick preparation is examined. Clues found on the blood 
smear include spherocytes (present in hereditary spherocytosis and 
hemolytic anemias); elliptocytes (present in hereditary elliptocyto­
sis); polychromasia, poikilocytes, and fragmented cells (present in 
hemolytic anemias); sickled cells with target cells, spherocytes, and 
nucleated red blood cells (present in sickle cell anemia and vari­
ants); and microcytosis, hypochromia (present in thalassemias), and 
Howell-­Jolly bodies (present in splenic dysfunction). Hypersplenism 
(pooling or sequestration of blood cells in an enlarged spleen) may 
cause anemia.
Platelet Count
Thrombocytopenia (<150,000 platelets/mm3) may be caused by 
decreased platelet production or increased platelet destruction. 
Production is diminished in conditions characterized by bone mar­
row infiltration (leukemia, neuroblastoma). Increased destruction 
accompanies immunologic processes, drug reactions, HLH, and viral 
infections. Thrombocytosis (>400,000 platelets/mm3) often accom­
panies iron-­deficiency or acute infection as an acute-­phase reac­
tant. Sequestration of platelets within an enlarged spleen may cause 
thrombocytopenia.
Obtain CBC with differential
Peripheral smear
Reticulocyte count
Congestive disorder
Neoplasm
Storage disease
Other infections
Collagen vascular disease
Histiocytosis
Extramedullary hematopoiesis
(osteopetrosis, myelofibrosis)
Hematoma
Cysts/pseudocysts
Hamartomas
Polysplenia syndrome
Hemangiomas
Lymphangiomas
Perform abdominal US
± CT/MRI
RBC enzyme deficiencies
(G6PD deficiency)
Hemoglobinopathies
Erythrocyte membrane
disorders (hereditary 
spherocytosis, elliptocytosis)
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Drug-induced hemolytic      
 
  anemia
Leukemia
Fragmentation hemolysis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria
Suggestive of
hemolytic disorder
B
SPLENOMEGALY (continued)
Atypical lymphocytes
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
Normal
results
Normal
displacement
EBV
CMV
Toxoplasmosis
Obtain serology for EBV,
toxoplasmosis, CMV
Blast cells
present
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Abnormal
results
Fig. 20.8, cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
363
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
Pancytopenia
Pancytopenia implies bone marrow dysfunction, bone marrow infil­
tration, or portal hypertension with hypersplenic destruction of all the 
formed elements of the blood (see Chapter 50). A bone marrow aspi­
ration and biopsy should be performed in any child with splenomegaly 
and pancytopenia. Tests of liver function, including prothrombin time 
and albumin, are indicated.
Viral Antibody Titers
Viral antibody titers for Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus 
should be obtained when a mononucleosis syndrome is present, espe­
cially when splenomegaly persists. Heterophile antibody tests are rapid 
and have a sensitivity of 85% for EBV in older children and adolescents 
but are not sensitive in children younger than 4 years. Specific serologic 
testing for EBV is useful in these younger children. The results of these 
tests rarely affect management but may permit a presumptive diagnosis 
of a self-­limited process to be made, and they may preclude more invasive 
tests such as imaging and/or bone marrow examination. Toxoplasmosis 
should also be considered. Primary infection with HIV frequently causes 
splenomegaly. Acute infection with HIV may not be noted on screening 
labs, and therefore additional testing may be required.
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate and C-­Reactive Protein
Elevation of the ESR is nonspecific but suggests infection, especially bac­
terial, mycobacterial, or fungal infection, or an inflammatory process, 
such as JIA, HLH, or SLE. The ESR may be normal despite significant 
inflammation, for example, when there is severe anemia or hypofibrino­
genemia. The CRP level may be elevated when the ESR is normal.
Liver Function Tests
Liver function tests are indicated if splenomegaly is significant (>2 cm) 
or persists longer than 1 month. Portal hypertension is often asymp­
tomatic until hepatic fibrosis is far advanced. Liver synthetic function 
(albumin, prothrombin time, fibrinogen), direct bilirubin levels, and 
transaminase levels should be assessed.
Immunologic Evaluation
Immunologic evaluation is needed when autoimmune disorders (JIA, 
SLE) or immunodeficiency disorders (inherited or acquired) are sus­
pected. This assessment includes measurements of antinuclear anti­
body titer, immunoglobulin levels, and immunoglobulin subclass 
levels; tests of neutrophil function; and measurements of T-­cell sub­
classes. Repeated infections stimulate the immune system and may 
cause splenomegaly.
Cultures
Bacterial, fungal, and other cultures may be necessary and are dictated 
by the suspected infection.
Genetic Testing
Splenomegaly is a feature in many genetic conditions. A search for 
splenomegaly on the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) 
website returns 205 clinical syndromes for which the molecular basis is 
known. After a thorough work-­up does not reveal a cause for spleno­
megaly, molecular testing including whole exome sequencing (WES) 
may be appropriate, especially if there are dysmorphisms, developmen­
tal delay, or multiple organ system involvement.
Bone Marrow Examination
Bone marrow examination is appropriate for diagnosing infiltra­
tive processes (acute leukemia and other malignancies), HLH, and 
some infections that may be difficult to diagnose from other tissues 
(disseminated histoplasmosis, miliary tuberculosis, bacterial endo­
carditis, and other chronic infections, especially in immunocompro­
mised patients). While lysosomal storage disorders (Gaucher disease, 
Niemann-­Pick disease, Tay-­Sachs disease) may be identified through 
bone marrow examination in patients for whom malignancy is initially 
suspected, enzyme and genetic testing are preferred over bone marrow 
biopsy for the diagnosis of these conditions.
Imaging
Chest radiography is simple and may reveal hilar adenopathy or a 
mediastinal mass when malignancy is suspected. Imaging of the spleen 
has several roles but should be performed selectively. It is useful for 
the confirmation of splenic size, assessment of splenic architecture, and 
evaluation of other organs involved in the differential diagnosis. It can 
be useful in determining whether there are other abdominal masses 
that suggest widespread involvement by tumor, and if there is silent 
portal hypertension.
The choice of imaging depends on the questions to be asked. Ultra­
sonography has been the preferred method of imaging as it does not 
require radiation and is used to assess size and perfusion and to visu­
alize cysts and other lesions. Guidelines are available for the upper 
limit of normal splenic length (measured as the greatest longitudinal 
distance between the dome of the spleen and the tip). Doppler flow 
ultrasonography can detect portal hypertension.
CT of the spleen can define focal lesions (Fig. 20.9) and nonfocal 
enlargement, as well as evaluate the splenic and portal veins and the 
vasculature of the spleen. Less common in children than in adults, 
splenic cysts and pseudocysts may manifest with palpable spleens 
(Fig. 20.10). Both CT and ultrasonography identify such cysts well, 
and they also image the pancreas. Pancreatitis is a common cause of 
splenic cysts. Subcapsular hematoma can also be visualized by ultra­
sonography. Splenic lacerations are seen well on CT (Fig. 20.11). Per­
sistent splenomegaly after systemic infections may be caused by splenic 
abscesses, which are visualized with ultrasonography (Fig. 20.12). CT 
is an alternative imaging procedure for each of these problems.
SPLENECTOMY
Surgery plays an important role in the management of splenomegaly 
due to congenital hemolytic anemias. Laparoscopic splenectomy pro­
cedures have been demonstrated to significantly decrease sequestration 
events in both hereditary spherocytosis and sickle cell disease. Partial 
Fig. 20.9  Abdominal CT scan of a 15-­year-­old with fever, weight loss, 
and orthopnea. The diagnosis was Hodgkin disease. The spleen shows 
hypoechoic lesions, typical of lymphoma.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
364
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
splenectomy outcomes are durable in 5-­year follow-­up with only a 
4.8% failure rate according to the congenital hemolytic anemia registry. 
The use of partial splenectomy may be helpful in hereditary sphero­
cytosis where total splenectomy has been associated with pulmonary 
artery hypertension, thrombosis, and overwhelming postsplenectomy 
sepsis. Pediatric surgeons initiated nonoperative approaches for the 
management of splenic lacerations resulting from trauma. The Amer­
ican Association for the Surgery of Trauma grading scales for splenic 
injury have been employed to prospectively follow outcomes in stable 
pediatric trauma patients. Patients with grade I–II lacerations are con­
fined to bed for 24 hours, and those with grade III–V lacerations are 
confined to bed for 48 hours with restriction of activity for grade plus 
2 weeks postinjury. Even for the highest grades of injury, the need for 
splenectomy due to hemorrhage and clinical deterioration is <5%.
NEUROBLASTOMA
Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid malignancy 
in childhood. It accounts for 10% of all childhood tumors and 
15% of pediatric cancer deaths. The incidence of neuroblastoma is 
approximately 10.2 per million U.S. children under age 15 and is 
more common in males than in females (1.2:1). The tumor affects 
primarily children younger than 8 years, and more than 50% occur 
in children older than 2 years of age. Pathologic genetic or gene 
variant of neural crest cells giving rise to the primitive sympathetic 
innervation leads to tumor formation. Seventy-­five percent of the 
tumors are abdominal, and 65% of these originate in the adrenal 
medulla or lumbar sympathetic ganglia. The biology of neuroblas­
toma is exceptionally heterogeneous as mature lesions, particularly 
in neonates, may regress spontaneously or mature into more benign 
forms of ganglioneuroblastoma or ganglioma. Unpredictably, other 
lesions may degenerate despite intensive chemotherapy. As a deriv­
ative of sympathetic ganglia, this tumor produces catecholamines 
(90%) and expresses surface disialoganglioside 2 (GD2). These 
features are exploited via MIBG scans and GD2 epitope-­directed 
immunotherapy. Multiple genetic associations have been made 
including alterations in MYCN and anaplastic lymphoma receptor 
tyrosine kinase (ALK) variants. MYCN amplification has import­
ant prognostic consideration and can lead to postsurgical upstaging 
and alteration in chemotherapy. Gain-­of-­function variants in ALK 
have provided therapeutic targets with ALK inhibitors, including 
sorafenib. Both staging and multimodal therapy of neuroblastoma 
are rapidly changing landscapes as interventions become more 
targeted with the additional aim of decreasing secondary malig­
nancy. Presurgical staging has coalesced competing staging systems 
into the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group staging system 
(INRGSS). Isolated lesions <3.1 cm (solid) or 5 cm (cystic) are 
observed in infants under 6 months of age, and low-­risk lesions in 
older children may be amenable to surgical resection alone.
Toddlers present with progressive abdominal distention or abdom­
inal discomfort. The mass is retroperitoneal and tends to encase rather 
than displace vessels and viscera. Catecholamine production by the 
tumor occasionally results in flushing, sweating, and irritability. Vaso­
active intestinal polypeptide, also produced by the tumor, may cause 
secretory diarrhea. A variety of neurologic symptoms (opsoclonus-­
myoclonus) may also be seen, as may weight loss and anorexia. Most 
patients have metastases at the time of diagnosis, mainly to regional 
and distant lymph nodes, bone marrow and bone cortex, the orbit, the 
liver, and occasionally the lungs. Signs and symptoms related to metas­
tases include bone pain, proptosis, and skin lesions.
Diagnostic studies must define relative anatomy and size of the 
tumor and determine regional invasion, metastatic disease, function, 
and ultimately histologic features. In 90% of patients, high levels of 
catecholamines and their detectable metabolites (homovanillic and 
vanillylmandelic acid) are found in spot urine samples. Twenty-­four-­
hour urine collections show no additional sensitivity. Ferritin remains 
A
B
Fig. 20.10  The large epidermoid cyst of the spleen in a boy, shown on ultrasonography (A), is shown by CT 
scan (B) to compress the left renal vein (arrows). The boy presented with varicocele.
Fig. 20.11  Splenic laceration that resulted from trauma in a 15-­year-­old 
boy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
365
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
a useful serum marker, while neuron-­specific enolase is more relevant 
in tumor biopsy immunohistochemistry. A CBC may show anemia. In 
50% of cases, a plain radiograph shows finely stippled tumor calcifica­
tions and displacement of gas-­filled bowel loops. Ultrasonography con­
firms its solid nature and position in relation to the kidney. CT or MRI 
should be completed with arterial and venous phase contrast prior to 
biopsy or resection (Fig. 20.13). Axial imaging may reveal any intraspi­
nal extension of the tumor or its metastases. Bone marrow metastases 
are detected by bone marrow aspiration. PET scans identify sites of 
recurrent or residual metastatic lesions. MIBG uptake is useful to study 
pretherapy to assess the role of MIBG-­based therapy (I-­131) as part of 
the multimodal plan.
Surgical resection is the primary treatment of localized neuro­
blastoma. Two exceptions to this rule exist—neonates with stage MS 
disease (primary lesion, cutaneous, hepatic, and/or bone marrow 
metastases) and infants up to 1 year of age with stage L1 small adre­
nal or periadrenal tumors. In these cases careful observation may be 
employed with intervention for disease progression. Adjuvant che­
motherapy and radiotherapy are employed postoperatively, depend­
ing on the stage of the disease. For initially unresectable tumors, a 
diagnostic open biopsy is preferred to needle biopsy, and preferably 
retroperitoneally. Bone marrow aspiration findings, necessary for 
staging, may demonstrate classic small, round blue cells forming 
rosettes. For large encasing tumors surrounding major vasculature, 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be employed following biopsy and 
prior to resection. This strategy has been shown to improve resect­
ability, the goal being to achieve >90% tumor volume reduction at 
resection. In high-­risk neuroblastoma, at least four cycles of high-­
dose chemotherapy precede resection, followed by postoperative 
radiation therapy, autologous stem cell rescue, and continued che­
motherapy. The use of differentiating agents, such as retinoic acid, is 
indicated in high-­risk disease. Interleukin 2 (IL-­2), granulocyte mac­
rophage colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF), and anti-­GD2 therapy 
are also used in high-­risk protocols. Staging is based on the regional 
extension of the tumor, the level of metastatic disease, and the degree 
of resection. The outcome of the patient is determined primarily 
by the child’s age, tumor stage, histologic classification, and MYCN 
amplification. Hyperploid DNA is associated with a lower stage and 
better prognosis (contrary to most other tumors). Overall 5-­year 
neuroblastoma survival is 81% (>95% low risk, >90% intermediate 
risk, and >40% high risk), a striking shift considering that this tumor 
was uniformly fatal 30 years ago.
RENAL MASSES
The most common causes of a renal mass in neonates and infants 
are congenital (bilateral or unilateral) hydronephrosis and congen­
ital multicystic-­dysplastic kidney (often unilateral). In older infants 
and toddlers, Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) emerges as the leading 
cause. Ultrasonography immediately reveals whether the mass is solid 
or cystic, thus directing further investigation. An ectopic or horseshoe 
midline kidney may also be palpable.
A
B
Fig. 20.12  A 10-­year-­old girl had been treated for acute myelogenous leukemia. She had taken multiple anti­
biotics for recurrent infections. Unremitting fevers then developed. Candidiasis was strongly suspected, and 
ultrasonography was requested. Two weeks after the clinical suspicion of candidiasis was raised, obvious 
focal defects (arrows) could be seen within the spleen (A) and liver (B).
Fig. 20.13  Left adrenal neuroblastoma in a 9-­month-­old girl. Coronal 
contrast-­enhanced CT image shows a large heterogeneous retroperito­
neal mass invading the left kidney. The left kidney is displaced caudally 
and laterally with suggestion of a partial “claw sign” (arrow), which may 
lead to the erroneous interpretation that the mass is arising from the left 
kidney. (From Navarro OM, Daneman A. Acquired conditions. In: Colley 
BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2019:1175, Fig. 122.8.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
366
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Congenital Hydronephrosis
Hydronephrosis secondary to ureteropelvic obstruction due to aber­
rant renal artery or adhesion may result in a flank mass discovered in 
the neonatal period or in later childhood. It is more common in males 
and on the left side. The most common presenting symptom in infants 
is an abdominal mass or urinary tract infection. In older children, dis­
tention of the renal pelvis may cause intermittent pain, and hematuria 
may occur following minor abdominal trauma.
The diagnosis is confirmed with ultrasonography. A voiding cys­
tourethrogram excludes ureterovesical reflux and posterior urethral 
valves (in males). Diuretic renal scintigraphy is useful to demonstrate 
degree of obstruction and relative renal function. Treatment consists of 
pyeloplasty with resection of the obstruction.
Prenatally diagnosed dilated renal pelvis occurs in 1% of pregnan­
cies and rarely requires fetal intervention (Fig. 20.14). Postnatally, these 
infants will spontaneously resolve in over 90% of cases. Higher rates of 
intervention are required in infants with bilateral involvement, advanced 
grades of calyceal dilatation with parenchymal thinning (Society of Fetal 
Urology [SFU] grade III/IV), high-­grade reflux, and bladder wall thick­
ening. Males with bilateral hydronephrosis should undergo urologic 
evaluation for presence of obstructing posterior urethral valves.
Cystic Abnormalities of the Kidney
A unilateral multicystic-­dysplastic kidney (MCDK) usually manifests 
as a flank mass in the newborn. Ultrasonography demonstrates a cys­
tic kidney with absence of renal parenchyma and decreased function 
and readily allows for evaluation of the contralateral kidney. MCDK 
is differentiated from advanced hydronephrosis by lack of continuity 
between parenchymal cysts and the collecting system. Treatment rarely 
consists of surgical excision as the majority of lesions slowly involute 
and are not associated with increased risk of malignancy. Earlier 
reports combined cystic Wilms tumor with MCKD, now realized to be 
discretely different lesions. MCKD requiring resection includes those 
resulting in continued growth and rarely uncontrolled hypertension or 
pain. Voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) is rarely indicated, as MCKD 
is associated with a very low rate of ureteral reflux.
In the more serious case of autosomal recessive infantile polycystic 
disease (1/20,000 live births), both kidneys are affected. The kidneys are 
filled with thousands of small cysts derived from the collecting tubules. 
The clinical manifestation varies, depending on the degree of renal fail­
ure. Unfortunately, 30% of newborns die with pulmonary failure and 
almost 50% of patients experience severe renal insufficiency before the 
age of 15 years. The neonatal form is fatal without dialysis and then 
renal transplantation. Abdominal ultrasonography discloses the cystic 
nature of the condition, and diuretic renal scintigraphy shows symmet­
rically diminished function. Following peritoneal dialysis, renal trans­
plantation is the definitive management.
Wilms Tumor (Nephroblastoma)
Wilms tumor (WT) is an embryonal renal neoplasm, one of the most 
common childhood abdominal malignancies. The estimated incidence 
is close to 1 in 15,000 live births, with a male-­to-­female ratio of 0.9:1. The 
mean age at diagnosis is 3.5 years, and at least 90% of the patients present 
before the age of 8 years. Between 4% and 10% of children have bilat­
eral disease with a mean age of 2.5 years. Associated conditions include 
aniridia, hemihypertrophy, genitourinary anomalies, and Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome. WT arises in precursor lesions called nephro­
genic rests, which may be intra-­ or extralobar and usually spontaneously 
regress. The tumor suppressor gene WT1 (11p13) and the transcription 
factor WT2 (11p15) are associated with Wilms pathogenesis. Germline 
variants in these genes induce Wilms-­associated syndromes (Denys-­
Drash, Wilms tumor–aniridia–genitourinary malformation–mental 
retardation), which are rare. Loss of heterozygosity at 1p and 16q is asso­
ciated with higher relapse rates, upstages lesions, and is more resistant to 
current chemotherapy. Microscopic hematuria is present in about 30% 
of patients. In rare cases, obstruction of the left renal vein may induce 
a left-­sided varicocele via the gonadal vein. Other less common symp­
toms or signs include anemia, polycythemia, weight loss, hypertension, 
or frank hematuria.
In infants and toddlers, the most useful imaging modality is a CT 
scan of the abdomen with arterial and venous phase contrast due to the 
speed of the study and high resolution afforded for surgical planning (Fig. 
20.15). The location, size, and resectability of the tumor; presence of local 
A
B
Fig. 20.14  Fetal ultrasonography showing bilateral hydronephrosis. A, The urinary bladder (UB) is seen 
between the two dilated renal pelvises (LT and RT). B, The renal cortex is seen on the right side of the same 
fetus, between the two Xs.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
367
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
tumor invasion; and infiltration of the renal vein and inferior vena cava are 
assessed. Metastatic or bilateral disease must be ruled out. Differentiation 
of WT from neuroblastoma on axial imaging is based on whether the renal 
pelvis is splayed by an intrinsic renal mass or simply displaced by a supra­
renal mass. In WT, lung metastases from the renal vein and inferior vena 
cava infiltration may be present, whereas bone metastases are rare; these 
features distinguish it from neuroblastoma. In some cases, however, the 
overwhelming size of the tumor may make differentiation between WT 
and neuroblastoma challenging. A chest CT scan should be completed.
Treatment includes a transabdominal nephrectomy with early liga­
tion of the renal vein to avoid tumor mobilization. Chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy are added postoperatively, depending on the stage and 
histologic features of the tumor. For very large or complex tumors, 
especially those with extension of the tumor into the renal vein, 
inferior vena cava, and right atrium, preoperative chemotherapy has 
been employed in selected patients following tumor biopsy. In cases 
of bilateral disease, partial resection with nephron-­sparing surgery is 
employed. For children with excessive loss of functional renal paren­
chyma, transplantation is an option.
Tumor staging is based on radiographic evaluation (metastatic disease) 
and intraoperative findings (tumor size, extrarenal extension of the tumor, 
tumor spillage, status of local lymph nodes). The stage determines the 
prognosis and treatment of the disease. Survival depends on the prognos­
tic factors, cytogenetics, the histologic features of the tumor, and the age of 
the patient. Younger patients have a better prognosis. Most children have 
either stage I or stage II disease (regional extension of the tumor but com­
plete surgical removal), and most cases of WT have favorable histologic 
features. Overall, the 5-­year survival rate for favorable histology tumors 
exceeds 90%, with steadily decreasing chemotherapeutic toxicity and radi­
ation exposure called for in evolving treatment protocols. This adjustment 
in therapy is a model for other cancer types, the result of an ongoing col­
laboration between the National Wilms Tumor Study (NWTS) Group in 
the United States and the Societe International D’oncologie Pediatrique 
(SIOP) group in Europe. Similarly, the amount of cross-­sectional imaging 
used for post-­treatment surveillance is steadily decreasing to keep ioniz­
ing radiation exposure “as low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA). The 
late complications of therapy for WT include the development of acute 
myelogenous leukemia, short stature, and congestive heart failure.
LIVER TUMORS
Hepatomegaly or a hepatic mass may be caused by infection (hepati­
tis, abscess, cyst), storage disease, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and 
benign or malignant lesions. Primary liver tumors are uncommon in 
children, but when they occur, 66% are malignant. Hepatoblastomas 
predominate, followed by hepatocellular carcinoma, mesenchymoma, 
and rarely sarcoma.
Hepatic abscesses are caused by pathogens such as Staphylococcus 
aureus, anaerobic bacteria, or Escherichia coli. Chronic granulomatous 
disease, appendicitis, or immunocompromised state may predispose 
a child to this complication. Amebic infection of the liver caused by 
Entamoeba histolytica and parasite infestation with Echinococcus spe­
cies may also lead to abscess formation in tropical climates. Abscesses 
are treated with appropriate antibiotics and percutaneous drainage, 
only rarely requiring surgical intervention.
Benign tumors can be of either mesenchymal or epithelial ori­
gin. Mesenchymal tumors include disorders such as hamartomas, 
cavernous hemangiomas, and infantile hemangioendotheliomas in 
young children. These conditions manifest as asymptomatic abdomi­
nal masses. Hemangiomas, particularly diffuse ones, may be difficult 
to resect and should be managed nonoperatively unless complications 
develop. Hamartomas, which usually manifest in the first year of life, 
should be resected. Epithelial lesions include focal nodular hyperplasia, 
hepatic adenoma, and nonparasitic solitary or multiple cysts.
The initial radiographic evaluation for liver masses should include 
plain abdominal radiography to detect calcifications and the mass 
effect, and ultrasonography to determine the origin, size, and echoge­
nicity of the tumor. In addition, an abdominal CT or MRI scan can 
be obtained to define the exact localization and extent of the tumor 
(Fig. 20.16). MRI is more capable of discerning hamartomatous versus 
malignant lesions than CT scan, especially using EOVIST, a gadolin­
ium agent preferentially taken up by hepatocytes. Angiography is often 
Fig. 20.15  An exophytic Wilms tumor noted incidentally on a CT 
obtained for trauma.
Fig. 20.16  MRI showing a liver hamartoma in a 13-­month-­old boy. Note 
the excellent visualization of the blood vessels. The child presented 
with abdominal distention, poor appetite, and decreased activity. The 
liver was nontender and was palpated 15 cm below the costal margin. 
Operative resection was successful.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
368
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
useful for determining resectability. Chest radiography or CT is used to 
determine the presence of pulmonary metastases.
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatoblastoma is the most common primary liver tumor in children 
under 3 years of age affecting 1.5 per 1 million live births, and it is 
twice as common in males as in females. Premature birth and very 
low birthweight are associated with increased risk. The most common 
presentation is a child with a palpable abdominal mass, occasionally 
associated with anemia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, or abdominal 
pain. An unusual manifestation is precocious puberty resulting from 
tumor secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin. Elevated levels of 
serum α-­fetoprotein are seen in about 90% of cases, and this feature 
is helpful in the post-­therapy monitoring of disease activity. Ultraso­
nography, MRI, or CT (Fig. 20.17) may be used to image the lesion 
and assign a PRETEXT (PRETreatment EXTent of Disease) stage. 
Designed by the International Childhood Liver Tumor Strategy Group 
(SIOPEL), PRETEXT classifies tumors into four risk groups based 
upon the number of contiguous uninvolved liver segments as well as 
metastatic, portal venous, or systemic venous invasion (Fig. 20.18). 
The goal is to accurately predict resectable lesions and plan for trans­
plantation when appropriate without the complications associated with 
attempted resection in all cases, as surgical resection of hepatoblastoma 
is the mainstay of therapy. Core needle biopsy and neoadjuvant che­
motherapy are undertaken in unresectable lesions, and axial imaging 
is repeated. Hepatic transplantation may be undertaken when lesions 
remain unresectable in the absence of metastatic disease. While PRE­
TEXT I lesions portend a 100% 5-­year survival, PRETEXT IV lesions 
confer 63% 5-­year event-­free survival with resection and platin-­based 
therapy. Early consultation and use of liver transplantation is the cur­
rent most effective therapy for advanced stage lesions. Pretreatment 
variables associated with survival are the extent of the tumor, histologic 
classification, and the presence of metastases.
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma, more common in adults, usually occurs in 
an already diseased liver, such as that found after hepatitis B or C virus 
infection, tyrosinemia, galactosemia, biliary atresia, or cirrhosis. It is 
Fig. 20.17  CT of a hepatoblastoma in an 8-­month-­old girl. The child 
presented with hepatomegaly, increased abdominal girth, weight loss, 
and lethargy. The voluminous tumor occupies a large part of the upper 
abdominal cavity.
PRETEXT
 = Extent of tumor at diagnosis
POSTTEXT
 = Extent of tumor after
    neoadjuvant chemotherapy
I   ... 3 contiguous sections tumor free
II  ... 2 contiguous sections tumor free
III ... 1 contiguous section tumor free
IV ... no contiguous sections tumor free
In addition, any group may have:
V ... ingrowth vena cava, all 3 hepatic veins
P ... ingrowth portal vein, portal bifurcation
E ... extrahepatic
C ... caudate
M ... metastasis
PRETEXT (PRETreatment EXTent of disease)
I
II
III
IV
a
c
d
e
b
Fig. 20.18  PRETEXT classification of hepatic tumors. Staging considers number of uninvolved contiguous 
liver segments. (From Meyers R, Aronson D, Zimmermann A. Malignant liver tumors. In: Coran A, ed. Pediat­
ric Surgery. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:463–482.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
369
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
rare in younger children and has a peak incidence between the ages of 
10 and 15 years. The tumor manifests as a painful abdominal mass; in 
more than 65% of patients, it is unresectable. In these cases and in the 
absence of metastatic disease, liver transplantation should be consid­
ered. The diagnostic evaluation, staging, and treatment of hepatocellu­
lar carcinoma are similar to those of hepatoblastoma. Tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors such as sorafenib have emerged as significant treatment 
adjuncts in the pediatric patient population.
CONGENITAL DILATATION OF THE BILE DUCTS
Any congenital cystic dilatation of the bile ducts is commonly called 
choledochal cyst. There are several anatomic varieties of this condition, 
and the cause remains unknown. The most common choledochal cyst 
is seen when the common bile duct is grossly dilated (Todani type I, 
Fig. 20.19). However, the size varies, and the child may remain asymp­
tomatic for many years. About 20% of patients present with the classic 
triad of jaundice, pain, and a right upper quadrant abdominal mass. 
Obstructive jaundice may result from coincident gallstones, manifest­
ing in pruritus, dark urine, and acholic stools.
Ultrasonography reveals the location, size, and nature of the cyst. If 
there is any doubt about its origin, magnetic resonance cholangiopan­
creatography (MRCP) or liver-­phase CT scan (Fig. 20.20) may be used 
to outline the biliary tract and help differentiate it from other lesions 
such as duodenal duplication. Treatment consists of resection of the 
cyst and drainage of the hepatic duct into an intestinal segment (Fig. 
20.21). Incomplete resection of at least the mucosa of the affected por­
tion of the biliary tree predisposes the patient to the development of 
cholangiocarcinoma, which is a 20–30% lifetime risk in this population.
INTESTINAL AND PANCREATIC MASSES
Appendiceal Phlegmon and Abscess
Either delayed manifestation (walled off by mesentery) or delayed diag­
nosis of acute appendicitis may enable the development of a right lower 
quadrant mass after perforation as the inflamed tissues amalgamate 
into a phlegmon. Further maturation of this process may lead to an 
abscess. Diagnosis is often facilitated by the history, which can differ­
entiate from many other causes of abdominal mass by the recent (days 
to weeks) history of fever associated with abdominal pain and nausea. 
Antibiotic therapy may mask the diagnosis of appendicitis. Ultrasound 
is the preferred primary diagnostic modality and may be used in many 
cases to guide percutaneous drainage (Fig. 20.22). Interval appendec­
tomy in an uninflamed field may be performed safely 6–8 weeks later 
and is particularly useful in patients without obstructive symptoms. 
This approach is not appropriate either for suspected uncomplicated 
acute appendicitis with an appendicolith or for diffuse peritonitis.
Intussusception
Intussusception occurs when peristalsis of a lead point attached to the 
intestinal wall results in telescoping of proximal intestine into distal 
intestine causing luminal obstruction. Abdominal pain, vomiting, 
“currant-­jelly stools,” and lethargy are common. Two thirds of patients 
are younger than 2 years of age; the peak incidence is late in the first 
year of life. Ileocolic intussusception is usually caused by benign ileal 
lymphoid hyperplasia, whereas ileoileal intussusception or intussus­
ception in an older child should raise concern for a pathologic lead 
point. An abdominal mass may be palpated in 25% of patients as a 
“sausage” in the upper abdomen. Ultrasound may be obtained if the 
I
II
IVA
IVB
V
III
Fig. 20.19  Todani classification of choledochal cysts. (From Michaelis S, Kalache K. Biliary anomalies. In: 
Copel J, ed. Obstetric Imaging. 1st ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:114–120; redrawn from Callen PW. 
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
370
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
diagnosis is uncertain, but radiologic reduction enemas are diagnostic 
and therapeutic (see Chapter 13).
Bezoar
Children with psychiatric illness or developmental delay may eat their 
own hair (trichotillomania) or other indigestible material (e.g., persim­
mon peel). Most of these patients are females, usually in their teens. A 
trichobezoar (hair) or a phytobezoar (vegetable matter) forms in the 
stomach and causes partial gastric outlet obstruction. Gastric bezoars 
may massively distend the stomach and extend into the small intestine. 
If hair manages to pass the stomach, it collects in the duodenum and 
causes biliary tract obstruction; if it collects in the ileum, it may lead to 
intestinal obstruction.
The clinical picture is characterized by poor appetite, vague abdom­
inal discomfort, and intolerance to solid foods. Physical examination 
reveals loss of hair on the scalp and a movable mass in the epigastrium. 
Abdominal radiographs will show gastric outlet or intestinal obstruc­
tion. Axial imaging subsequently demonstrates the size and location. 
The bezoar may be removed endoscopically, but operative removal 
is most frequently required. Bacterial counts within a bezoar are 
extremely high, and operative removal is associated with a high rate 
of postoperative infection despite use of perioperative antibiotics and 
intraoperative wound protectors.
Intestinal Duplications
Duplications of the gastrointestinal tract occur anywhere from the 
esophagus to the anus and are either cystic or tubular. The more com­
mon cystic duplications are lined with endothelium and are enclosed in 
a muscular wall common with the adjacent intestinal segment. Tubular 
duplications are located on the mesenteric side of the bowel and are 
either blind or in communication with the bowel. The lining is usually 
that of the adjacent intestine but may be heterotopic, such as gastric 
mucosa in a duplication of the small bowel.
Duplications are often detected prenatally. When discovered, they 
should be resected after birth as volvulus has been seen as early as 2 
postnatal weeks. In older children, the manifestations depend on the 
size and location of the malformation. Many intraabdominal duplica­
tions manifest as an asymptomatic, palpable mass but may also cause 
pain, intestinal obstruction, hemorrhage, or volvulus. Ultrasonography 
differentiates the cystic nature of duplications from solid tumors and 
also demonstrates the intimate association between the duplication 
and the bowel wall. Treatment consists of resection of the duplication 
alone or, more commonly, along with the portion of intestine from 
which the duplication arose, depending on the anatomic location and 
amount of shared wall and blood supply (Fig. 20.23).
Neoplasms of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Neoplasms of the gastrointestinal tract of children are rare. The symp­
toms are often nonspecific, and diagnosis tends to be delayed. A gastric 
teratoma may appear as an epigastric mass, while gastric leiomyo­
mas manifest with bleeding. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors most 
commonly arise in the small intestine, can cause intussusception or 
Fig. 20.20  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrat­
ing a pediatric Todani type I choledochal cyst (C) and common bile duct–
pancreatic duct junction (arrow). (From Lim J, Kim K, Choi D. Biliary tract 
and gallbladder. In: Haaga J, Dogra V, Forsting M, et al., eds. CT and 
MRI of the Whole Body. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2009:1373–1453.)
Gallbladder
Liver
Cyst
Duodenum
Fig. 20.21  Operative photograph of a choledochal cyst between the 
gallbladder and the duodenum, displacing both.
Fig. 20.22  A large appendiceal abscess with a calcified fecalith. The 
abscess was drained percutaneously and treated with antibiotics. Inter­
val appendectomy was performed 8 weeks later.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
371
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
volvulus, and are highly sensitive to imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhib­
itor. Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common malignant tumor 
of the small intestine and may act as a lead point for intussusception. 
Other malignant tumors of the small intestine include angiosarcoma 
and carcinoid tumor. These conditions also occur in the large intes­
tine. Carcinoid tumors are most commonly found in the appendix, 
where they can cause obstruction and may lead to appendicitis. The 
colon is the most common site for the rare adenocarcinoma of the 
gastrointestinal tract in children. Colon adenocarcinoma in children 
is usually nonsyndromic, mucinous in nature (80%), and often at an 
advanced stage upon discovery. Benign neoplasms of the small and 
large intestine include hemangiomas, lymphangiomas, leiomyomas, 
and polyps. Neoplasms of the intestine require resection for diagnosis 
and treatment.
Mesenteric, Omental, and Retroperitoneal Cysts
Benign cysts located in the omentum or mesentery can be simple or 
multilocular and contain clear serous fluid. They arise from a develop­
mental abnormality of the lymphatic system that results in lymphatic 
obstruction. Most of these cysts are diagnosed during the first 5 years 
of life. They may be asymptomatic for years or manifest with a dis­
tended abdomen, abdominal mass, intestinal obstruction, volvulus, 
or abdominal pain. The abdomen is usually nontender with a mobile 
mass. In contrast to ascites, the flanks do not bulge when a child with 
an abdominal cyst is in the supine position.
A plain abdominal radiograph shows intestinal gas displaced for­
ward in the case of a mesenteric cyst and backward in the case of an 
omental cyst. Small amounts of calcification may be seen in the wall of 
the cyst. Ultrasonography, MRI, or CT further elucidates the nature, 
size, and location of the cyst (Fig. 20.24). An ovarian, pancreatic, or 
choledochal cyst or an intestinal duplication may be difficult to differ­
entiate from a mesenteric or omental cyst. Cerebrospinal fluid from 
a ventriculoperitoneal shunt or lumbar drain fails to be resorbed 
because of scarring of the peritoneum, leading to a “CSFoma” (Fig. 
20.25), which also may be mistaken for a mesenteric or omental cyst. 
Treatment of these lesions consists of surgical marsupialization or 
extirpation, occasionally requiring segmental small bowel resection. 
Retroperitoneal lymphatic malformations are amenable to percutane­
ous sclerotherapy with good results.
Rare solid lesions include inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, 
Castleman disease, mesenteric fibromatosis, desmoplastic small round 
cell tumors (Fig. 20.6), or rhabdomyosarcoma.
Pancreatic Pseudocyst and Neoplasms
Pancreatic tumors are rare in children and are cystic or solid, benign 
or malignant. Young children and infants may have pancreatoblas­
toma. Functional neoplasms arise from the islet cells, and the clinical 
manifestation is not of an abdominal mass but rather is characterized 
by the effects of the endocrine substances secreted by the tumor (e.g., 
hypoglycemia caused by insulinoma). Tumors arising from the acinar 
or ductal parts of the pancreas are nonfunctional and usually manifest 
as an abdominal mass. They may be benign (cystadenoma) or malig­
nant (adenocarcinoma). Embryonic pluripotent cells may give rise to 
solid pseudopapillary tumors, accounting for <5% of all pediatric pan­
creatic masses. Metastases are common in pancreatic neoplasms given 
the frequent delay in diagnosis. Diagnosis is aided by ultrasonography, 
endoscopy, CT, or MRI and, in cases of suspected endocrine tumors, 
by measurements of active hormones. Both benign and malignant 
tumors should be surgically resected. Malignant non–multiple endo­
crine neoplasia pancreatic tumors in children are rare and include 
Ewing sarcoma family tumors, VIPoma, acinar cell carcinoma, and 
solid pseudopapillary tumor.
Fig. 20.23  Operative photograph of the typical appearance of an intes­
tinal duplication.
Fig. 20.24  CT scan of the abdomen in an 11-­year-­old male, showing a 
mesenteric cyst in the transverse mesocolon.
Fig. 20.25  A large fluid collection associated with a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt (“CSFoma”).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
372
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
A pancreatic pseudocyst lacks epithelial lining and is the result of 
pancreatitis or pancreatic blunt trauma. Often, there is a symptom-­
free interval of several weeks or months between the trauma and the 
appearance of symptoms. The cause of pancreatic pseudocyst in the 
absence of trauma should prompt investigation of causes of recurrent 
pancreatitis including pancreas divisum and variants in PRSS1 and 
SPINK1 genes, allowing inappropriate release of pancreatic trypsin. 
Typical signs and symptoms are nausea, abdominal pain, and an epi­
gastric mass. Ultrasonography and axial imaging locate the cyst and 
identify any displacement of the bowel. The cysts usually resolve spon­
taneously; however, if they do not, they should be drained percutane­
ously or into the gastrointestinal tract.
OVARIAN TUMORS
Ovarian tumors are common abdominal masses in females leading to 
25 per 100,000 children’s hospital admissions. They must be considered 
in any female with lower abdominal pain, an abdominal mass, or pre­
cocious puberty. They manifest at any age from birth to adulthood but 
occur slightly more frequently in children at an average of 13 years of 
age. The risk of malignancy increases with age. Cystic tumors are more 
common than solid tumors, and the majority of masses are benign. 
An ovarian lesion may also be the presenting manifestation of other 
metastatic diseases, such as neuroblastoma or rhabdomyosarcoma. 
Malignant gonadal tumors (dysgerminoma, gonadoblastoma) may be 
seen in females with gonadal dysgenesis and males with cryptorchi­
dism. Other causes of adnexal mass include hydrosalpinx, pregnancy, 
and imperforate hymen leading to hydrocolpos or hydrometrocolpos.
Diagnosis is made by ultrasonography, which provides information 
on the size, consistency, location, perfusion, and wall characteristics 
of the tumor. Abdominal radiography may reveal calcifications. CT 
can locate local or distant metastases. Endocrinopathies are present 
in 5–10% of children with ovarian tumors, so consideration of the 
anterior pituitary–adrenal–gonadal axis is warranted. Levels of tumor 
markers, such as α-­fetoprotein and β-­human chorionic gonadotropin 
(β-­hCG), are uniformly helpful. CA-­125 and inhibin A should be con­
sidered, especially in children older than 3 years of age, in solid masses 
>8 cm, with inappropriate virilization, or with other concerns for oper­
ative findings consistent with epithelial cancer. Germ cell tumors occur 
in the setting of a normal karyotype.
A simple cyst may appear in a neonate as a mobile abdominal 
mass or may even be detected incidentally by ultrasonography. Small 
cysts (generally <6 cm) can be monitored with ultrasonography and 
should spontaneously disappear. Larger cysts should be excised, 
because they can undergo torsion. The symptoms of ovarian torsion 
in an older child simulate those of appendicitis or ectopic pregnancy 
(see Fig. 20.26).
All other tumors of the ovaries should be excised, whether benign 
(cystic teratoma, cystic adenoma, granulosa cell tumor) or malignant 
(endodermal sinus tumor, yolk sac tumor, embryonal carcinoma, 
malignant teratoma, adenocarcinoma, dysgerminoma, choriocarci­
noma). Great care should be taken to spare as much of the adnexa as 
possible to preserve future fertility. Unilateral salpingectomy with ovar­
ian preservation is required in the case of symptomatic hydrosalpinx. 
Depending on the histologic appearance and stage, most malignant 
lesions should be treated postoperatively with chemotherapy. Survival 
depends on the nature of the lesion; however, with the exception of 
highly malignant tumors such as endodermal sinus tumors and embry­
onal carcinoma, the prognosis is good.
SOFT TISSUE SARCOMA
Soft tissue sarcomas arise from mesenchymal cells and are generally 
rare tumors. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) arises from striated muscle 
and accounts for 4% of pediatric tumors, while nonrhabdomyosar­
comatous soft tissue sarcoma (NRSTS) is much more heterogeneous 
and adds an additional 3% of incidence. RMS is the most common 
pelvic malignancy in children under 3 years of age. In this location, 
tumors may grow undetected until large enough to palpate. Treatment 
is surgical resection with sentinel node biopsy and a chemotherapeu­
tic backbone strengthened by mTOR and tubulin inhibitors, with the 
addition of radiation therapy if the tumor is large and/or incompletely 
Fig. 20.26  Torsion of an ovarian teratoma in a 5-­year-­old female. The 
child presented with acute abdominal pain and a movable mass. A pre­
operative radiograph showed calcified material in the mass.
TABLE 20.7  Red Flags
1. Lower Abdominal Mass in Females
May be an indication of pregnancy, imperforate hymen, torsion of ovarian 
tumor, tuboovarian abscess
2. Appendiceal Abscess
Can often appear as a small bowel obstruction in younger children, in whom 
the diagnosis is often missed
3. Nonmobile Mass
Is suggestive of malignancy
4. Skeletal Pain or Pathologic Fracture
Is suggestive of metastatic disease (neuroblastoma) or lymphoma
5. Sudden Increase in Size of Clothing
May represent a mass or ascites
6. Left-­Sided Varicocele
May be a consequence of a left-­sided Wilms tumor
7. Systemic Signs of Weight Loss, Fever, Night Sweats, 
Anorexia, Petechiae, Anemia
Should trigger concern for malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune 
disorders, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, or atypical infections
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
373
CHAPTER 20  Abdominal Masses
resected. Currently 5-­year survival for all cases exceeds 70% and is 
greatly affected by age, group, histology, size, and site of involvement.
NRSTS may arise in multiple areas within the abdomen and pelvis. 
The most effective therapy is surgical resection, especially for tumors 
<5 cm, as chemotherapeutic response is less effective than in RMS. 
Patients with incomplete resection benefit from radiation and proton 
beam therapy for local control. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors have a select 
role in treating some tumor subtypes (e.g., desmoid).
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Although the discovery of an abdominal mass in a child is of great 
concern, the prognoses of most congenital masses are excellent. Sple­
nomegaly is often a manifestation of acute and benign common viral 
infections in children. Red flags for splenomegaly include chronicity, 
a positive family or travel history, pancytopenia, and signs of disease 
in addition to splenomegaly (weight loss, pallor, jaundice, fever, mal­
aise, petechiae). Additional red flags for abdominal masses are listed 
in Table 20.7. With modern diagnostic techniques and advanced 
multimodal therapy, the prognoses for malignant tumors continue 
to improve.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
373.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Diagnostic Strategies
Cope Z. The prevention and early diagnosis of the acute abdomen. Br Med J. 
1929;1:6–9.
Splenomegaly
Atichartakarn V, Chuncharunee S, Yamwong S, et al. Pulmonary artery pressure 
correlates directly with spleen volume in non-­splenectomized hemoglobin E/
beta-­thalassemia patients. Acta Haematol. 2013;130(3):172–175.
Beutler E, Saven A. Misuse of marrow examination in the diagnosis of Gaucher 
disease. Blood. 1990;76:646–648.
Brandow AM, Camitta BM. Splenomegaly. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III 
JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21 ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:2619–2620.
Buesing KL, Tracy ET, Kiernan C, et al. Partial splenectomy for hereditary 
spherocytosis: a multi-­institutional review. J Pediatr Surg. 2011;46(1):178–183.
Das A, Bansal D, Ahluwalia J, et al. Risk factors for thromboembolism and 
pulmonary artery hypertension following splenectomy in children with 
hereditary spherocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;61(1):29–33.
Dervan LA, King MA, Cuschieri J, et al. Pediatric solid organ injury operative 
interventions and outcomes at Harborview Medical Center, before and 
after introduction of a solid organ injury pathway for pediatrics. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(2):215–220.
Di Rocco M, Andria G, Deodato F, et al. Early diagnosis of Gaucher disease 
in pediatric patients: proposal for a diagnostic algorithm. Pediatr Blood 
Cancer. 2014;61(11):1905–1909.
Ebaugh Jr FG, McIntyre OR. Palpable spleen. A ten year follow-­up. Ann Intern 
Med. 1979;90:130–131.
Emond AM, Collis R, Darville D, et al. Acute splenic sequestration in 
homozygous sickle cell disease: natural history and management. J Pediatr. 
1985;107:201–206.
Epstein-­Barr Virus Infections. Red Book: 2018 Report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018.
Graus F, Ariño H, Dalmau J. Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes in 
Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphomas. Blood. 2014;123:3230–3238.
Heyne TF, Tsurutis AD, Herzberg EM, et al. A young infant from New 
Hampshire with fever, splenomegaly, anemia and thrombocytopenia. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2019;38:765.
Hilmes MA, Strouse PJ. The pediatric spleen. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 
2007;28(1):3–11.
Klopfenstein KJ, Grossman NJ, Fishbein M, et al. Cavernous transformation 
of the portal vein: a cause of thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly. Clin 
Pediatr. 2000;39:727–730.
Maschio M, Cozzi G, Sanabor D, et al. Splenomegaly as presentation of a 
wandering spleen. J Pediatr. 2010;157:859.e1.
McIntyre OR, Ebaugh Jr FG. Palpable spleens in college freshmen. Arch Intern 
Med. 1967;66:301–306.
Megremis SD, Vlachonikolis IG, Tsilimigaki AM. Spleen length in childhood 
with US: normal values based on age, sex, and somatometric parameters. 
Radiology. 2004;231(1):129–134.
Motyckova G, Steensma DP. Why does my patient have lymphadenopathy or 
splenomegaly? Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2012;26(2):395–408. ix.
Munolini F, Merlob J, Ashkenazi S, et al. Palpable spleens in newborn term 
infants. Clin Pediatr. 1985;24:197–198.
Murphy EE, Murphy SG, Cipolle MD, et al. The pediatric trauma center and 
the inclusive trauma system: impact on splenectomy rates. J Trauma Acute 
Care Surg. 2015;78(5):930–933, discussion 933–­934.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM. Johns Hopkins University. 
(Accessed 09/03, 2020, at https://omim.org/.)
Pomeranz A, Sabnis S, Busey S, et al. Splenomegaly. Pediatric Decision-­Making 
Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2016:106–109.
Pozo AL, Godfrey EM, Bowles KM. Splenomegaly: investigation, diagnosis 
and management. Blood Rev. 2009;23(3):105–111.
Rice HE, Englum BR, Rothman J, et al; Splenectomy in Congenital Hemolytic 
Anemia Consortium. Clinical outcomes of splenectomy in children: report 
of the splenectomy in congenital hemolytic anemia registry. Am J Hematol. 
2015;90(3):187–192.
Tamato SG, Rickman LS, Mathews WC, et al. Examiner dependence on 
physical diagnostic tests for the detection of splenomegaly: a prospective 
study with multiple observers. J Gen Intern Med. 1993;8:69–75.
Zimmerman JAO, Sharathkumar A. Severe anemia and “splenomegaly.” Clin 
Pediatr (Phila). 2017;56:1266–1269.
Neuroblastoma
Ahmed AA, Zhang L, Reddivalla N, et al. Neuroblastoma in children: update 
on clinicopathologic and genetic prognostic factors. Pediatr Heme Onc. 
2017;34:165–185.
Azarova AM, Gautma G, George RE. Emerging importance of ALK in 
neuroblastoma. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011;21:267–275.
Cheung NK, Dyer MA. Neuroblastoma: developmental biology, cancer 
genomics and immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;13:397–411.
Del Campo Braojos F, Donnelly LF. Practical application of the International 
Neuroblastoma Risk Group Staging System: a pictoral review. Curr Prob 
Diag Rad. 2019;48:509–518.
Kushner BH, Modak S, Kramer K, et al. Striking dichotomy in outcome 
of MYCN-­amplified neuroblastoma in the contemporary era. Cancer. 
2014;120:2050–2059.
Nuchtern JG, London WB, Barnewolt CE, et al. A prospective study of 
expectant observation as primary therapy for neuroblastoma in young 
infants: a Children’s Oncology Group study. Ann Surg. 2012;256:573–580.
Renal Masses
Babu R, Sai V. Postnatal outcome of fetal hydronephrosis: implications for 
prenatal counselling. Indian J Urol. 2010;26:60–62.
Farmer DL. Urinary tract masses. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2000;9:109–114.
Liu DB, Armstrong WR, Maizels M. Hydronephrosis: prenatal and postnatal 
evaluation and management. Clin Perinatol. 2014;41:661–678.
Psooy K. Multicystic dysplastic kidney in the neonate: the role of the urologist. 
Can Urol Assoc J. 2010;4:95–97.
Ulman I, Jayanthi VR, Koff SA. The long-­term follow-­up of newborns with 
severe unilateral hydronephrosis initially treated nonoperatively. J Urol. 
2000;3:1101–1105.
Wilms Tumor
Davidoff AM. Wilms tumor. Adv Pediatr. 2012;59:247–267.
Gadd S, Huff V, Huang CC, et al. Clinically relevant subsets identified by gene 
expression patterns support a revised oncogenic model of Wilms tumor: a 
Children’s Oncology Group study. Neoplasia. 2012;14:742–756.
Grundy PE, Green DM, Dirks AC, et al. Clinical significance of pulmonary 
nodules detected by CT and not CXR in patients treated for favorable histology 
Wilms tumor on National Wilms Tumor Studies-­4 and -­5: a report from the 
Children’s Oncology Group. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;59:631–635.
Kieran K, Anderson JR, Dome JS, et al. Lymph node involvement in Wilms 
tumor: results from National Wilms Tumor Studies 4 and 5. J Pediatr Surg. 
2012;47:700–706.
Liver Tumors
Chiorean L, Cui XW, Tannapfel A, et al. Benign liver tumors in pediatric 
patients—review with emphasis on imaging features. World J Gastroenterol. 
2015;21:8541–8561.
Czauderna P, Lopez-­Terrada D, Hiyama E, et al. Hepatoblastoma state of the 
art: pathology, genetics, risk stratification, and chemotherapy. Curr Opin 
Pediatr. 2014;26:19–28.
Humphries PD, Sebire NJ, Siegel MJ, et al. Tumors in pediatric patients at 
diffusion-­weighted MR imaging: apparent diffusion coefficient and tumor 
cellularity. Radiology. 2007;245:848–854.
Malogolowkin MH, Katzenstein HM, Meyers RL, et al. Complete surgical resection 
is curative for children with hepatoblastoma with pure fetal histology: a report 
from the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:3301–3306.
Meyers RL, Tiao G, de Ville de Goyet J, et al. Hepatoblastoma state of the art: 
pre-­treatment extent of disease, surgical resection guidelines and the role 
of liver transplantation. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014;26:29–36.
Weldon CB, Madenci AL, Tiao GM, et al. Evaluation of the diagnostic biopsy 
approach for children with hepatoblastoma: a report from the Children’s 
Oncology Group AHEP0731 Liver Tumor Committee. J Ped Surg. 
2020;55:655–659.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
373.e2
Congenital Dilatation of the Bile Ducts
Edil BH, Cameron JL, Reddy S, et al. Choledochal cyst disease in children 
and adults: a 30-­year single-­institution experience. J Am Coll Surg. 
2008;206:1000–1005, discussion 1005–­1008.
Intestinal and Pancreatic Masses
Casanova M, Collini P, Ferrari A, et al. Solid-­pseudopapillary tumor of the 
pancreas (Frantz tumor) in children. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2003;41:74–76.
d’Ambrosio G, del Prete L, Grimaldi C, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for 
malignancies in children. J Pediatr Surg. 2014;49:534–538.
Densmore JC, Lal DR. Intussusception. Rudolph’s Pediatrics. 22nd ed. New 
York: McGraw-­Hill; 2011:1428–1429.
Laje P, Bhatti TR, Adzick NS. Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas 
in children: a 15-­year experience and the identification of a unique 
immunohistochemical marker. J Pediatr Surg. 2013;48:2054–2060.
Shorter NA, Glick RD, Klimstra DS, et al. Malignant pancreatic tumors in 
childhood and adolescence: the Memorial Sloan-­Kettering experience, 
1967 to present. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:887–892.
Duplications
Aboutalebi A, Jessup CJ, North PE, et al. Histopathology of vascular anomalies. 
Facial Plast Surg. 2012;28:545–553.
Kosir MA, Sonnino RE, Gauderer MWL. Pediatric abdominal lymphangiomas: 
a plea for early recognition. J Pediatr Surg. 1991;26:1309.
Laje P, Flake AW, Adzick NS. Prenatal diagnosis and postnatal resection 
of intraabdominal enteric duplications. J Pediatr Surg. 2010;45:
1554–1558.
Ovarian Tumors
Hayes-­Jordan A. Surgical management of the incidentally identified ovarian 
mass. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2005;14:106–110.
Papic JC, Finnell SM, Slaven JE, et al. Predictors of ovarian malignancy in 
children: overcoming clinical barriers of ovarian preservation. J Pediatr 
Surg. 2014;49:144–147, discussion 147–­148.
Taskinen S, Fagerholm R, Lohi J, et al. Pediatric ovarian neoplastic tumors: 
incidence, age at presentation, tumor markers and outcome. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 2015;94:425–429.
Soft Tissue Sarcoma
Gounder M, Mahoney MR, et al. Sorafenib for advanced and refractory 
desmoid tumors. N Eng J Med. 2018;379:2417–2428.
Lautz TB, Hayes-­Jordan A. Recent progress in pediatric soft tissue sarcoma 
therapy. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2019;28:1–5.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
