190
The first step in the evaluation of a child for hypertension is to define 
whether the child is in fact hypertensive. For children under 13 years 
of age, the normative data for blood pressure are interpreted based on 
gender, age, and height because all these are variables that influence 
blood pressure norms. The current hypertension definition and staging 
lead to seamless interfacing with the 2017 American Heart Association 
(AHA) and American College of Cardiology (ACC) adult hypertension 
guidelines for children over 13 years of age (Table 11.1).
Data on blood pressure tracking from childhood to adulthood 
demonstrate that higher blood pressure in childhood correlates with 
hypertension in young adulthood. Autopsy and imaging studies reveal 
that hypertension is associated with poorer markers of vascular aging, 
which are known to predict cardiovascular events in adults.
PRESENTATION
Symptoms
Hypertension can be silent or may present with symptoms related to 
high blood pressure or the primary disease producing the hypertension 
(e.g., pheochromocytoma, lupus). Chronic hypertension is silent in 
most cases, but acute hypertension is typically symptomatic. A detailed 
history and physical examination will help guide the assessment of eti­
ology and urgency for management. Summaries are provided in Tables 
11.2 and 11.3. Eliciting symptoms related to acute hypertension that 
could indicate urgency is critical in the initial assessment and man­
agement. Presentations with severe headache, vision changes, chest 
pain, respiratory distress, abdominal pain, seizure, or acute neurologic 
changes with elevated blood pressure should be considered emergent 
in any age group and need immediate attention.
In addition to symptoms secondary to the hypertension, those 
related to potential etiology should be sought, especially since most 
hypertension in children is not primary hypertension. Renal causes 
are high in the differential in all children but vary according to age. 
Potential causes for each age group (Tables 11.4 and 11.5) help guide 
the symptoms to be elicited and focus the physical examination. Neo­
nates may present with gross hematuria or an abdominal mass. In later 
infancy the presentation may be similar to that in neonates, but edema 
would suggest glomerular pathology. Infants may also present with 
nonspecific symptoms of poor growth, weight loss, and/or fussiness. 
Childhood and adolescent acute hypertension may present with symp­
toms of gross hematuria, edema, rash, joint complaints, respiratory 
symptoms, or diarrhea depending on the etiology. Urinary symptoms 
can be a presentation of hypertension in childhood that would suggest 
a urologic abnormality not previously discovered. In later childhood 
and adolescence, the risk of recreational drug use increases, so symp­
toms of lethargy, irritability, anorexia, and poor school performance 
are relevant. Sleep problems could be related to sleep apnea or illicit 
drug use. Episodic palpitation or flushing may be symptoms related to 
catecholamine-­secreting tumors or hyperthyroidism. Some disorders 
produce transient or intermittent hypertension (Table 11.6).
Physical Examination
Accurate blood pressure measurement is fundamental in identification 
of hypertension. Manual, auscultatory blood pressure is the most accu­
rate, and the normative data are based on this method of blood pres­
sure measurement. An accurate reading depends on positioning and 
appropriate cuff size. Sitting relaxed with uncrossed feet on the floor 
with the back supported and using a cuff with a bladder that covers a 
minimum of 80% midarm circumference and 40% of arm length are 
optimal.
In infants and those in whom Korotkoff sounds are not well heard, 
Doppler can be used to measure blood pressure accurately, but only 
systolic readings are obtained by that method. An oscillatory method 
may not be accurate but is useful as a screening tool, if done with a 
device calibrated for pediatric use. In an emergency setting a manual 
blood pressure measurement may not be feasible initially. A well-­
calibrated oscillatory device can be used for initial screening and fre­
quent monitoring, and then validated with auscultatory method at the 
earliest opportunity.
Blood pressure measurement should be done on the right arm, 
unless there is known atypical anatomy that can confound that assess­
ment. If blood pressure is found there to be elevated, four extremity 
readings should be obtained to evaluate for vascular anomalies, in 
particular aortic coarctation, which might further be suggested by the 
presence of a heart murmur. Lower extremity blood pressure is typ­
ically equal or higher than upper extremity blood pressure. Finding 
right upper extremity blood pressure >10 mm Hg above that of lower 
extremity blood pressure is a strong indication of aortic coarctation.
If the initial blood pressure reading is in the elevated blood pres­
sure or stage 1 hypertension range, additional readings should be 
obtained on different days over days to weeks to confirm the presence 
of true hypertension. If there is concern that anxiety with clinic visits is 
affecting blood pressure assessment, 24-­hour ambulatory blood pres­
sure monitoring (ABPM) can be used to separate those with sustained 
hypertension from those with “white coat hypertension.” ABPM pro­
vides frequent readings in the home setting with diurnal information. 
The standards used for these readings are different from the casual 
blood pressure reading guidelines mentioned earlier.
Other pertinent physical examination information is critical in 
determining the urgency of the situation as well as the etiology. Abnor­
mal fundoscopic findings such as papilledema and retinal hemorrhages 
and focal neurologic or encephalopathic findings are indicative of 
acute hypertensive emergency and the need for immediate therapeu­
tic intervention along with prompt evaluation to identify the etiology. 
The physical findings help lead to both the effects of hypertension and 
the potential etiology. The presence of a gallop rhythm and rales on 
Hypertension
Scott K. Van Why and Rajasree Sreedharan
11
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
191
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
auscultation of the heart and lungs, along with edema, indicates vol­
ume overload as the cause of severe symptomatic hypertension, pos­
sibly from underlying glomerulonephritis. Edema, rash, and arthritis 
would suggest hypertension secondary to renal involvement from 
potential autoimmune disease. Diminished lower extremity pulses 
with discrepancy between upper and lower extremity blood pressures, 
along with a heart murmur, point to coarctation of the aorta. Abdomi­
nal or flank bruit may be present with renal artery stenosis. Findings of 
body habitus suggestive of Cushing syndrome, ambiguous genitalia, or 
features of hyperthyroidism can direct evaluation to endocrine causes. 
Physical exam findings associated with genetic syndromes that can 
have hypertension caused by abnormal renal or vascular development 
include coloboma, lens dislocation, ear tags, brachial cysts, café-­au-­lait 
spots, or a webbed neck (see Table 11.3).
ETIOLOGY
Hypertension in children is uncommon and when present is usually 
from an identifiable cause other than primary essential hypertension. 
The preponderance of hypertension in adulthood is either primary 
hypertension, formerly called “essential hypertension,” or hypertension 
secondary to diabetic nephropathy. While the prevalence of primary 
hypertension is rising in childhood, the cause of hypertension in chil­
dren and adolescents usually is secondary to an identifiable cause, and 
is most often from renal disease. Disease processes that cause hyper­
tension in childhood typically manifest at different ages, with the major 
differences being between infants and older children.
INFANTILE HYPERTENSION
Neonatal
Causes of hypertension identified during infancy can be separated into 
neonatal forms and those identified later during infancy (see Table 
11.4). During the neonatal period causes of elevated blood pressure are 
typically identified in the context of prenatal fetal imaging, premature 
birth, or perinatal stress. The principal causes in this age group can 
be separated between abnormalities in the vasculature or renal archi­
tecture. With premature birth, vital signs are routinely monitored, so 
hypertension is readily identified in this group. In apparently healthy 
term neonates blood pressure is not routinely assessed after discharge 
from the nursery, so hypertension is often not identified unless symp­
toms or signs dictate, such as development of a cardiac murmur, gross 
hematuria, presentation in extremis from severe hypertension, or pal­
pation of an intraabdominal mass.
The most common cause of hypertension in the neonate is hyper­
tension associated with premature birth. In this context the majority 
of causes are vascular related, with the preponderance secondary to 
having had an umbilical artery catheter (UAC) for needed vascular 
access. While rarely identifiable by any imaging study, presumptively 
these infants sustain a focal thromboembolic insult to a kidney that 
then drives the elevation in blood pressure. This cause of hyperten­
sion tends to improve over time. Often antihypertensive treatment for 
this cause can be discontinued during later infancy or early childhood. 
However, hypertension can then recur later in childhood. Less com­
monly, having had a UAC is associated with being found to have renal 
TABLE 11.1  2017 American Heart Association (AHA) and American College of Cardiology (ACC) 
Adult Hypertension Guidelines for Children over 13 Years of Age
For Children Aged 1 to <13 yr
For Children Aged ≥13 yr
Normal BP
<90th percentile
<120/<80 mm Hg
Elevated BP
≥90th to <95th percentile or 120/80 mm Hg to <95th percentile (whichever is lower)
120–129/<80 mm Hg
Stage 1 Hypertension
≥95th to <95th percentile + 12 mm Hg or 130–139/80–89 mm Hg (whichever is lower)
130–139/80–89 mm Hg
Stage 2 Hypertension
≥95th percentile + 12 mm Hg or ≥140/90 mm Hg (whichever is lower)
≥140/90 mm Hg
Data extracted from Gidding SS, Whelton PK, Carey RM, et al. Aligning adult and pediatric blood pressure guideline. Hypertension. 2019;73:938–943.
TABLE 11.2  History and Physical Exam in 
the Evaluation of Hypertension
History
Hypertension-­related symptoms: headache, dizziness, 
blurry vision, altered mental status, chest pain, 
palpitations
Etiology-­related symptoms: hematuria, joints, swelling 
edema, rash, cardiac/respiratory issues, voiding 
problems
Past history: prematurity and related issues, intensive 
care unit stay and related issues, urinary issues 
including infection
Social history: include drug and supplement history
Family history: renal issues or blood pressure problems
Physical exam
 • Accurate method for casual measurement
 • Relaxed child in exam room with uncrossed feet on 
floor and back supported
 • Auscultatory method
 • Appropriate-­size cuff
 
• Bladder length 80% of the midarm circumference
 
• Bladder width at least 40%
 • All-­extremity blood pressure measurements
 • Confirm
 • Measure on 3 different days
 • ABPM
 • Findings in symptomatic hypertension
 • Focal neurologic finding
 • Papilledema
 • Gallop cardiac rhythm on auscultation
 • Other findings
 • Constitutional: obesity, syndromic features
 • Fundus: retinal hemorrhage, arterial narrowing, 
papilledema
 • Skin: rash, purpura, café-­au-­lait
 • Swelling: Edema: periorbital or extremity
 • Cardiac: femoral radial pulse lag, murmur
 • Abdominal mass, bruit
 • Occasional findings
 • Coloboma
 • Ear tag/pit
 • Webbed neck
 • Genital abnormality
ABPM, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
192
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
artery stenosis later during infancy or early childhood, presumptively 
acquired from focal injury to the ostium of the renal artery that then 
progresses to ostial stenosis and subsequent hypertension.
Renal vein thrombosis occurs in infants subjected to perinatal 
stress or volume depletion but can occur spontaneously in an other­
wise healthy infant. The combination of gross hematuria, hypertension, 
and low platelet count should alert the clinician to this possibility. Dop­
pler study of the renal veins typically identifies a significant thrombus, 
at times with associated diminished global renal perfusion.
Congenital vascular abnormalities that cause hypertension in the 
neonate include congenital renal artery stenosis and aortic coarctation. 
The former is a difficult diagnosis to establish during infancy. Aortic 
coarctation is readily identified with four-­extremity blood pressure 
measurement and confirmation with echocardiography.
With the routine use of prenatal fetal ultrasound, the majority of 
renal structural causes of neonatal hypertension are identified prior to 
birth. These are broadly categorized as congenital abnormalities of 
the kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT) and include cystic kidney 
disease and abnormalities of drainage of the urinary tract. While many 
forms of CAKUT do not cause hypertension, those associated with uri­
nary tract obstruction are more likely to have hypertension as a man­
ifestation. This includes any form of bladder outlet obstruction, such 
as with neurogenic bladder or urethral valves in males, and ureteral 
obstruction, most often at the ureteropelvic junction. A multicystic 
dysplastic kidney on occasion can cause hypertension, but typically 
hypertension is seen in those associated with ureteral obstruction.
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) manifested in infancy is rare, but 
if seen it is almost always associated with severe hypertension. In this 
context, the kidneys typically are readily palpable on physical exam and 
found on ultrasound study to be massively enlarged with cysts. The cause 
may be either autosomal recessive (ARPKD) or infantile-­onset autosomal 
dominant (ADPKD). Imaging, including the finding of associated liver 
abnormalities in ARPKD, may differentiate between the two diagnoses. 
However, ARPKD and ADPKD at times may not be able to be differenti­
ated solely on imaging findings or family history. In that instance genetic 
testing can be helpful, especially for providing a diagnosis of ARPKD.
TABLE 11.3  Findings to Look for on Physical Examination in Patients with Hypertension
Physical Findings
Potential Relevance
General
Pale mucous membranes, edema, 
growth retardation
Chronic renal disease
Elfin facies, poor growth, retar­
dation
Williams syndrome
Webbing of neck, low hairline, 
widespread nipples, wide carry­
ing angle
Turner syndrome
Moon face, buffalo hump, hirsut­
ism, truncal obesity, striae, acne
Cushing syndrome
Habitus
Thinness
Pheochromocytoma, renal disease, 
hyperthyroidism
Virilization
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Rickets
Chronic renal disease
Skin
Café-­au-­lait spots, neurofibromas
Neurofibromatosis, pheochromocytoma
Tubers, “ash-­leaf” spots
Tuberous sclerosis
Rashes
Systemic lupus erythematosus, vas­
culitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura), 
impetigo with acute nephritis
Pallor, evanescent flushing, 
sweating
Pheochromocytoma
Needle tracks
Illicit drug use
Bruises, striae
Cushing syndrome
Acanthosis nigricans
Type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance
Eyes
Extraocular muscle palsy
Nonspecific, chronic, severe
Fundal changes
Nonspecific, chronic, severe
Proptosis
Hyperthyroidism
Head And Neck
Goiter
Thyroid disease
Adenotonsillar hypertrophy
Sleep-­disordered breathing
Webbed neck
Turner syndrome
Physical Findings
Potential Relevance
Cardiovascular Signs
Absent of diminished femoral 
pulses, low leg pressure relative 
to arm pressure
Aortic coarctation
Heart size, rate, rhythm; murmurs; 
respiratory difficulty, hepato­
megaly
Aortic coarctation, congestive heart 
failure
Bruits over great vessels
Arteritis or arteriopathy
Rub
Pericardial effusion secondary to 
chronic renal disease
Pulmonary Signs
Pulmonary edema
Congestive heart failure, acute 
nephritis
Picture of bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia–associ­
ated hypertension
Abdomen
Epigastric bruit
Primary renovascular disease or in 
association with Williams syndrome, 
neurofibromatosis, fibromuscular 
dysplasia, or arteritis
Abdominal masses
Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, pheo­
chromocytoma, polycystic kidneys, 
hydronephrosis, dysplastic kidneys
Jaundice
Alagille arteriohepatic dysplasia
Neurologic Signs
Neurologic deficits
Chronic or severe acute hypertension 
with stroke
Muscle weakness
Hyperaldosteronism, Liddle syndrome 
(hypokalemic low renin hypertension)
Genitalia
Ambiguous, virilized
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (11β-­ or 
17α-­hydroxylase deficiencies)
Skeletal
Short metacarpal (4th, 5th) bones, 
short stature
Autosomal dominant hypertension with 
brachydactyly (Bilginturan disease)
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2494, Table 472.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
193
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
Later Infancy
Most of the causes of hypertension in the neonatal period may also 
present during later infancy. However, in the latter context the hyper­
tension is not found incidentally, but rather often is found due to asso­
ciated symptoms or signs. This is because blood pressure measurement 
is not commonly performed in otherwise healthy-­appearing infants 
because obtaining a valid blood pressure in an infant is challenging.
Several of the causes of hypertension associated with premature 
birth may persist or may not manifest until later in infancy. These 
include intrarenal thrombotic and thromboembolic injury to the 
kidney that may not have caused hypertension earlier in the neona­
tal course but present later in infancy. In addition, even without any 
evident risk factors for a thrombotic or thromboembolic cause, prema­
ture birth alone, especially severely premature birth, is associated with 
early-­onset hypertension. The etiology in this scenario is thought to be 
from the complication of incompletely developed, immature kidneys at 
birth complicated by events during the early course after birth. Events 
predisposing to later-­onset hypertension include subclinical insults to 
the kidneys, such as from multiple nephrotoxins and transient hypo­
tensive events, causing occult acute kidney injury. In this setting, 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia itself is associated with development of 
hypertension in later infancy.
Congenital vascular and renal architecture abnormalities that cause 
hypertension may present later in infancy if not found as a neonate. 
Those caused by CAKUT are found in later infancy either during 
evaluation for urinary tract infection that can be the presenting fea­
ture of CAKUT, from evaluation for symptomatic hypertension, or 
when blood pressure is measured for an acute illness unrelated to the 
underlying cause of hypertension. Polycystic kidney disease, especially 
ARPKD in which progression often manifests as rapidly enlarging kid­
neys during infancy, may be found by palpation of an abdominal mass. 
Blood pressure when then measured typically is severely elevated.
TABLE 11.4  Causes of Infantile 
Hypertension
Neonatal
 • Vascular
 • Thrombotic/thromboembolic: UAC associated or renal vein thrombosis
 • Aortic coarctation
 • Renal artery stenosis: congenital or acquired
 • Congenital urinary tract malformations: obstructive
 • Polycystic kidney disease
Later infancy
 • Prematurity associated
 • History of thrombotic/thromboembolic renal insult
 • Renal artery stenosis: congenital or acquired
 • Immature kidneys, history of renal insults: AKI, nephrotoxins
 • Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
 • Congenital urinary tract malformations: obstructive
 • Polycystic kidney disease
 • Aortic coarctation
 • Tumors: nephroblastoma, neuroblastoma
 • Glomerulopathy
 • Congenital infection
 • Congenital/infantile nephrotic syndrome, familial FSGS, Denys-­Drash 
syndrome
 • Atypical HUS
AKI, acute kidney injury; FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; 
HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; UAC, umbilical artery catheter.
TABLE 11.5  Causes of Childhood 
Hypertension
Common Causes
 • Primary obesity associated (metabolic syndrome)
 • Parenchymal renal disease
 • Acute and chronic glomerulonephritis
 
• Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
 
• Systemic vasculitis with renal involvement (SLE, HSP, ANCA vasculitis)
 
• Primary, idiopathic (IgA nephropathy, FSGS, crescentic glomerulone­
phritis)
 • Hemolytic uremic syndrome
 • Hereditary cystic kidney disease: PKD, MCKD, nephronophthisis
 • Sickle cell disease
 • Interstitial nephritis
 • End-­stage kidney disease of unknown etiology
 • Congenital urinary tract malformations: obstructive or cystic dysplasia, 
either isolated or syndromic
 • Scarred kidney: congenital Ask-­Upmark kidney or acquired from renal 
injury (e.g., pyelonephritis)
 • Drug induced: therapeutic and recreational
Less Common Causes
 • Vascular/renal artery stenosis
 • Aortic coarctation
 • Fibromuscular dysplasia
 • Syndromic: Williams syndrome, neurofibromatosis, Turner syndrome, 
middle aortic syndrome
 • Tumor-­associated extrinsic compression: Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, 
lymphoma
 • Large-­vessel vasculitis: Takayasu, moyamoya, polyarteritis nodosum
 • Trauma-­associated perirenal hematoma
 • Neoplasia: nephroblastoma (Wilms tumor), neuroblastoma, pheochromo­
cytoma, infiltrative lymphoma
 • Persistent or late-­onset hypertension from perinatal renal insult, prematu­
rity associated
 • Neurologic
 • High intracranial pressure from head trauma, intracranial tumor, or 
pseudotumor cerebri
 • Secondary to seizure
 • Peripheral neuropathies: Guillain-­Barré, poliomyelitis
Rare causes
 • Monogenic
 • Liddle syndrome
 • Hyperaldosteronism: familial and glucocorticoid remedial
 • Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
 • Gordon syndrome: pseudohypoaldosteronism
 • Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
 • Mineralocorticoid receptor gain-of-function mutations (Geller 
syndrome)
 • Dysautonomia
 • Endocrine
 • Thyroid disease
 • Cushing syndrome
 • Catecholamine-­secreting tumors
 • Hypercalcemia: vitamin D intoxication, hyperparathyroidism, 
malignancy associated
ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; FSGS, focal segmental glo­
merulosclerosis; HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; MCKD, multicystic 
dysplastic kidney; PKD, polycystic kidney disease; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
194
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Rare causes of hypertension in infancy include intraabdominal 
tumors, found by palpation of a mass or on imaging for gastrointestinal 
symptoms. The two most likely tumors in this age group are nephro­
blastoma or neuroblastoma. Both of these tumors may cause hyper­
tension by compromising the renal vasculature. Neuroblastoma also 
can cause hypertension by obstructing the urinary tract, depending on 
location and size of the tumor, or by secreting catecholamines.
Rarely, glomerulopathies may manifest in infancy leading to 
hypertension. These include those secondary to congenital infection 
such as syphilis and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Congenital or infantile 
nephrotic syndrome, such as familial focal and segmental glomeru­
losclerosis (FSGS) or the glomerulopathy of Denys-­Drash syndrome, 
often present with hypertension. Atypical, nondiarrheal, hemolytic 
uremic syndrome with accompanying glomerulopathy is rare but can 
present in infancy with anemia and thrombocytopenia, renal insuffi­
ciency, and hypertension. The lack of a diarrheal prodrome is a hall­
mark of the disease.
CHILDHOOD HYPERTENSION
While much of childhood hypertension is discovered during evalua­
tion for an acute illness or symptomatic hypertension, with progression 
in age hypertension becomes more often found incidentally during 
examination on a well-­child visit. Table 11.5 outlines common and less 
common causes of hypertension that present during childhood. Several 
of the diseases that cause hypertension during early or later childhood 
may be present during infancy but may not progress to cause signifi­
cant hypertension until later in the course of the disease. Examples of 
these include hereditary cystic kidney diseases such as PKD, medul­
lary cystic kidney disease, nephronophthisis, or any form of CAKUT 
with an obstructive lesion. CAKUT that can cause hypertension may 
become apparent in childhood in those who have been diagnosed with 
a syndrome that has increased risk of associated urinary tract or renal 
anomalies. These include Turner syndrome, branchio-­oto-­renal syn­
drome, and coloboma-­renal syndrome. Renal injury sustained early in 
life, in the setting of either premature birth, perinatal complications, 
or early pyelonephritis with associated later development of renal scar, 
may not result in manifested hypertension until later in childhood.
Common Causes
The younger the child, the more likely it is that there will an identifiable 
cause of elevated blood pressure; thus, secondary hypertension will be 
found with appropriate investigation. Primary hypertension, then, is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. Primary hypertension in years past was a rare 
cause of hypertension in childhood. However, the childhood obesity 
epidemic that has ensued in the past couple of decades has unmasked 
primary hypertension earlier in life, and lately brought it into prom­
inence during later childhood and adolescence. When secondary 
hypertension has been ruled out, primary hypertension is presumed 
when blood pressure elevation in an older child is not severe, is asymp­
tomatic, is associated with obesity, and there is family history of early-­
onset primary hypertension.
Acute and symptomatic hypertension in childhood is most likely 
to be secondary to glomerular disease. Acute postinfectious glomer­
ulonephritis is the most common cause of nephritis in childhood, and 
often may present with symptomatic hypertension when gross hematu­
ria is not the heralding symptom. Patients with systemic vasculitis with 
renal involvement, including lupus, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, and 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA) vasculitis, at pre­
sentation and during flares of the disease often have significant hyper­
tension as a prominent feature. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), 
both toxigenic and atypical familial forms, routinely have associated 
hypertension during the episode. The hypertension from HUS may 
abate after the HUS episode resolves, although it may be persistent and 
become a long-­term sequela requiring chronic treatment.
Patients with crescentic glomerulonephritis, whether idiopathic 
or secondary to other identifiable nephropathy, typically have signif­
icant and often severe hypertension at presentation. Primary idio­
pathic forms of glomerulonephritis such as immunoglobulin A (IgA) 
nephropathy and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) may be 
indolent and not have hypertension at presentation. However, if severe 
TABLE 11.6  Conditions Associated with 
Transient or Intermittent Hypertension in 
Children
Renal
Acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura with nephritis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Acute kidney injury
After renal transplantation (immediately and during episodes of rejection)
Hypervolemia
Pyelonephritis
Renal trauma
Leukemic infiltration of the kidney
Drugs and Poisons
Cocaine
Oral contraceptives
Sympathomimetic agents
Amphetamines
Phencyclidine
Corticosteroids and adrenocorticotropic hormone
Cyclosporine, sirolimus, or tacrolimus treatment after transplantation
Licorice (glycyrrhizic acid)
Lead, mercury, cadmium, thallium
Antihypertensive withdrawal (clonidine, methyldopa, propranolol)
Vitamin D intoxication
Ma-­huang
Central and Autonomic Nervous System
Increased intracranial pressure
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Burns
Familial dysautonomia
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Posterior fossa lesions
Porphyria
Poliomyelitis
Encephalitis
Spinal cord injury (autonomic storm)
Miscellaneous
Preeclampsia
Pain, anxiety
Hypercalcemia
After coarctation repair
White blood cell transfusion
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Closure of abdominal wall defect
Modified from Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., 
eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:2492, Table 472.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
195
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
and therapy for the primary process is not effective, hypertension then 
becomes a nearly uniform feature in these patients.
Early-­onset hypertension in patients with sickle cell disease is usu­
ally associated with overt sickle cell nephropathy, with significant pro­
teinuria and developing renal insufficiency that can become manifest 
during adolescence. However, even without overt sickle cell nephropa­
thy, this population appears to be prone to earlier-­onset hypertension. 
The predisposition to hypertension in those with sickle cell disease 
appears to be secondary to endothelial cell dysfunction.
Drug-­induced hypertension is common in childhood and adoles­
cence. Usual agents that cause hypertension include several classes of 
therapeutic medications, illicit drugs, and other agents including sup­
plements (see Table 11.6). The majority of these agents cause hyperten­
sion by enhancing vasoconstriction. Any child or adolescent presenting 
with severe and symptomatic hypertension who does not have evident 
renal disease on initial testing and is not on a prescribed medication 
known to cause hypertension should be evaluated for the possibility of 
drug-­induced hypertension.
Less Common Causes
While less common than renal parenchymal causes of hypertension, 
vascular causes of hypertension should always be considered in a child 
with significant hypertension (Table 11.7). Often a child with a vascular 
cause of hypertension presents with asymptomatic and severe hyper­
tension with no evident renal disease based on urinalysis or blood tests. 
Because the hypertension has been long-­standing and gradual, those 
with aortic coarctation or renal artery stenosis typically present with 
incidentally found severe hypertension that is asymptomatic. Renal 
artery stenosis can be idiopathic, such as with fibromuscular dyspla­
sia, or syndromic. Any child who carries a diagnosis of Williams syn­
drome, Turner syndrome, or neurofibromatosis should be routinely 
screened for hypertension, since aortic coarctation (Williams and 
Turner syndromes) or renal artery stenotic lesions associated with 
these syndromes are typically asymptomatic and can become manifest 
as severe hypertension at any time during childhood.
Renal vascular stenosis or compromise can be acquired acutely 
and in that setting more often presents as symptomatic hypertension. 
Tumor compression of renal vasculature from Wilms tumor, abdomi­
nal neuroblastoma, or lymphoma can cause severe acute hypertension. 
Large-­vessel vasculitis, such as Takayasu arteritis or moyamoya dis­
ease, may be occult but then presents with neurologic symptoms and 
severe hypertension.
Neoplastic disease, separate from those that cause compromise of 
the major renal vasculature, can directly cause hypertension. Nephro­
blastoma or lymphoma may cause hypertension by direct infiltration 
of normal renal parenchyma. Pheochromocytoma and neuroblastoma 
cause hypertension through elaboration of excessive catecholamines. 
This may result in severe and symptomatic hypertension at presenta­
tion, especially with pheochromocytoma (Table 11.8).
Neurologic injury or disease often has associated elevation in blood 
pressure. Typically, the elevated blood pressure is acute and transient, 
not resulting in long-­standing hypertension. Increased intracranial pres­
sure from head trauma, intracranial tumor, or idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) often results in high blood pres­
sure, which if present speaks to the severity of the intracranial pressure 
and need for acute intervention for the primary problem. Peripheral 
neuropathies such as from Guillain-­Barré syndrome or poliomyelitis 
commonly have hypertension from autonomic dysfunction in the acute 
phase of the disease. Hypertension in this setting typically resolves with 
recovery from the illness, but in some cases can persist.
Blood pressure is often elevated during seizure activity and does 
not require antihypertensive treatment or specific evaluation if seizure 
alone is clearly the cause of the elevated blood pressure. However, since 
hypertensive crisis caused by several underlying diseases, such as acute 
glomerulonephritis, may present with new-­onset seizures, it must 
always be considered whether the finding of elevated blood pressure is 
TABLE 11.7  Causes of Renovascular 
Hypertension in Children
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Syndromic causes
Neurofibromatosis type 1
Tuberous sclerosis
Williams syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Other syndromes
Vasculitis
Takayasu arteritis (disease)
Polyarteritis nodosa
Kawasaki disease
Other systemic vasculitides
Extrinsic compression
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Other tumors
Other causes
Radiation
Umbilical artery catheterization
Trauma
Congenital rubella syndrome
Transplant renal artery stenosis
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2495, 
Table 472.7.
TABLE 11.8  Features Suggestive of 
Pheochromocytoma
Hypertension, Persistent or Paroxysmal
Markedly variable blood pressures (± orthostatic hypotension)
Sudden paroxysms (± subsequent hypertension) in relation to:
Stress: anesthesia, angiography, parturition, exercise
Pharmacologic provocation: histamine, nicotine, caffeine, β blockers, 
glucocorticoids, tricyclic antidepressants
Manipulation of tumors: abdominal palpation, urination
Rare patients persistently normotensive
Unusual settings
Childhood, pregnancy, familial
Multiple endocrine adenomas: medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MEN-­2), 
mucosal neuromas (MEN-­2B)
Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome
Neurocutaneous lesions: neurofibromatosis
Associated Symptoms
Sudden spells with headache, sweating, palpitations, nervousness, nausea, 
vomiting
Pain in chest or abdomen
Associated Signs
Sweating, tachycardia, arrhythmia, pallor, weight loss
From Zipes DP, et al. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Car­
diovascular Medicine. 11th ed., Vol. 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:925, 
Table 46.8.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
196
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
the cause or effect of the seizure. If hypertension is the effect of the sei­
zure, blood pressure usually returns to normal rapidly after the seizure 
resolves. However, if blood pressure remains persistently and signifi­
cantly elevated with resolution of seizure activity, hypertension causing 
the seizure then becomes much more likely. In that instance treatment 
of and evaluation for the underlying cause of symptomatic hyperten­
sion are imperative.
Rare Causes
While well known to cause elevated blood pressure, endocrine causes 
of hypertension are rare in childhood (see Table 11.5). Other than 
catecholamine-­secreting tumors, endocrine causes of hypertension 
do not typically present as hypertension as the principal feature. 
More often high blood pressure is found when being evaluated for 
other signs or symptoms attributable to the underlying endocrine 
disorder. The hypertension resolves when the underlying disorder 
is discovered and effectively treated. Mineralocorticoid excess from 
monogenetic etiologies or other causes frequently produces hyper­
tension (Table 11.9).
Monogenic forms of hypertension (see Table 11.5) are exceedingly 
rare and considered only when renal disease or other identifiable causes 
of secondary hypertension have been ruled out, and the child does not 
fit the clinical picture of primary or obesity-­associated hypertension. A 
unifying feature of most monogenic forms of hypertension is that the 
causative single-­gene variant effects enhanced renal sodium resorp­
tion, which leads to volume expansion with resultant hypertension. A 
clue that a monogenic cause of hypertension might be present is that 
abnormalities in blood potassium may be found because several of the 
gene variants in this group of disorders affect mineralocorticoid path­
ways. Hyperkalemia and a metabolic acidosis are noted in pseudohy­
poaldosteronism type 2 (familial hyperkalemic hypertension: Gordon 
syndrome). Gordon syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder in 
most patients; the involved genes include KLHL3, CUL3, WNK1, and 
WNK4. Hypokalemia is suggestive of Liddle syndrome (autosomal 
dominant; epithelial sodium channel), Geller syndrome (autosomal 
dominant; gain of function in mineralocorticoid receptor), glucocor­
ticoid remedial aldosteronism, and other hyperaldosteronism-­like 
states. In those conditions, hypokalemia is variable and a metabolic 
alkalosis may also be present.
EVALUATION
In all pediatric patients found to have hypertension, the initial approach 
is garnering a thorough history and physical examination. Not only 
does this direct the practitioner to investigations likely to identify the 
cause, but also it identifies those patients in whom investigation must 
move quickly. The speed and breadth of needed evaluation are driven 
by the severity of blood pressure elevation and whether there are asso­
ciated signs and symptoms that indicate a potentially serious underly­
ing disease or hypertensive crisis.
Secondary hypertension must always be considered in all chil­
dren who have clearly defined persistent or symptomatic hyperten­
sion. Because of the high incidence of specific, identifiable causes of 
hypertension in the young, even the older child or adolescent who may 
on initial evaluation seem to fit the picture of primary hypertension 
requires investigation to rule out more common causes of secondary 
hypertension. Therefore, in all pediatric patients with clearly defined 
sustained hypertension, even if mild, focused work-­up for an underly­
ing cause is warranted. The younger the child, the more likely it is that 
an identifiable cause of secondary hypertension is present, to where in 
infancy nearly all cases have a cause found (Fig. 11.1).
INVESTIGATION OF INFANTILE HYPERTENSION
Most important in neonates/infants is the need for renal imaging. 
Renal ultrasound with Doppler investigation of the major vessels is the 
primary study recommended in this age group. Cystic kidney disease 
and CAKUT are readily identified with ultrasound. In addition, the 
tumors of infancy that can cause hypertension are also typically seen 
on renal ultrasound.
The Doppler study is primarily performed to rule out thrombus in 
a major vessel of a kidney, especially in the main renal vein, but also 
on rare occasion a major renal artery thrombus is found. Doppler study 
of the renal arteries has low sensitivity for identifying renal artery ste­
nosis (RAS), either acquired or congenital. Thus, if not found by Dop­
pler study, RAS is not ruled out. A clue that there may be underlying 
unilateral RAS is significant size discrepancy on ultrasound between the 
kidneys, which otherwise have normal architecture and echogenicity. If 
other entities are ruled out and RAS is suspected, an angiographic study 
TABLE 11.9  Clinical Findings in Patients with Mineralocorticoid Excess
Condition
Clinical Presentation
CAH: 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency
Early growth spurt initially, then short adult stature; advanced bone age, premature adrenarche, 
acne, precocious puberty in males, amenorrhea/hirsutism/virilism in females (autosomal 
recessive)
CAH: 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency
Pseudohermaphroditism (male), sexual infantilism (female) (autosomal recessive)
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
Growth retardation/short stature, nephrocalcinosis (autosomal recessive)
Liddle syndrome
Severe hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis, muscle weakness (autosomal 
dominant)
Mineralocorticoid receptor gain-­of-­function mutation
Early onset of hypertension (before age 20 yr), exacerbated in pregnancy
Glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism (GRA) (familial aldostero­
nism type 1)
Early onset of hypertension, presence of family history of mortality or morbidity from early 
hemorrhagic stroke (autosomal dominant)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (Gordon syndrome)
Short stature, hyperkalemic and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, borderline blood pressure 
(autosomal dominant)
Glucocorticoid resistance (children) (Chrousos syndrome)
Ambiguous genitalia, precocious puberty; women may have androgen excess: acne, excessive 
hair, oligo/anovulation, infertility (familial or sporadic)
CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Modified from Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st e. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2493, Table 
472.4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
197
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
is required to provide the diagnosis. Direct, invasive angiography to 
evaluate for RAS carries significant risk in early infancy, so it is typically 
deferred until late infancy or later, depending on the severity of hyper­
tension and ability to control the hypertension with medication. The first 
step to evaluate for RAS is noninvasive methods, either CT or magnetic 
resonance angiography. As image resolution of the vasculature using 
either of these methods improves with the age of the infant, the timing 
of performing the study is commonly determined by a nephrologist in 
consultation with an imaging specialist, with the same consideration of 
whether the study is urgent based on the ability to control the infant’s 
hypertension with medication.
While imaging is the primary investigation that reveals the cause of 
hypertension in infancy, additional studies are indicated at the start of 
the investigation for hypertension in this group. Urinalysis should be 
performed on a sample obtained by bag collection, which helps avoid 
a false-­positive result for blood, which often occurs when the sample is 
collected by catheterization. The lack of blood or protein on the urinal­
ysis effectively rules out a rare congenital or acquired glomerulopathy 
of infancy. CBC should also be performed as thrombocytopenia may 
herald an occult major thrombus, such as a renal vein thrombus, or a 
microangiopathy affecting the kidneys, such as a rare atypical HUS. 
Finally, renal function should be assessed by measuring blood electro­
lytes and creatinine levels.
INVESTIGATION OF SYMPTOMATIC CHILDHOOD 
HYPERTENSION (FIG. 11.2 AND TABLE 11.10)
Children who present with symptomatic hypertension, whether the 
symptoms be from the hypertension (e.g., headache, visual disturbance, 
seizure, or other neurologic symptoms) or associated with the under­
lying disease causing the hypertension (e.g., constitutional symptoms, 
joint symptoms, skin lesions, gross hematuria, or edema), are likely 
to have an acute glomerular disease. Initial investigation should be 
prompt and focus on potential etiologies. Initial testing should include 
blood and urine tests to screen for acute glomerulopathy. Urinalysis 
showing blood and/or protein in the urine is indicative of likely under­
lying glomerular disease. Urine microscopy showing red blood cell 
(RBC) casts confirm glomerulonephritis, but unfortunately the vast 
majority of clinical laboratories are unable to identify RBC casts when 
present, so the lack of RBC casts does not rule out glomerulonephritis 
(see Chapter 23). A complete metabolic panel may reveal renal insuffi­
ciency, with high BUN and creatinine supporting further investigation 
of renal cause for the hypertension. Low blood albumin on that panel 
may either indicate nephrotic level of proteinuria or be secondary to 
Documented hypertension
Gradient between upper and
lower blood pressures
Yes
Yes
No
No
Coarctation
of aorta
Monogenetic
Endocrine
Renovascular lesion
Essential hypertension
Predominant
white blood cells
Reflux nephritis
Recurrent urinary
  tract infections
Renal anomaly
  (and infection)
Postinfectious
  nephritis
Lupus nephritis
Henoch Schönlein
  purpura
Nephrocalcinosis
Nephrolithiasis
Other nephritis
Renal vein
  thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Tumor
Predominant
red blood cells
Abnormal urinalysis
Fig. 11.1  Initial diagnostic algorithm in the evaluation of hypertension. 
(Modified from Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. 
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:2493, Fig. 472.1.)
Any abnormality
Initial testing
Secondary testing
1. Possible glomerulopathy
    • Serum C3 and C4
    • Consider ANA, anti-ds DNA, ANCA
2. Possible bilateral PKD or CAKUT
    • Renal ultrasound
1. Urine toxicology
    • Drug screen/investigation
2. Renal ultrasound
3. Blood and urine metanephrines
4. T4, TSH
Urinalysis
Blood electrolytes and creatinine
Complete blood count
All normal
Fig. 11.2  Evaluation of symptomatic hypertension. ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cyto­
plasmic antibody; C3 and C4, complement levels; CAKUT, congenital abnormalities of the kidneys and urinary 
tract; PKD, polycystic kidney disease; T4, thyroxine test; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
198
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
inflammation from underlying systemic vasculitis. CBC is also indi­
cated at presentation. Anemia along with low platelet count raises the 
possibility of HUS but also may indicate hematologic involvement 
from systemic lupus erythematosus, in which case leukopenia often is 
an accompanying feature.
If there is clear evidence on the initial blood and urine tests that 
acute glomerulopathy is the cause of the hypertension, then renal 
imaging is not needed. In that instance, further investigation with 
serologic studies to determine the precise cause of the glomerulopa­
thy is indicated. If the pattern does not fit HUS, then additional test­
ing should include C3 and C4 blood complement levels along with 
antinuclear antibody (ANA) panel and antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody.
However, if the urinalysis and blood creatinine are normal, other 
etiologies of severe and symptomatic hypertension must be pursued. If 
neurologic symptoms are a prominent feature of the presentation and 
brain imaging is unremarkable, drug ingestion needs to be considered. 
Urine toxicology screen can rapidly identify common agents that cause 
symptomatic hypertension, such as cocaine and amphetamines, but is 
not able to identify a variety of other illicit drugs that can cause severe 
hypertension. So, if drug ingestion is suspected and prompt return of 
the urine toxicology screen is not informative, the urine sample should 
also be sent for a full drug investigation. The latter testing takes much 
longer to complete, but if that investigation is not considered and sent 
during the acute presentation, the window to identify this cause of 
acute symptomatic hypertension may then be missed.
If acute glomerulopathy or toxic ingestion appears to be ruled out, 
renal imaging is then indicated, since other forms of parenchymal renal 
disease may present as severe hypertension at any age and on occa­
sion have associated symptoms. Renal ultrasound in this setting readily 
identifies congenital urinary tract abnormalities as well as cystic kid­
ney diseases that may present primarily with hypertension, including 
severe hypertension.
Investigation for Asymptomatic, Less Common, and 
Rare Causes of Childhood Hypertension (Fig. 11.3 and 
see Table 11.10)
If the blood creatinine and urinalysis are normal on initial screening 
and renal ultrasound is normal, an abnormality in blood electrolytes 
on the chemistry panel may suggest other etiologies for the significant 
TABLE 11.10  Clinical Evaluation of Confirmed Hypertension
Study or Procedure
Purpose
Target Population
Evaluation for Identifiable Causes
History, including sleep history, family history, risk 
factors, diet, and habits such as smoking and 
drinking alcohol; physical examination
History and physical examination help focus subse­
quent evaluation
All children with persistent BP ≥90th percentile
Blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, urinaly­
sis, and urine culture
R/O renal disease and chronic pyelonephritis, miner­
alocorticoid excess states
All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile
Complete blood count
R/O anemia, consistent with chronic renal disease
All children with signs of chronic kidney disease
Renal ultrasound
R/O renal scar, congenital anomaly, or disparate renal 
size
All children with signs or symptoms concerning for 
secondary cause of hypertension
Evaluation for Comorbidity
Fasting lipid panel, fasting glucose
Identify hyperlipidemia, metabolic abnormalities
Overweight patients with BP at 90th–94th percentile; 
all patients with BP ≥95th percentile; family history 
of hypertension or cardiovascular disease; child with 
chronic renal disease
Drug screen
Identify substances that might cause hypertension
History suggestive of possible contribution by sub­
stances or drugs
Polysomnography
Identify sleep-­disordered breathing
History of loud, frequent snoring or daytime somnolence
Evaluation for Target-­Organ Damage
Echocardiogram
Identify left ventricular hypertrophy and other indica­
tions of cardiac involvement
Patients with comorbid risk factors* and BP 90th–94th 
percentile; all patients with BP ≥95th percentile
Retinal exam
Identify retinal vascular changes
Patients with comorbid risk factors and BP 90th–94th 
percentile; all patients with BP ≥95th percentile
Additional Evaluation as Indicated
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
Identify white coat hypertension, abnormal diurnal BP 
pattern, BP load
All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile
Renovascular imaging: magnetic resonance or CT 
angiography
Identify renovascular disease
Young children with stage 1 hypertension and any 
child or adolescent with stage 2 hypertension
Arteriography: digital subtraction or classic
Plasma and urine catecholamines: MRI with PET 
scan
Identify catecholamine-­mediated hypertension
Patients with signs and symptoms concerning for 
pheochromocytoma
BP, blood pressure; R/O, rule out.
*Comorbid risk factors also include diabetes mellitus and kidney disease.
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2495, Table 472.6.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
199
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
hypertension. Low blood potassium is commonly seen when renal 
artery stenosis is present, as the hypertension is secondary to prom­
inent activation of the renin-­angiotensin system. In addition, several 
of the monogenic causes of hypertension have associated abnormal­
ity of blood potassium, especially those with low potassium level from 
hyperaldosteronism.
If the hypertension is severe at presentation and the more com­
mon etiologies of secondary hypertension have been ruled out with 
the initial investigations as noted earlier, the possibility of an underly­
ing renovascular cause then needs to be explored. Aortic coarctation 
should always be considered and is simply ruled out on examination 
using four-­extremity blood pressure measurements (see “Physical 
Examination” section previously). The first step to evaluate for a possi­
ble renal artery stenosis is with a noninvasive abdominal CT or mag­
netic resonance angiogram. If these are negative, an actual angiogram 
may need to be performed (Fig. 11.4).
Nuclear scans may identify isolated renal vascular or focal paren­
chymal disease as the cause of hypertension. A radionucleotide renal 
perfusion scan can identify an area of segmental poor renal perfusion 
indicative of a scar from a previous renal insult, such as from an epi­
sode of pyelonephritis or an occult segmental renal infarction as may 
occur from thromboembolism or secondary to vasculitis. Unilateral 
poor global perfusion of a kidney on a captopril renal perfusion scan 
is indicative of unilateral renal artery stenosis. The need to use a cap­
topril renal scan to identify likely renal artery stenosis has waned as 
the resolution of the renal vasculature imaging by CT and magnetic 
resonance angiograms has improved substantially to provide the 
diagnosis.
An echocardiogram can serve two roles in the evaluation of a 
hypertensive patient. First, it has high sensitivity in confirming aor­
tic coarctation in a patient who has strong evidence for coarctation 
based on the physical examination revealing the typical discrepancy 
between arm and leg blood pressure values. Second, an echocardio­
gram can help assess the significance of the hypertension in patients 
whose blood pressure is difficult to measure consistently, and can also 
give some sense of duration of hypertension in those who present with 
symptomatic or severe hypertension. Finding significant left ventricu­
lar hypertrophy (LVH) on echocardiogram indicates end-­organ effect 
from hypertension that is not acute, and may have been occult and 
long-­standing. If LVH is present on echocardiogram and initial studies 
have not found one of the more common causes of hypertension, it 
then becomes imperative to pursue further diagnostic studies, includ­
ing those for rare forms of hypertension.
Rare causes of hypertension are pursued as symptoms suggest or 
if hypertension is significant and otherwise unexplained. Associated 
symptoms or signs of tachycardia and flushing suggest the possibility 
of a catecholamine-­secreting tumor or thyroid disease. In that sce­
nario, thyroid function tests or blood and urine catecholamine studies 
reveal the etiology. If an endocrine cause other than thyroid disease 
is suspected (see Table 11.5) based on clinical presentation or blood 
electrolyte abnormality on screening studies, blood renin, aldosterone, 
and cortisol levels are tested. If a pheochromocytoma is suspected 
Any abnormality
Initial testing
Secondary testing
All normal
Renal ultrasound
Urinalysis
Blood electrolytes and creatinine
Complete blood count
Likely primary hypertension
if older child who fits typical
clinical pattern (see text)
Normal
Severe hypertension
1. Possible glomerulopathy
    • Serum C3 and C4
    • Consider ANA, anti-ds DNA, ANCA
2. Possible bilateral PKD or CAKUT
    • Renal ultrasound
1. Noninvasive renal angiography
2. Echocardiogram
1. Renal nuclear scan
2. Plasma renin, aldosterone, cortisol
3. Consider genetic analysis
LVH
Severe sustained hypertension
Negative angiogram
Normal
Mild hypertension
Fig. 11.3  Evaluation of asymptomatic hypertension. ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cyto­
plasmic antibody; C3 and C4, complement levels; CAKUT, congenital abnormalities of the kidneys and urinary 
tract; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; PKD, polycystic kidney disease.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
200
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
(see Table 11.8), plasma-­free metanephrines are the initial test but 
followed by a 24-­hour urinary metanephrine and catecholamine test. 
Adrenal CT or MRI is the initial imaging study, but CT or MRI com­
bined with PET scanning is the most accurate study for neuroendo­
crine tumors (Figs. 11.5 and 11.6).
Monogenic forms of hypertension are not usually explored 
unless the clinical pattern does not fit that of primary hypertension, 
all other potential identifiable causes are ruled out, or an abnor­
mality on blood electrolytes, especially blood potassium level con­
sistent with a monogenic cause of hypertension, is present. When 
considering a monogenic form of hypertension, blood renin and 
aldosterone levels are measured initially, since many of the single-­
gene variants that cause hypertension impact the aldosterone path­
way. All monogenic causes of hypertension have suppressed renin 
levels (Fig. 11.7). However, the most effective method to make 
a diagnosis of a monogenic form of hypertension is by genetic 
sequencing and analysis.
There is no specific test to make the diagnosis of primary hyper­
tension. It is effectively a diagnosis of exclusion made in the context 
of the typical clinical pattern. It requires ruling out common identi­
fiable causes of hypertension in a child presenting with asymptom­
atic and mild hypertension. The diagnosis is made, then, when the 
following pattern is met: the patient is an older child or adolescent, 
the patient is asymptomatic, the level of hypertension is mild, and 
there is no evidence of significant end-­organ effect (e.g., no LVH on 
echocardiogram). In addition, there are no abnormalities on the ini­
tial screening studies and no history to suggest a renal injury having 
occurred earlier in the child’s life, such as in the perinatal period. 
There is usually a family history of early-­onset hypertension and con­
comitant significant obesity, bordering on developing associated met­
abolic syndrome.
Fig. 11.4  Renal angiogram in 7-­year-­old boy with hypertension. Right 
renal artery is visible with a string-­of-­beads appearance characteristic of 
fibromuscular dysplasia (arrows). The aorta and left renal artery appear 
normal. (From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nel­
son Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2496, 
Fig. 472.2.)
A
B
Fig. 11.5  A, A 14-­year-­old girl with paroxysmal hypertension, tachycar­
dia, and biochemical evidence of catecholamine excess with almost 
exclusively norepinephrine secretion (fractionated 24-­hour urinary 
normetanephrine 15,245 μg/24 hours, n.r. 88–444, and metanephrines 
<32 μg/24 hours, n.r. 52–341). MRI of the abdomen revealed a 7.5 
pelvic mass with high signal intensity on T2 weighted sequences and 
areas of necrosis. B, The mass had increased uptake on 18F-­FDG PET/
CT (SUVmax 12.4). Histology confirmed paraganglioma, and genetic 
testing revealed SDHB mutation. (Modified from Delivanis DA, Vas­
siliadi DA, Tsagarakis S. Adrenal imaging in patients with endocrine 
hypertension. Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am. 2019;48:667–680 [Fig. 4, 
p. 676].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
201
CHAPTER 11  Hypertension
B
C
D
F
E
A
RIGHT
LOGIQ
E9
Fig. 11.6  Pheochromocytoma. A young male presented with episodes of hypertension and headaches. A, 
Ultrasound shows a heterogeneously hypoechoic right adrenal mass. B, CT shows peripheral thick rind of 
enhancement and central necrosis. MRI showed high T2 (C) signal (light bulb sign) and peripheral enhance­
ment on T1 weighted images (D). E, Coronal image shows the right adrenal pheochromocytoma and its rela­
tionship with the right kidney. F, PET/CT performed for staging showed intense peripheral hypermetabolism 
(SUVmax of 10.8) and central photopenia (necrosis). No evidence of metastatic disease was seen and the 
patient underwent surgical resection. (From Bhargava P, Sangster G, Haque K, et al. A multimodality review 
of adrenal tumors. Curr Prob Diag Radiol. 2019;49:605–615 [Fig. 12, p. 611].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
202
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Nonmonogenic
causes, e.g., renal
artery stenosis
MRA response?
High
High
High
Renin levels?
Low
Low
Low
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Normal
MRA response?
Gordon syndrome
Type I, familial
hyperaldosteronism
Type II, familial
hyperaldosteronism
Liddle syndrome
DOC/deoxycortisol to
cortisol ratio
Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
Apparent
mineralocorticoid
excess
Aldosterone
levels?
Responsive to glucocorticoids?
Early-onset hypertension
Fig. 11.7  Diagnostic evaluation for monogenic hypertension. DOC, deoxycorticosterone; MRA, mineralocor­
ticoid receptor antagonist. (From Raina R, Krishnappa V, Das A, et al. Overview of monogenic or mendelian 
forms of hypertension. Front Pediatr. 2019;7:263 [Fig. 1].)
   	 R E D  F L A G S
Symptoms of mental status change, severe headache, and/or blurry 
vision associated with stage 2 hypertension require urgent evaluation 
and management. Physical findings of papilledema on fundoscopy, 
gallop rhythm on cardiac exam, or any neurologic finding also indi­
cates the need for urgent evaluation and management. Associated 
hematuria and/or generalized edema should be promptly evaluated. 
Four-­extremity blood pressure with discrepancy between lower and 
upper extremities or lag in pulse intensity between upper and lower 
extremities indicates coarctation of the aorta. Symptomatic acute 
hypertension in later childhood with normal initial testing should 
raise concern for drug-­induced hypertension.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
202.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anyaegbu EI, Dharnidharka VR. Hypertension in the teenager. Pediatr Clin N 
Amer. 2014;61(1):131–151.
Bhargava P, Sangster G, Haque K, et al. A multimodality review of adrenal 
tumors. Curr Prob Diag Radiol. 2019;49:605–615.
Brady TM, Feld LG. Pediatric approach to hypertension. Sem Nephrol. 
2009;29(40):379–388.
Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of High Blood 
Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2017;140(3):e20171904. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-1904.
Delivanis DA, Vassiliadi DA, Tsagarakis S. Adrenal imaging in patients with 
endocrine hypertension. Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am. 2019;48:667–680.
Gidding SS, Whelton PK, Carey RM, et al. Aligning adult and pediatric blood 
pressure guideline. Hypertension. 2019:73:938–943.
Grinsell MM, Norwood VF. At the bottom of the differential diagnosis list: un­
usual causes of pediatric hypertension. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24:2137–2146.
Peterson CG, Miyashita Y. The use of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 
as standard of care in pediatrics. Front Pediatr. 2017;5:153.
Raina R, Krishnappa V, Das A, et al. Overview of monogenic or mendelian 
forms of hypertension. Front Pediatr. 2019;7:263.
Robinson RF, Batisky DL, Hayes JR, et al. Significance of heritability in prima­
ry and secondary pediatric hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2005;18:917–
921.
Trautmann A, Roebuck DJ, McLaren CA, Brennan E, Marks SD, Tullus K. 
Non-­invasive imaging cannot replace formal angiography in the diagnosis 
of renovascular hypertension. Pediatr Nephrol. 2017;32(3):495–502. PMID: 
27747454.
Williams SS. Advances in genetic hypertension. Curr Opin Pediatr. 
2007;19:192–198.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
