Chapter Title One Line
Chapter Author
374
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Dysuria is defined as painful urination and can be related to uncom­
fortable contraction of the muscles of the bladder or when urine 
comes into contact with the inflamed genitourinary mucosa. The dif­
ferential diagnoses for a patient presenting with dysuria are extensive 
(Table 21.1) and can be due to infectious or noninfectious causes. 
The cause of dysuria varies based on age of the child or adolescent; 
therefore, specific elements of the patient history, potential causes, 
and diagnostic evaluation will vary with age (Fig. 21.1). With every 
patient, the provider must elicit a history of signs and symptoms out­
side the genitourinary tract, including fever, weight loss, generalized 
rash, involvement of other mucosa, and joint pain or swelling. Physi­
cal examination for every patient should include temperature, blood 
pressure, inspection of the genitals for skin lesions or discharge, 
abdominal palpation, pelvic examination when indicated, and neu­
rologic examination in children with voiding dysfunction to exclude 
spinal cord pathology. It is important to also consider less common 
etiologies of dysuria such as genetic disorders including hyperoxal­
uria and acute intermittent porphyria.
NEONATES
Neonates and infants cannot complain of dysuria; however, urinary 
tract infections (UTIs) are prevalent in this age group and a major 
source of morbidity. In this age group, it is difficult to distinguish 
between upper UTI (pyelonephritis) and lower UTI (cystitis) based 
on signs and symptoms alone. Unlike UTIs in older children, neonatal 
UTIs are more common in male neonates compared to females. In neo­
nates, UTIs are associated with bacteremia and/or congenital abnor­
malities of the kidney and urinary tract. In term infants, infections 
tend to be community acquired and present in the 2nd to 3rd week 
after birth. UTIs can be caused by either hematogenous spread or an 
ascending infection. In preterm infants, infections are more likely to 
be hospital acquired.
The symptoms suggestive of a UTI in the neonate are the same 
as those for suspected sepsis; therefore, major presenting symptoms 
include fever, poor feeding, weight loss, lethargy, and vomiting (see 
Chapter 52). Neonates may also present with jaundice or abdominal 
distention. A maternal urinary infection at or near term may increase 
the risk for neonatal pyelonephritis. A mother whose vaginal culture is 
positive for group B streptococci or who presents with fever, prolonged 
rupture of the amniotic membranes (>18 hours), uterine tenderness, 
or preterm labor is at an increased risk for delivering a premature 
baby with pyelonephritis as part of the neonatal sepsis syndrome. 
Family history is also important. There is a high genetic component 
to the presence of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR); the siblings of chil­
dren with known VUR also have a significant risk of reflux, with or 
without infection. Children with a UTI and VUR are at increased risk 
of pyelonephritis and renal scarring. However, the screening for VUR 
in an asymptomatic sibling of an index case of VUR is controversial; 
a voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) is recommended if there is evi­
dence of renal scarring on ultrasound or if there is a history of UTI in 
the sibling who has not been tested. Given that the value of identifying 
and treating VUR is unproven in the absence of a UTI, an observa­
tional approach without screening for VUR may be taken for siblings 
of children with VUR, with prompt treatment of any acute UTI and 
subsequent evaluation for VUR.
Physical examination of a neonate suspected of having a UTI 
should include the palpation of the abdomen to identify hydrone­
phrosis, obstructive lesions, or cystic kidneys. Urine culture should be 
obtained by suprapubic or bladder catheterization, as bag collection 
has a high rate of contamination with perineal flora. Because of the 
associated risk of bacteremia, blood cultures and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) cultures should be obtained in all neonates in whom UTI is sus­
pected. Initial empirical therapy should be started after collection of 
urine, blood, and CSF cultures. The empirical therapy should provide 
broad coverage against probable uropathogens and is initially admin­
istered parenterally, as the risk of urosepsis is higher in neonates than 
in other age groups. Common empirical therapy includes ampicillin 
in addition to either gentamicin or a third-­generation cephalosporin. 
Therapy is then tailored according to the specific uropathogen identi­
fied on culture and the antimicrobial sensitivity.
Ultrasound is the first-­line imaging method in neonates after the 
first UTI. The main purpose of diagnostic imaging is the detection 
of risk factors, such as anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract 
or VUR, as well as any renal damage acquired from the infection. 
Clinical practice guidelines do not recommend DMSA (dimercap­
tosuccinic acid) scans as part of routine evaluation of infants with 
their first febrile UTI because the findings rarely affect acute clinical 
management.
CHILDREN 2–24 MONTHS OF AGE
Like neonates, young children 2–24 months of age cannot report 
dysuria. Nonetheless, UTIs are common (see Chapter 52). The main 
Dysuria
Paula Cody
21
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
375
CHAPTER 21  Dysuria
risk factor for febrile infant males is whether or not they are circum­
cised; other individual risk factors for UTI in males include tem­
perature >39°C, fever for at least 24 hours, and absence of another 
source of infection. Individual risk factors for UTI in infant females 
include age younger than 12 months, temperature of at least 39°C, 
fever for at least 2 days, and absence of another source of infection 
(Table 21.2).
The method of collecting urine for testing is dependent on the risk 
factors of the child. Culture of a urine specimen from a bag attached 
to the perineal area has a high false-­positive rate; this method of urine 
collection is not suitable for diagnosing UTI. However, a culture of a 
urine specimen from a sterile bag that shows no growth is strong evi­
dence that UTI is absent; if growth of a single uropathogen is present, 
it may represent a UTI. Nonetheless, one approach provides several 
recommendations in testing and treatment of UTIs in febrile infants 
(Fig. 21.2):
 • If a febrile infant (2–24 months) with no apparent source for fever 
requires antibacterial therapy, a urine specimen should be obtained 
via suprapubic aspiration or catheterization for both culture and 
UA prior to the initiation of antibacterials.
If immediate empiric antibiotic therapy is not indicated:
 • Clinician should obtain urine sample for UA and culture through 
catheterization or suprapubic aspiration.
or
 • Clinician can obtain a clean-­void bagged urine sample. If UA 
results suggest UTI, then an additional urine specimen for culture 
should be obtained via catheterization or suprapubic aspiration and 
empiric treatment initiated.
Diagnosing a UTI in young children generally requires both a 
positive UA (for white cells and/or bacteria) and >50,000 CFU/mL of 
a single urinary pathogen on urine culture from a suprapubic or cath­
eterized urine specimen. A combination of a positive urine nitrite 
test plus positive leukocyte esterase plus white blood cells ≥10/mm3 
or ≥5 per high-­power field is highly suggestive of a UTI. Some labs 
also report the microscopic presence of bacteria. Nitrite testing may 
be negative with high urine flow rates and frequent bladder emptying 
(bacteria need ∼4 hours to produce nitrites); leukocyte esterase may 
be negative with certain bacteria or localized infections (abscess). 
Negative leukocytes, nitrites, and leukocyte esterase in the presence 
of bacteria suggest asymptomatic bacteriuria, which requires no 
treatment.
Sterile pyuria (leukocytes with no bacterial growth) may be seen in 
a partially treated UTI, renal or perinephric abscess, infection proximal 
to an obstruction (duplication), nephronia, interstitial nephritis, renal 
tuberculosis, Kawasaki disease, MIS-­C (multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children), adenovirus or JC viruses, endocarditis, sexually 
transmitted infections (STIs), schistosomiasis, prostatitis, appendicitis, 
epididymitis, or lupus.
The usual choices for empirical antibacterial therapy include a 
third-­generation cephalosporin, amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid, or 
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole. The clinician should base choice of 
antibacterial on local antimicrobial sensitivity patterns if available 
and should adjust according to sensitivity results of the isolated uro­
pathogen. Most well-­appearing infants can be treated orally. Fever 
persisting after 48 hours of appropriate antibiotic therapy raises 
the suspicion of a complicated UTI (obstructive uropathy, abscess, 
nephronia).
The rationale for imaging infants with UTI is to identify abnor­
malities of the genitourinary tract. Renal and bladder ultrasound is 
the first-­line imaging modality to identify anatomic abnormalities. 
VCUG to detect VUR should not be performed after the first febrile 
UTI. It is indicated if the ultrasound reveals hydronephrosis, renal 
TABLE 21.1  Causes of Dysuria
Infectious causes
Urinary tract infection (cystitis, pyelonephritis)
Urethritis
Herpes simplex virus infections
Varicella infections
Epstein-­Barr virus infections
Hemorrhagic cystitis (adenovirus)
Prostatitis
Vaginitis*
Renal tuberculosis
Urinary schistosomiasis
Sexually transmitted infections
Urinary tract 
abnormalities 
(congenital and 
acquired)
Urinary calculi
Urethral stricture
Meatal stenosis
Prostate enlargement
Malignancy
Urethral diverticulum
Bladder diverticulum
Idiopathic hypercalciuria
Bladder outlet obstruction
Urethral prolapse
Genital tract abnor­
malities
Sexually transmitted infections
Vaginitis
Prostatitis
Endometritis
Endometriosis
Labial adhesions
Phimosis
Paraphimosis
Balanitis
Foreign body
Vulva, vaginal ulcerations
Medications and 
irritants
Primary irritant dermatitis
Chemical irritants (soaps, detergents, bubble baths, 
feminine hygiene products, spermicides)
NSAIDs
Anticholinergics (amitriptyline, imipramine, and 
antihistamines)
Anti-­infectives (isoniazid, sulfonamides)
Chemotherapy-­related hemorrhagic cystitis (cyclo­
phosphamide)
Other
Trauma
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis
Behçet syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Toxic shock syndrome
Reactive arthritis (in conjunction with urethritis, 
conjunctivitis)
Neurologic conditions that impact bladder emptying
Pinworms
Lichen sclerosus
Appendicitis (if inflamed appendix or periappendiceal 
abscess lies low in iliac fossa)
Tumor (bladder, kidney, uterus, vagina)
Foreign body (urethral, vaginal)
Perianal group A streptococcus
NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
*Vaginitis; chemical, nonspecific bacterial, Candida albicans, Tricho­
monas vaginalis, herpes simplex, gonorrhea, group A streptococcus, 
gram-­negative organisms.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
376
SECTION 5   Genitourinary Disorders
scarring, or other findings that suggest high-­grade VUR or obstruc­
tive uropathy.
PRESCHOOL CHILDREN
A young child may or may not be able to verbalize dysuria; they may 
show signs of urethral irritation including delayed toilet training (espe­
cially during the day), secondary enuresis, dribbling, and frequent 
squatting. Due to the large variability in the time of achievement of 
daytime dryness (15 months–4 years), delayed toilet training may be 
an unreliable sign of dysuria; primary diurnal enuresis should be eval­
uated if the child is older than 48 months of age. Nocturnal enuresis is 
rarely a sign of UTI, but urine cultures should probably be obtained in 
children who do not stay dry at night by 5 years of age. A more signifi­
cant symptom in young children is the acute onset of daytime enuresis 
after a period of continence.
UTIs are the most common cause of dysuria in preschool children. 
It may be difficult to distinguish between pyelonephritis and cystitis in 
these young children. Both urine and stool withholding have a role in 
causing UTIs in young children. Bowel/bladder dysfunction is asso­
ciated with large residual urine volumes after voiding and increased 
UTI risk, and thus the treatment of constipation leads to a reduction in 
UTIs. Females are at increased risk of UTI due to the ease with which 
pathogens can migrate from the gastrointestinal tract to the periure­
thral area and urethra, and ultimately ascend to the bladder. Improper 
toileting habits can further increase the risk of UTI. Uncircumcised 
males, patients with neurogenic bladders (spina bifida), patients with 
indwelling catheters, and patients with renal or bladder anomalies 
(e.g., cysts, obstructed hydronephrosis, double collecting systems, 
ectopic ureter, horseshoe kidney, posterior urethral valves, VUR) are 
at increased risk for UTI.
Children who are toilet-­trained can give a clean-­void urine sam­
ple. Those who are not toilet-­trained can give a urine specimen from a 
sterile bag attached to the perineal area, although this has a high false-­
positive rate.
Preschool children may also have irritant urethritis due to bubble 
baths, perfumed soaps, or detergents.
SCHOOL-­AGED/PREPUBERTAL CHILDREN
Dysuria in school-­aged children can be due to infectious and nonin­
fectious causes (see Table 21.1). Most children with a UTI present with 
dysuria, frequency, or fever. It is worthwhile to ask about any urine 
color change, which suggests the presence of hematuria. The child 
should be questioned about the frequency, character, and size of their 
bowel movements. Constipation may predispose the school-­aged 
Possible signs and symptoms
<3 months
Fever
Hematuria
and foul-
smelling
urine
Vomiting
Lethargy and
malaise
Poor feeding
Faltering growth
Irritability
Jaundice
Irritability
Abdominal pain
Incontinence if trained
Dysuria
Abdominal pain
Flank-costovertebral
angle tenderness/pain
Loin tenderness
Incontinence (daytime)
Frequency
Dysuria
3 months –
3 years
>3 years
Fig. 21.1  Possible signs and symptoms in children with a urinary tract infection. (Modified from Prajapati H. 
Urinary tract infections in children. Pediatr Child Health. 2018;28[7]:318–323 [Table 2, p. 319].)
TABLE 21.2  Risk Factors for UTI
Past History
Age 2–24 months
Uncircumcised males <2 yr old
Genitourinary anomalies (obstructive uropathies)
Neurogenic bladder (spinal dysraphism, spinal cord injury, megacystic 
disorders)
Dysfunctional voiding
Constipation
Poor perineal hygiene
History of prior UTI
Current Illness
Males ≤1 yr
Females ≤2 yr and sexually active adolescents
Fever without a focus ≥48 hr
Fever ≥39°C
Foul-­smelling urine
Urine positive for nitrites
Urine positive for leukocyte esterase
Pyuria ≥10/mm3 WBC or ≥5 WBC/HPF
Bacteria on microscopy
HPF, high-­power microscopic field; UTI, urinary tract infection; WBC, 
white blood cell.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
377
CHAPTER 21  Dysuria
child to a UTI; stool softeners, such as mineral oil or fiber, may be indi­
cated. Pyelonephritis can be clinically distinguished from cystitis by 
presence of systemic features (fever, vomiting) and signs (flank pain, 
costovertebral angle tenderness).
A careful inspection of the genitals is important in the diagnosis of 
the cause of dysuria. Males may have nonspecific bacterial infection 
of the glans penis (balanitis); uncircumcised boys can have infection 
of both the glans and the prepuce (balanoposthitis). Both of these are 
usually accompanied by painful swelling and inflammation. Irritants 
can cause a nonspecific urethritis in males, with dysuria being the main 
symptom.
Prepubertal females can have dysuria as the presenting symptom of 
vaginitis, along with other symptoms including vaginal discharge. In 
prepubertal females, the vulvar mucosa is thin and susceptible to inflam­
mation from chemicals and mechanical irritation. Because the labia are 
not well developed, the vulvar mucosa is not anatomically shielded and is 
thus vulnerable to irritation. Vaginitis in prepubertal females can be non­
specific, due to irritants (soaps, detergents), or may be due to the pres­
ence of a foreign body (Table 21.3). Whereas vulvovaginal candidiasis is 
common in postpubertal females, the vaginal environment in prepuber­
tal females is not typically conducive to Candida species growth, unless 
they have an immunodeficiency or recent antibacterial use. In the major­
ity of cases, vulvovaginitis in prepubertal females is a mixed, nonspecific 
bacterial infection secondary to contamination by urine and feces. The 
responsible bacteria are usually normal flora (Table 21.4). Bloody vaginal 
discharge in young females may be caused by Shigella species or group 
A streptococcal infections, a foreign body (e.g., toilet paper), neoplasm 
(such as rhabdomyosarcoma), or trauma. Most cases of prepubertal non­
specific vaginitis can be managed with hygiene; some vulvovaginitis may 
require a course of antibacterial agents or topical estrogen vaginal cream 
(Table 21.5).
Several vulvar skin disorders can be confused with vulvovaginitis 
and present with dysuria due to contact of urine with inflamed mucosa. 
Lichen sclerosus manifests as white patches on the glabrous skin that 
are thinned and atrophic and are easily traumatized with resultant 
bullae (which may be blood-­filled) in the vulvar region. Seborrheic 
dermatitis may manifest with inflammation and secondary infection 
of the intertriginous areas; the face and scalp may be involved as well. 
Labial or vulvar agglutination may be noted and can be secondary to 
previous vulvovaginitis of unestrogenized epithelia.
Urethritis caused by herpes simplex virus may occur in both males 
and females of this age group from autoinoculation from herpes sto­
matitis; however, presence of genital ulcers should always elicit ques­
tioning about sexual activity and/or assault.
Other etiologic factors that may lead to urethritis and resultant 
dysuria include infection (fungi, pinworms, scabies), irritation (soap, 
Obtain urine sample via catheterization
or suprapubic aspiration for UA and Cx
Obtain urine dipstick or
catheterization
Infant 2-24 months with fever
>38°C
Clinical suspicion of UTI in a hemodynamically stable child without an identifiable focus of infection
Child > 2 years of age
UA* and/or culture
positive?
Start antibiotics 
Look for another source
Obtain renal US and
adjust antibiotics to
culture results
UA* and/or culture
positive?
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Do not start antibiotics
for UTI and look for
another source
Start antibiotics based
on local antibiogram and
adjust to culture results  
Renal US normal?
Complete antibiotic
course
Is renal US
suggestive of
obstructive uropathy
or high-grade VUR?
Obtain VCUG and
consult Urology
based on results
Nephrology or
Urology consult
depending on
findings
Fig. 21.2  Algorithm for diagnosis and management of UTI in infants and young children. *UA positive for leu­
kocyte esterase, leukocytes, nitrites, or bacteria. Cx, culture; US, ultrasonography; UTI, urinary tract infection; 
VCUG, voiding cystourethrogram; VUR, vesicoureteral reflux.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
378
SECTION 5   Genitourinary Disorders
shampoo, detergent, bubble bath), systemic illness (Stevens-­Johnson 
syndrome), and trauma (abuse, play, tight clothing, masturbation).
ADOLESCENTS
There are many causes for dysuria in an adolescent. A detailed sex­
ual history is mandatory (Table 21.6). Greater than 38% of high school 
students have engaged in sexual intercourse, with an increase to 56% 
among 12th graders. Over 3% initiated sexual intercourse before 13 
years of age, and 27% had a sexual encounter within the previous 3 
months. Adolescents are likely to have multiple sexual partners over 
relatively short periods of time, fail to recognize the symptoms of STIs, 
and use condoms inconsistently. It is critical that the provider perform 
a thorough history in a nonjudgmental and nonthreatening manner. 
Interviewing the adolescent in the room alone (i.e., without a parent 
present) for at least a portion of the visit is the standard of care for all 
adolescent health care visits. The terms of a confidential visit should be 
explained to the adolescent and parent; all information disclosed by 
the adolescent remains confidential (within the confines of the state’s 
confidentiality laws) unless they reveal a risk of rendering harm to 
themselves or others, such as with suicidal or homicidal ideation. Ask 
the adolescent about sexual partners, including anatomy and gender 
identity, since one’s gender identity may not match the sexual anatomy 
and can lead to inaccurate assumptions about types of sexual activity. 
Questions about victimization, trafficking, and abuse are part of the 
sexual history, regardless of age or gender.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are much more common in adoles­
cent females than adolescent males. Risk factors for recurrent UTIs in 
females include frequency of sexual intercourse (higher frequency leads 
to higher risk), maternal history of recurrent UTI, a new sexual partner 
in the past year, and spermicide use in the past year. Common patho­
gens in this age group include Escherichia coli, Proteus species, Klebsiella 
species, Staphylococcus saprophyticus, and enterococcus. Although often 
recommended by clinicians, no evidence supports the thought that post­
coital urination leads to a reduction in the frequency of UTIs.
One of the most common causes of dysuria in adolescent males 
and females is sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (Table 21.7). 
TABLE 21.3  Causes of Noninfectious 
Vulvovaginitis and Dysuria
Condition
Historical Cues
Poor hygiene
Infrequent bathing, handwashing, and clothing 
changes; soiled underwear, toilet independence
Poor perineal aeration
Tight clothing, nylon underwear, tights, leotards; 
wet bathing suits, hot tubs, obesity
Frictional trauma
Tight clothing, sports, sand from sandbox or beach, 
obesity, excessive masturbation or sexual abuse
Chemical irritants
Bubble baths, harsh or perfumed soaps or deter­
gents, powders, perfumed and/or dyed toilet 
paper, ammonia, perfumed and/or dyed sanitary 
products; douches and feminine hygiene products
Contact dermatitis
Topical creams or ointments, exposure to poison ivy
Vaginal foreign bodies
Wiping habits, excessive masturbation or self-­
exploration, sexual abuse
Parasites, insect bites, 
infestations
Home environment, pets, sandboxes, travel, camp­
ing, exposure to woods or beach
Medications
Topical steroid or hormone creams, antibiotics, 
chemotherapy
Generalized skin 
disorders
History of pruritus, chronic skin lesions, prior 
diagnosis
Anatomic anomalies
Vesicovaginal or rectovaginal fistula, ectopic 
ureter, spina bifida, cloacal anomalies, urogenital 
anomalies
Genetic disorders
Hyperoxaluria, acute intermittent porphyria
Neoplasms
Discharge, bleeding, bulging abdomen, change in 
bowel or bladder function, premature puberty
Systemic illness 
(Stevens-­Johnson syn­
drome, Crohn disease, 
toxic shock syndrome)
Tampon use, systemic evidence of inflammatory 
bowel disease including rash, oral ulcers, failure 
to gain weight or height, abdominal pain
Modified from Succato GS, Murray PJ. Pediatric and adolescent 
gynecology. In: Zitelli BJ, Davis HW, eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical 
Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier; 2018:658–690.
TABLE 21.4  Normal Vaginal Flora
 • Aerobic
 • Gram-­positive rods
 
• Diphtheroids
 
• Lactobacilli
 • Gram-­positive cocci
 
• Staphylococcus aureus
 
• Staphylococcus epidermidis
 
• Streptococcus species
 
• α-­Hemolytic
 
• β-­Hemolytic
 
• Nonhemolytic
 
• Group D
 • Gram-­negative rods
 
• Escherichia coli
 
• Klebsiella and Enterobacter species
 
• Proteus species
 
• Pseudomonas species
 • Anaerobic species
 
• Bacteroides species
 
• Clostridium species
 
• Eubacterium species
 
• Fusobacterium species
Modified from Larsen B, Monif GRG. Understanding the bacterial flora 
of the female genital tract. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32(4):e69–e77.
TABLE 21.5  Treatment of Nonspecific 
Vulvovaginitis in Young Females
 • Toilet hygiene
 • Urinate with knees apart
 • Wipe in an anterior-­to-­posterior direction with supervision
 • Scent-­ and dye-­free wipes may be useful
 • Clothing
 • Choose white cotton underpants, may need to change underpants 
midday if urinary dribbling
 • Wear loose-­fitting clothing
 • Change out of wet swimsuits immediately
 • Bathing
 • Take sitz baths in clear water up to 4 times a day
 • Wash gently with unperfumed soap
 • Do not use bubble bath or wash hair in bath
 • Rinse perineum with clear water, dry gently with towel
 • Management of inflammation and pruritis
 • Premarin vaginal cream topically twice daily for 10–14 days
 • Hydroxyzine, 0.5 mg/kg/dose orally 4 times daily as needed
 • Diphenhydramine, 1.25 mg/kg/dose orally 4 times daily as needed
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
379
CHAPTER 21  Dysuria
Adolescents represent an age group at high risk for acquisition and 
transmission of STIs. Although many STIs are asymptomatic and are 
diagnosed by screening asymptomatic sexually active individuals, STIs 
can present with dysuria, vaginal discharge, penile discharge, and geni­
tal lesions (Table 21.8). The most likely time for this to happen is within 
1 month of beginning a relationship with a new sexual partner. Diag­
nostic testing is highlighted in Table 21.9.
Chlamydial genital infection is the most frequently reported bacte­
rial STI. Infections with Chlamydia trachomatis may be asymptomatic 
or may present with dysuria, discharge, intermenstrual bleeding, or 
dyspareunia. C. trachomatis has also been associated with Fitz-­Hugh–
Curtis syndrome (perihepatitis) and reactive arthritis. C. trachoma­
tis infection may lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), ectopic 
pregnancy, and infertility. C. trachomatis urogenital infection can be 
detected in women by testing urine or collecting swab specimens from 
the endocervix or vagina; in men, the diagnosis can be made through 
urine or urethral swab. Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) are 
the most sensitive methods for detecting C. trachomatis. Treatment of 
infection improves symptoms, decreases the risk of sequelae, and pre­
vents sexual transmission of the disease (Table 21.10).
Gonorrhea, caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae, is the second most 
frequently reported bacterial STI. Infections with N. gonorrhoeae may 
be asymptomatic or may present with dysuria, discharge, intermen­
strual bleeding, or dyspareunia. N. gonorrhoeae infection may lead to 
PID; late complications include ectopic pregnancy and infertility. N. 
gonorrhoeae urogenital infection can be detected in women by testing 
urine or collecting swab specimens from the endocervix or vagina; 
in men, the diagnosis can be made through urine or urethral swab. 
NAATs are the most sensitive methods for detecting N. gonorrhoeae. 
Treatment of infection improves symptoms, decreases risk of sequelae, 
and prevents sexual transmission of the disease (see Table 21.10). 
Treatment of gonorrhea is complicated by the ability of N. gonorrhoeae 
to develop resistance to antibacterials.
Trichomoniasis, caused by Trichomonas vaginalis, may be asymptom­
atic or may present with dysuria, frothy yellow-­green vaginal discharge, 
genital pruritus, or intermenstrual bleeding. Diagnosis of T. vaginalis is 
usually assessed by microscopy of vaginal or urethral secretions; how­
ever, there are more sensitive methods of detection, including a specific 
culture, a nucleic acid probe, and an immunochromatographic capillary 
flow dipstick. See Table 21.10 for treatment recommendations.
Primary herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection can cause genital 
ulcers and dysuria, as well as other conditions, including nongenital 
lesions, cervicitis, urethritis, cystitis, proctitis, and pharyngitis. Systemic 
complications, such as hepatitis, pneumonia, thrombocytopenia, and 
monoarticular arthritis, may rarely occur. HSV-­infected patients can 
present with a primary infection, which can be asymptomatic; a first clin­
ical episode, which may not necessarily occur during the primary infec­
tion; or a recurrent episode. Usually, the first clinical episodes are more 
painful and prolonged than are subsequent ones. Recurrent episodes 
occur less frequently with a genital HSV-­1 infection and with intervals 
between episodes becoming longer, as compared to HSV-­2. Treatment 
for initial and recurrent outbreaks of HSV is listed in Table 21.10.
Vaginitis due to various causes can cause dysuria in adolescent 
females. Vulvovaginal candidiasis, bacterial vaginosis, and trichomoni­
asis are common causes of vulvovaginitis in adolescents. Other causes 
are local chemical or allergic irritants, bacterial infections caused by 
Streptococcus or Staphylococcus species, trauma, and secondary infec­
tions from foreign bodies. Rare causes of vaginitis and subsequent 
TABLE 21.6  Approach to Clinical Evaluation 
of Sexually Transmitted Infections: Sexual 
History
Age at coitarche
Gender identity and anatomy of sexual partners
Date of most recent sexual encounter
Duration of relationship with current partner
Numbers of current, recent (within past 3–6 mo), and lifetime partners
Condom usage (overall consistency)
Contraceptive usage
Vaginal intercourse
Oral intercourse
Anal intercourse
Dyspareunia
Involuntary sexual encounters (abuse, rape)
Partner’s sexually transmitted infection symptoms and relevant sexual history 
(i.e., other sex partners)
TABLE 21.7  Sexually Transmitted Infection 
Syndromes in Adolescents and Young Adults
Sexually 
Transmitted 
Infection 
Syndrome
Primary Organisms
Other Causal 
Organisms
Genitourinary Syndromes
Discharge and 
dysuria
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Trichomonas vaginalis
Mycoplasma genitalium
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Mycoplasma hominis
Herpes simplex virus 1, 2
Proctitis, proctocoli­
tis, and enteritis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Treponema pallidum
Herpes simplex virus 1, 2
Campylobacter species
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Salmonella species
Shigella species
Cytomegalovirus
Genital ulcer and 
lymphadenopathy
Herpes simplex virus 1, 2
Treponema pallidum
Calymmatobacterium 
granulomatis
Haemophilus ducreyi
Chlamydia trachomatis 
­lymphogranuloma 
venereum
Pelvic pain 
(e.g., pelvic inflam­
matory disease)
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Mycoplasma hominis
Mixed aerobic and 
­anaerobic bacteria
Scrotal pain (e.g., 
epididymitis)
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Pharyngeal Syndromes
Infections of 
­pharyngeal 
mucosa
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Herpes simplex virus 1, 2
Treponema pallidum
Human papillomaviruses
Dermatologic Syndromes
Genital warts
Human papillomaviruses
—
Molluscum 
­contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum 
virus
—
Rash, alopecia
Treponema pallidum
—
Arthritis and 
­dermatitis ­syndrome
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Chlamydia trachomatis
—
Jaundice, hepatitis
Hepatitis A, B, C viruses
—
Scabies
Sarcoptes scabiei
—
Pubic lice
Phthirus pubis
—
From Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of 
Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:350, 
Table 49-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
380
SECTION 5   Genitourinary Disorders
TABLE 21.8  Diagnostic Characteristics of Genital Lesions
Syndrome
Appearance
Number of 
Lesions
Pain
Adenopathy
Occurrence in the 
United States
Herpes
Vesicles and superficial ulcers on 
erythematous base (1–2 mm)
Multiple
Often
Bilateral; inguinal; firm; movable; 
tender
Frequent
Syphilis
Papule and superficial or deep ulcer 
(5–15 mm)
Single
No
Bilateral; inguinal; firm; movable; 
nontender
Uncommon
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Ulcer (2–10 mm), resolves quickly
Single
Yes
Unilateral; inguinal; fluctuant; may 
suppurate; tender
Uncommon
Human papillomavirus
Anogenital exophytic warts; may 
resemble cauliflower or be papu­
lar with projections
Single or 
multiple
No
None
Frequent
Lice or nits
Tiny (≤1 mm) insects or eggs adher­
ent to hair shaft; excoriations
Multiple
No but 
pruritic
None
Common
Chancroid
Deep, purulent ulcers (2–20 mm)
Multiple
Yes
Unilateral; inguinal; fluctuant; may 
suppurate; tender
Rare
Non–sexually acquired genital 
ulceration (common causes: 
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomeg­
alovirus, Mycoplasma)
Varied—can be shallow or deep, 
may be necrotic, often in kissing 
pattern on labia
Single or multiple Yes
Based on underlying condition
Uncommon
TABLE 21.9  Tests Used to Determine the Cause of Sexually Transmitted Infection Syndromes in 
Adolescents and Young Adults
STI Syndrome
Office Tests Available
Preferred Laboratory Tests
Genitourinary Syndromes
Discharge and dysuria
Females: microscopic wet prep vaginal secretions, pH paper, whiff 
test, KOH; LET; rapid tests for GC, CT, TV, BV, and HIV; UPT
Males: Gram stain smear of urethral discharge looking for ≥5 WBCs 
per oil immersion field and intracellular gram-­negative diplococci; 
LET; microscopic examination of first-­void spun urine sediment with 
≥10 WBCs per high-­power field; rapid tests for GC, CT, and HIV
Females, males: NAATs for GC, CT, and TV; HIV test
Proctitis, proctocolitis, 
and enteritis
Females, males: Gram stain smear of anorectal exudate; rapid test 
for HIV
Females: UPT
NAATs for GC and CT; see HSV and syphilis under genital ulcer; 
cultures for other gram-­negative pathogens and amoeba; HIV 
test
Genital ulcer and 
­lymphadenopathy
Females, males: darkfield examination for syphilis; rapid test for HIV
Females: UPT
Cultures for HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 or PCR for HSV; serology for type-­
specific glycoprotein G to discern HSV-­1 or HSV-­2
RPR or VDRL and confirmatory tests for syphilis if positive or 
treponemal EIA or CIA chemiluminescence immunoassays and 
confirmatory nontreponemal test (RPR or VDRL) if positive
NAATs for CT; PCR genotyping or serology for LGV (complement 
fixation or microimmunofluorescence)
Gram stain and culture for chancroid; staining for Donovan bodies 
on tissue biopsy; HIV test
Pelvic pain (e.g., pelvic 
inflammatory disease)
Microscopic wet prep vaginal secretions, pH paper, whiff test, KOH; 
LET; rapid tests for GC, CT, TV, BV, and HIV; UPT
NAATs for GC, CT, and TV; HIV test
Scrotal pain (e.g., 
­epididymitis)
Gram stain smear of urethral discharge looking for ≥5 WBCs per oil 
immersion field and intracellular gram-­negative diplococci; LET; 
microscopic examination of first-­void spun urine sediment with 
≥10 WBCs per high-­power field on first-­void urine; rapid tests for 
GC, CT, and HIV
NAATs for GC and CT; HIV test
Pharyngeal Syndromes
Infections of pharyngeal 
mucosa
Rapid strep test
NAATs or culture for GC and CT; culture or PCR for HSV-­1 and 
HSV-­2, serology for type-­specific glycoprotein G to discern 
HSV-­1 and HSV-­2; RPR or VDRL and confirmatory tests if 
positive; HIV test
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
381
CHAPTER 21  Dysuria
dysuria include ulcerating conditions of the mucous membranes, such 
as toxic shock syndrome and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. Epstein-­Barr 
virus, cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and other systemic 
infections can cause non–sexually acquired genital ulcerations. Non­
infectious causes of genital ulcers that can be confused with infection 
include inflammatory bowel disease and Behçet syndrome. Inflamma­
tory bowel disease usually manifests with intestinal symptoms, deeper 
ulcers, and a longer duration of ulcerative lesions. Behçet syndrome 
may manifest with lesions of other mucous membranes as well as ocu­
lar, central nervous system, and joint manifestations. If the clinical 
diagnosis is not definitive, viral culture of the lesions is recommended.
Males with dysuria may also have penile pain or dysuria as a result 
of phimosis, paraphimosis, balanitis, urethral trauma, epididymitis, or 
meatal stenosis. Phimosis is a scarring or narrowing of the preputial 
opening and manifests as failure to retract the foreskin. The foreskin is 
normally difficult to retract in neonates, but by 3 years of age, it is eas­
ily retracted. Paraphimosis, an emergent cause of dysuria and penile 
pain, is an incarceration of the prepuce behind the glans. Edema, pain, 
and swelling are present. Balanitis is an infection of the prepuce caused 
by Streptococcus species, Candida species, mixed flora, or Trichomonas 
species; it may be recurrent and warrants circumcision.
Evaluation for dysuria in the adolescent female should include a 
clean-­catch (midstream) urine for dipstick, microscopic exam, and cul­
ture. The presence of leukocytes on UA may indicate vaginitis due to 
STIs (N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, herpes, T. vaginalis). To check for 
gonorrhea or Chlamydia, a first-­stream urine or a swab of the vagina 
or cervix should be obtained. Depending on sexual activity, the phar­
ynx and rectum should also be tested to check for infections in those 
locations. Any lesions suggestive of HSV should be cultured or tested 
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The evaluation of any vaginal dis­
charge includes description of the vaginal discharge, measurement of 
vaginal pH, saline preparation, performance of a whiff test, and micro­
scopic examination (Table 21.11 and Figs. 21.3, 21.4, and 21.5). Thick, 
adherent cottage cheese–like discharge is suggestive of candidiasis; other 
physical examination findings include erythema, edema, and excoriation 
of the vagina. Thin, homogeneous, gray-­white, foul-­smelling discharge 
is suggestive of bacterial vaginosis (BV). Purulent, profuse, irritating, 
TABLE 21.9  Tests Used to Determine the Cause of Sexually Transmitted Infection Syndromes 
in Adolescents and Young Adults—cont’d
STI Syndrome
Office Tests Available
Preferred Laboratory Tests
Dermatologic Syndromes
Genital warts
Characteristic lesions
—
Molluscum contagiosum
Characteristic lesions
Wright or Giemsa staining for intracytoplasmic inclusions
Rash, alopecia
—
RPR or VDRL and confirmatory tests if positive
Arthritis, dermatitis
Males: Gram stain smear urethral discharge looking for ≥5 WBCs per 
oil immersion field and intracellular gram-­negative diplococci; LET
Females: Microscopic wet prep vaginal secretions for WBCs; LET; 
rapid tests for GC, CT; and UPT
Females, males: NAATs or culture for GC and CT from rectum or 
pharynx
Females: NAATs of vaginal swab
Males: NAATs of first-­void urine
Jaundice, hepatitis
—
Appropriate laboratory tests for hepatitis
Scabies
Microscopic examination of skin and hair
—
Pubic lice
Identification of eggs, nymphs, and lice with naked eye or microscopy
—
BV, bacterial vaginosis; CIA, chemiluminescence immunoassay; CT, Chlamydia trachomatis; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GC, Neisseria gonorrhoeae; 
HSV-­1, herpes simplex type 1; HSV-­2, herpes simplex type 2; KOH, potassium hydroxide; LET, leukocyte esterase test of urine; LGV, lymphogranu­
loma venereum; NAATs, nucleic acid amplification tests; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; STI, sexually transmitted infec­
tion; TV, Trichomonas vaginalis; UPT, urine pregnancy test; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; WBCs, white blood cells.
From Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:351, 
Table 49-­2.
TABLE 21.10  Recommended Treatments of 
Selected Sexually Transmitted Infections
Pathogen
Recommended Regimen
Chlamydia 
­trachomatis
Azithromycin, 1 g orally in a single dose
or
Doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days
Neisseria 
­gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone 500 mg (patient weight <300 lb) or 1 g 
(>300 lb) intramuscularly in a single dose
Trichomonas vaginalis Metronidazole, 2 g orally in a single dose
or
Tinidazole, 2 g orally in a single dose
Herpes simplex virus
First clinical 
genital episode
Acyclovir, 400 mg orally 3 times a day for 7–10 days
or
Acyclovir, 200 mg orally 5 times a day for 7–10 days
or
Famciclovir, 250 mg orally 3 times a day for 
7–10 days
or
Valacyclovir, 1 g orally twice a day for 7–10 days
Herpes simplex virus
Episodic therapy for 
recurrent genital 
episodes
Acyclovir, 400 mg orally 3 times a day for 5 days
or
Acyclovir, 800 mg 3 times a day for 2 days
or
Acyclovir, 800 mg orally twice a day for 5 days
or
Famciclovir, 125 mg orally twice a day for 5 days
or
Valacyclovir, 500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days
or
Valacyclovir, 1 g orally once a day for 5 days
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sex­
ually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 
2015;64(3):1–135. See full document for alternative treatments and 
specific treatments in pregnancy and treatment for children younger 
than 8 yr old.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
382
SECTION 5   Genitourinary Disorders
frothy green-­yellow discharge often accompanies trichomoniasis. The 
Amsel criteria for diagnosis and treatment of bacterial vaginosis are 
listed in Tables 21.12 and 21.13, respectively.
The provider should perform a pelvic examination to exclude pelvic 
inflammatory disease (PID) in all sexually active adolescent females 
when vaginal discharge and/or pelvic pain are reported (Table 21.14). 
PID is an acute infection of the upper female genital tract (endome­
triosis, salpingitis, tubo-ovarian abscess, pelvic peritonitis). Features 
that suggest PID (vs lower tract infection) include cervical motion ten­
derness, uterine or adnexal tenderness, temperature >101°F, cervical 
mucopurulent discharge or friability, abundant white blood cells on 
saline prep of vaginal fluid, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
and C-­reactive protein levels, and a documented cervical infection 
with N. gonorrhea or C. trachomatis. Table 21.15 lists differential diag­
noses for PID, and Table 21.16 details the recommended treatment 
regimens for PID. Pregnancy testing is indicated when an adolescent 
female presents with dysuria or any symptoms of an STI; the test results 
may influence the treatment plan. Another important consideration in 
sexually active adolescents is screening for HIV.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend gon­
orrhea and Chlamydia testing of all males who meet the diagnostic 
criteria for urethritis. NAATs, the most sensitive gonorrhea and Chla­
mydia diagnostic test, can be performed on a single urine or urethral 
TABLE 21.11  Differences in Characteristics Between Bacterial Vaginosis, Trichomoniasis, and 
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis
Clinical Elements
Normal
Bacterial Vaginosis
Trichomoniasis
Vaginal Candidiasis
Symptoms
Vaginal odor
−
+
+/−
−
Vaginal discharge
Clear-­white
Thin, gray, homogeneous
Green-­yellow
White, curdlike
Vulvar irritation
−
+/−
+
+
Dyspareunia
−
−
+
−
Signs
Vulvar erythema
−
−
+/−
+/−
Bubbles in vaginal fluid
−
+
+/−
−
Strawberry cervix
−
−
+/−
−
Microscopy
Saline Wet Mount
Clue cells
−
+
−
−
Motile protozoa
−
−
+
−
KOH Test
Pseudohyphae
−
−
−
+
Whiff test
−
+
+/−
−
pH
3.8–4.2
>4.5
>4.5
<4.5
KOH, potassium hydroxide.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 2015;64(3):1–135.
Fig. 21.3  Bacteria are clinging to the sides of a vaginal epithelial cell 
(“clue cell”). (From Huffman JW. Genitourinary infections. In: Feigen 
RD, Cherry JD, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:570.)
Fig. 21.4  Trichomonas vaginalis identified in wet smears of the vaginal 
discharge. (From Huffman JW. Genitourinary infections. In: Feigen RD, 
Cherry JD, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 2nd ed. Phil­
adelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:568.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
383
CHAPTER 21  Dysuria
TABLE 21.12  Amsel Criteria for the 
Diagnosis of Bacterial Vaginosis
3 of the following 4 Amsel criteria are considered necessary to diagnose BV:
	 1.	Vaginal discharge: thin, homogeneous, white, uniformly adherent
	 2.	Vaginal pH >4.5
	 3.	Positive result of whiff test: fishy odor after mixing discharge with 
10% KOH
	 4.	>20% clue cells on microscopic examination: bacteria-­coated squamous 
epithelial cells, where both the periphery (cell membrane) and cyto­
plasm have a granular, irregular, “moth-­eaten” appearance
KOH, potassium hydroxide.
Modified from Amsel R, Totten PA, Spiegel CA, et al. Nonspecific vag­
initis. Diagnostic criteria and microbial and epidemiologic associations. 
Am J Med. 1983;74:14–22.
TABLE 21.13  Treatment Regimens for 
Bacterial Vaginosis
Nonpregnant Females
Metronidazole, 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days
or
Metronidazole gel, 0.75%, 1 full applicator (5 g) intravaginally once a day for 5 days
or
Clindamycin cream, 2%, 1 full applicator (5 g) intravaginally once a day for 
7 days
Pregnant Females
Metronidazole, 250 mg orally 3 times daily for 7 days
or
Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
­Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 
2015;64(3):1–135.
TABLE 21.14  Diagnostic Criteria for Pelvic 
Inflammatory Disease
Minimum Criteria
Uterine or adnexal tenderness (unilateral or bilateral)
or
Cervical motion tenderness
Additional Criteria to Increase Specificity of Minimum 
Criteria
Abnormal cervical or vaginal mucopurulent discharge
Presence of WBCs on saline microscopy of vaginal secretions
Oral temperature >38.3°C (101°F)
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-­reactive protein
Laboratory evidence of Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis at 
cervix
WBCs, white blood cells.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sex­
ually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 
2015;64(3):1–135.
TABLE 21.15  Differential Diagnosis for 
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Ectopic pregnancy
Ovarian cyst (with or without ovarian torsion)
Acute appendicitis
Endometriosis
Pyelonephritis
Septic or incomplete abortion
Pelvic thrombophlebitis
Functional pain
Psoas-­pelvic muscle abscess
Mesenteric adenitis
Pelvic adhesions
Pelvic bone osteomyelitis
Chronic intestinal disease (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease)
Fig. 21.5  Hyphae of Candida albicans on a wet smear of vaginal dis­
charge. (From Huffman JW. Genitourinary infections. In: Feigen RD, 
Cherry JD, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 2nd ed. Phil­
adelphia, WB Saunders; 1992:564.)
TABLE 21.16  Treatment Regimens for 
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Parenteral Regimens (One of the Following)
Cefotetan, 2 g IV q12h, or cefoxitin, 2 g IV q6h, both plus doxycycline, 100 mg 
IV or PO q12h or
Ceftriaxone 1 g IV q24h plus doxycycline 100 mg PO or IV q12h plus metroni­
dazole 500 mg PO or IV q12 hr
Parenteral therapy may be discontinued 24 hr after clinical improvement and 
continue doxycycline, 100 mg PO twice daily, and metronidazole 500 mg 
twice daily for 14 days of total therapy
For tubo-ovarian abscess, addition of either metronidazole, 500 mg PO twice 
daily, or clindamycin, 450 mg PO 4 times daily, to oral doxycycline provides 
better coverage against anaerobes
Outpatient Regimens (One of the Following)
Ceftriaxone, 500 mg IM in a single dose, or cefoxitin, 2 g IM, with probenecid, 
1 g PO in a single dose once, or other parenteral 3rd-­generation cephalo­
sporin (e.g., ceftizoxime) plus doxycycline, 100 mg PO twice daily for 14 
days, with metronidazole, 500 mg PO twice daily for 14 days
IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, per os (orally); q6h, every 6 
hr; q8h, every 8 hr; q12h, every 12 hr.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sex­
ually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 
2015;64(3):1–135.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
384
SECTION 5   Genitourinary Disorders
specimen. Any lesion suspicious for HSV should be cultured. Table 
21.8 lists the treatments for selected STIs. Epididymitis, typically pre­
senting as unilateral testicular pain, is most frequently caused by C. tra­
chomatis or N. gonorrhoeae or a sexually transmitted enteric organism 
such as E. coli and Pseudomonas species. On examination, a hydrocele 
may be present. Treatment of epididymitis is listed in Table 21.17.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Dysuria in prepubertal children is usually a symptom of a UTI but may 
also be due to other infectious or noninfectious causes of urethritis and 
vaginitis. The differential diagnosis expands greatly in adolescents, in 
whom an STI may be the cause. Table 21.18 demonstrates common 
pitfalls in the appropriate evaluation of dysuria in children and adoles­
cents. Red flags are noted in Tables 21.19 and 21.20.
Because children younger than 2 years cannot often verbal­
ize a specific complaint of dysuria, the diagnosis of a UTI is more 
challenging in children this age. Awareness of specific risk factors for 
UTI (uncircumcised status in boys, height of fever, and lack of other 
cause for fever on examination) especially in the first year of life will 
lead to the evaluation of those at highest risk and avoid unnecessary 
testing in those at low risk. Combining the results of the UA with an 
appropriately obtained urine culture allows for expeditious treatment 
and confirmation of the particular pathogen when the culture results 
are available.
   
TABLE 21.17  Treatment Regimens for 
Epididymitis
One of the following:
For epididymitis most likely caused by gonococcal or chlamydial infection:
Ceftriaxone, 500 mg intramuscularly in a single dose, plus doxycycline, 
100 mg orally twice daily for 10 days
For epididymitis most likely caused by enteric organism, or for patients who 
are allergic to cephalosporins and/or tetracyclines:
Levofloxacin, 500 mg orally once daily for 10 days*†
*Fluoroquinolones have not been recommended for persons younger 
than 18 yr because they damage articular cartilage in juvenile animal 
models. Among children treated with fluoroquinolones, no joint dam­
age attributable to therapy has been observed. Quinolones should not 
be used to treat possible gonorrhea infections acquired in Asia or the 
Pacific, including Hawaii, or California.
†In men who practice insertive anal sex and are not allergic to ceftriax­
one, add ceftriaxone 500 mg IM × 1 dose.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually trans­
mitted diseases treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 2015;64(3):1–135.
TABLE 21.18  Common Pitfalls in the 
Correct Diagnosis of Dysuria
Neonates/Infants
Assume that significant bacteriuria in a bagged urine specimen is a true UTI, 
and treat before a confirmatory culture is obtained
Fail to obtain a urine culture in a neonate older than 3 days and miss obstruc­
tive uropathy with a secondary infection
Toddlers and School-­Aged Children
Trust a urine culture from a bagged urine specimen
Accept a laboratory report of “no significant growth” on urine, without know­
ing that the laboratory reports only >100,000 CFU/mL as “significant”
Fail to label urine as a “catheterized specimen,” so that the laboratory can 
plate 0.1 mL as well as 0.01 mL
Adolescents
Fail to ask about sexual history suggestive of vaginitis, such as a new sexual 
partner and condom or other birth control device use
Treat pyuria as a UTI in a sample contaminated with vaginal leukocytes
CFU, colony-­forming unit; UTI, urinary tract infection.
TABLE 21.19  Red Flags for Referral to a 
Pediatric Urologist or Nephrologist After a 
Urinary Tract Infection
 • Poor urine stream in males (posterior urethral valves)
 • Constant wetting not from urethra (ectopic ureter or patent urachus)
 • Dilating VUR (grade III, IV, or V)
 • Renal scarring detected on sonography or a DMSA scan obtained >6 mo 
after the UTI
 • Urinary obstruction seen on a sonogram
 • Voiding dysfunction (enuresis, frequency, “curtsy” to stop voiding)
 • Breakthrough UTI in the child with VUR receiving prophylaxis
 • Elevated serum creatinine level
 • Hypertension
 • Antenatal hydronephrosis that is confirmed after day 3 after birth
DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; UTI, urinary tract infection; VUR, vesi­
coureteral reflux.
TABLE 21.20  Red Flags and Things Not to 
Miss: Sexually Transmitted Infections
Diagnosis of More Than One Sexually Transmitted 
Infection in the Same Patient
 • If patient is diagnosed with syphilis, gonorrhea, or HIV
 • If patient reports engaging in unprotected sex with multiple partners
 • If patient is immunocompromised
 • If patient has a history of sexually transmitted infections
Abdominal Pain in an Adolescent Girl
 • Pelvic inflammatory disease
 • Tubo-ovarian abscess
 • Ectopic pregnancy
 • Appendicitis
 • Ovarian cyst (rupture or torsion)
Fever, Rash, Malaise, Arthralgia
 • Disseminated gonococcemia
 • Reactive arthritis
 • HIV infection
Rape
Pregnancy
Treatment of Partners
Asymptomatic Cervicitis
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
384.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Urinary Tract Infection 
and Steering Committee on Quality Improvement and Management. 
Urinary tract infection. Reaffirmation of the clinical practice guideline: 
The diagnosis and management of the initial UTI in febrile infants and 
children 2-­24 months. Pediatrics. 2016;138(6):e20163026.
American Urological Association Guideline Statement. Management and 
screening of primary vesicoureteral reflux in children: AUA guideline; 
2017. Available from: https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/vesicoureteral-­
reflux-­guideline. Accessed May 18, 2020.
Bonadio WA. Urine culturing technique in febrile infants. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
1987;3:75–78.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases 
treatment guidelines 2015. MMWR. 2015;64(3):1–135.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth risk behavior surveil­
lance—United States, 2019. MMWR. 2019;69(SS-­01).
Chaudhari PP, Monuteaux MC, Bachur RG. Microscopic bacteriuria detected 
by automated urinalysis for the diagnosis of urinary tract infection. J 
Pediatr. 2018;202:238–244.
Emamghorashi F, Mahmoodi N, Tagarod Z, et al. Maternal urinary tract 
infection as a risk factor for neonatal urinary tract infection. Iran J Kidney 
Dis. 2012;6:178–180.
Finnell SM, Carroll AE, Downs SM, et al. Technical report: diagnosis and man­
agement of an initial urinary tract infection in febrile infants and young 
children. Pediatrics. 2011;128(3):e749.
Forster CS, Shaikh N, Hoberman A, et al. Uropathogens and pyuria in children 
with neurogenic bladders. Pediatrics. 2018;141(5):e20173006.
Gorelick MH, Shaw KN. Clinical decision rule to identify febrile young girls at 
risk for urinary tract infection. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2000;154(4):386–
390.
Hoberman A, Greenfield SP, Mattoo TK, et al. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for 
children with vesicoureteral reflux. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:2367–2376.
Huttner A, Kowalczyk A, Turjeman A, et al. Effect of 5-­day nitrofurantoin 
vs single-­dose fosfomycin on clinical resolution of uncomplicated lower 
urinary tract infection in women. JAMA. 2018;319(17):1781–1789.
Kanellopoulos TA, Salakos C, Spiliopoulou I, et al. First urinary tract infection 
in neonates, infants, and young children: a comparative study. Pediatr 
Nephrol. 2006;21:1131–1137.
Karavanaki K, Koufadaki AM, Soldatou A, et al. Fever duration during treated 
urinary tract infections and development of permanent renal lesions. Arch 
Dis Child. 2019;104:466–470.
Kodner CM, Thomas Gupton EK. Recurrent urinary tract infections in wom­
en: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician. 2010;82:638–643.
Kosmeri C, Kalaitzidis R, Siomou E. An update on renal scarring after uri­
nary tract infection in children: what are the risk factors? J Pediatr Urol. 
2019;15:598–603.
Michel RS. Toilet training. Pediatr Rev. 1999;20(7):240–245.
Millner R, Becknell B. Urinary tract infections. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2019;66:1–13.
Nicolle LE, Gupta K, Bradley SF, et al. Clinical practice guideline for manage­
ment of asymptomatic bacteriuria: 2019 update by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clin Infec Dis. 2019;68(10):1611–1615.
Oka H, Nagamori T, Yamamoto S, et al. Non-­invasive discrimination of 
acute focal bacterial nephritis with pyelonephritis. Pediatr International. 
2019;61:777–780.
Roberts KB. Revised AAP guideline on UTI in febrile infants and young 
children. Am Fam Physician. 2012;86(10):940–994.
Shaikh N, Haralam MA, Kurs-­Lasky M, et al. Association of renal scarring 
with number of febrile urinary tract infections in children. JAMA Pediatr. 
2019;173(10):949–952.
Shaikh N, Osio VA, Wessel CB, et al. Prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria in 
children: a meta-­analysis. J Pediatr. 202;217:110–117.
Shaikh N, Shope MF, Kurs-­Lasky M. Urine specific gravity and the accuracy of 
urinalysis. Pediatrics. 2019;144(5):e20190467.
St. Cyr S, Barbee L, Workowski KA, et al. Update to CDC’s Treatment Guide­
lines for Gonococcal Infection, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2020;69:1911–1916.
Tullus K, Shaikh N. Urinary tract infections in children. Lancet. 
2020;395:1659–1668.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
