784
EYE AND VISUAL SYSTEM ANATOMY
The anatomies of the eye and visual system are shown in Figs. 43.1 and 
43.2. The optic nerves, made up of the converging nerve fiber layer of 
the retina, have intraocular, intraorbital, intracanalicular, and intracra­
nial portions. Partial decussation of the optic nerve fibers occurs in the 
chiasm, which gives binocular visual input to each side of the brain. 
The visual cortex is where the conscious process of seeing occurs.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE EYE AND VISUAL SYSTEM
The eyes and vision of a newborn are immature and require several 
years to reach adult proportions and functional status. By the ninth 
month of gestation, the retinal vessels have reached the periphery of 
the retina (an important factor in the pathogenesis of retinopathy of 
prematurity [ROP]), the optic nerve has completed myelination, and 
the pupillary membrane has disappeared. Postnatal reorganization of 
neuron-to-neuron connections in the visual cortex improves the poor 
visual acuity and other visual processes, which are not fully developed 
at birth. The visual acuity of the newborn has been estimated to be 
20/400–20/600 and may reach the normal 20/20 level as early as 6–12 
months of age as tested with visual evoked cortical responses. Acuity 
of 20/20 is not reached with other types of testing such as preferential 
looking with Teller acuity cards until ages 3–5 years. Visual acuity mea­
sured with conventional letter or symbol recognition methods does not 
reach 20/20 until 6 years of age because of cognitive factors. Binocular 
vision, including establishment of normal ocular alignment and depth 
perception, and improved facility of accommodation, the ability to 
focus on images at different distances, develop rapidly in the first year 
of life. The rapid maturation of visual function in the first year of life 
accounts for the critical period of visual development and the extreme 
sensitivity of the visual system to abnormal visual input from strabis­
mus or cataracts. Children deprived of vision in this critical period will 
have limited visual potential and may develop nystagmus (abnormal 
eye movements).
The majority of newborns are moderately hyperopic. Heredity con­
tributes to the refractive status of the eyes and the environment and 
visual experience also plays a role.
AMBLYOPIA AND VISION SCREENING
Amblyopia is defined as a unilateral or, less commonly, bilateral reduc­
tion in visual acuity that cannot be immediately corrected with glasses 
or surgery. In children whose visual acuity can be accurately measured, 
a practical definition of amblyopia is a two-line or greater difference 
between the best-corrected visual acuity of the eyes. For preverbal 
children, differences between the eyes in fixation and following behav­
ior or fixation preference are used to diagnose amblyopia. Automated 
photoscreeners can aid in the diagnosis of risk factors for amblyopia 
and strabismus, particularly in preverbal children who perform poorly 
on subjective testing. Amblyopia results from abnormal visual experi­
ence early in life during the critical period for visual development. The 
sensitive period for amblyopia starts in early infancy and continues to 
at least the age of 6 years and sometimes beyond the age of 8 years. 
There is a suggestion of cortical plasticity in adults that may allow for 
some vision improvement into adulthood. The prevalence of amblyo­
pia in the North American population is 2–4%.
Unilateral amblyopia results from three types of abnormal visual 
experience: strabismus, anisometropia (unequal refractive errors), and 
monocular visual deprivation (e.g., cataract, corneal opacity, hemangi­
oma [severe ptosis]). Bilateral amblyopia results from bilateral media 
opacities or significant bilateral refractive errors (ametropia). Nearly all 
amblyopia is reversible if discovered at an early age and treated appro­
priately. Treatment effectiveness declines after the age of 5 years.
Detection strategies for amblyopia can involve early recognition of 
factors that give rise to amblyopia or actual measurement of reduced 
visual acuity that may be caused by amblyopia. Most amblyopia risk 
factors can be detected through routine pediatric screening such as 
ocular history, red reflex evaluation, ocular motility, and vision assess­
ment. Recommended screening and referral guidelines are shown in 
Table 43.1. Whenever possible, a line of symbols or isolated symbols 
with surrounding crowding bars is recommended for screening (Fig. 
43.3). Isolated symbols can lead to overestimates of the visual acuity 
of an eye with amblyopia due to a crowding phenomenon or contour 
interaction in which symbols of a given size are more difficult to rec­
ognize if they are surrounded by similar symbols. Hence, visual acuity 
obtained with single optotypes without crowding bars can result in fail­
ure to detect amblyopia.
The treatment of amblyopia involves eliminating amblyopia risk fac­
tors, providing a focused retinal image with appropriate optical correc­
tion, and forcing use of the amblyopic eye through occlusion of the sound 
eye or blurring the image the sound eye receives. For patients with visual 
deprivation amblyopia, the depriving factor must be addressed medi­
cally or surgically. Optical correction including a bifocal is required for 
patients who have had cataract surgery. Intraocular implants are not gen­
erally placed in children under 1 year of age due to the high postoperative 
complication rates. For patients with anisometropic amblyopia, optical 
correction usually involves spectacles or, less commonly, contact lenses.
An adhesive patch worn over the sound eye most commonly 
achieves forced use of the amblyopic eye. Occlusive devices can be 
attached to glasses but may be less reliable since the child can peek 
over the glasses or around the occlusive device. The use of the potent 
cycloplegic agent atropine sulfate may also be used to encourage use 
of the amblyopic eye. A drop of atropine is applied to the sound eye 
each day; this temporarily impairs its accommodative ability and, in 
the presence of sufficient hyperopia, prevents that eye from obtaining 
Eye Disorders
Deborah M. Costakos
43
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
785
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
a clear retinal image. Atropine “penalization” for amblyopia works best 
in hyperopic patients with mild to moderate amblyopia (visual acu­
ity of 20/100 or better). Close follow-up of patients being treated for 
amblyopia is important for monitoring compliance with treatment and 
for preventing the development of iatrogenic reverse amblyopia in the 
sound eye from excessive occlusion or penalization.
VISUAL FIELDS
Quantitative testing of the visual field of most children is difficult before 
the age of 10 years (see Fig. 43.2). Confrontation field tests can be per­
formed to detect gross abnormalities of the visual field (hemianopsias), 
but even these are not reliable and need to be confirmed at an older age. 
Visual field defects in children are uncommon despite parental concerns 
about a child who seems to bump into objects frequently. Unilateral ret­
inal or optic nerve disease can produce unilateral visual field defects, 
but these are almost always associated with reduced visual acuity in the 
involved eye. Bilateral visual field defects, particularly if symmetric (hom­
onymous), indicate disease of the optic radiations or visual cortex. Visual 
acuity may be entirely normal. Causes of bilateral visual field defects in 
children include cerebrovascular accidents, pituitary or hypothalamic 
tumors, or congenital central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities.
STRABISMUS
Strabismus is derived from the Greek word strabismos, “to squint to 
look obliquely or askance.” It implies misalignment of the eyes in such 
a way that they are not simultaneously viewing the same object. Terms 
to describe eye alignment and movement are noted in Table 43.2. 
Strabismus can be constant or intermittent and can be the same in all 
directions of gaze (comitant) or greater in one direction of gaze than in 
others (incomitant). Furthermore, it can be categorized as congenital 
or acquired, monocular or alternating. The direction of misalignment 
can be vertical or horizontal. Vertical strabismus is referred to as a 
hypertropia of the higher eye. Horizontal strabismus can be conver­
gent (esotropia) or divergent (exotropia). The importance of strabismus 
detection derives primarily from the fact that it is the leading cause of 
amblyopia. Other reasons for detecting strabismus are the possibility 
of being able to restore normal binocular use of the eyes, improving 
depth perception, and minimizing the social and economic drawbacks 
to strabismus in society.
Anterior pole of lens
LENS
Epithelium of cornea
Anterior chamber of eye
Iris
Iridocorneal angle
Vitreous Chamber
Ciliary body
Zonular
fibers
Posterior pole
of lens
Canal of Schlemm
Bulbar conjunctiva
Tendon of lateral
rectus m.
Retina
Choroid
Sclera
Fovea
Optic nerve sheath
Tendon of medial
rectus m.
Fig. 43.1  Anatomy of the right eye as seen in cross section. (Modified 
from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Phil­
adelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:36.)
1
1
1
1
1
3
4
5
Anterior Lesions:
Chiasmal Lesions:
Postchiasmal Lesions:
Retina
Optic nerves
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Optic radiations
2
2
3
Constricted visual field
Bitemporal hemianopsia
Arcuate scotoma
Altitudinal defect
Central scotoma
Left homonymous superior 
quadrantanopia
4
Left homonymous inferior
quadrantanopia
5
Left homonymous hemianopsia
with macular sparing
Fig. 43.2  Anatomy of the visual pathways. The anatomy of the visual 
pathways appears at the top of the figure, the pink shading indicating 
how visual information from the left visual space eventually courses 
to the right brain. Visual field defects are at the bottom of the figure. 
Anterior defects (labeled 1 from disease of the optic nerve or retina) 
characteristically affect one eye and cause defects (red shading) that 
may cross the vertical meridian (i.e., the vertical meridian is the ver­
tical line bisecting each visual field). Chiasmal defects (labeled 2) and 
postchiasmal defects (labeled 3 for a lesion in the anterior temporal 
lobe, 4 for the parietal lobe, and 5 for the occipital cortex) characteristi­
cally affect both eyes and respect the vertical meridian. (Modified from 
McGee S. Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2012:514.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
786
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Strabismus detection can be simple, as in patients with a large 
angle of deviation (Fig. 43.4), or difficult, as in patients with more 
subtle deviations or no deviation at all (pseudostrabismus) (Fig. 
43.5). Evaluation of the symmetry of the corneal light reflexes from a 
penlight directed at the eyes can reliably detect many cases (see Fig. 
43.4). With smaller angles of strabismus or when the results of the 
corneal light reflex are in doubt, the cover test should be performed 
(Fig. 43.6). It is important to provide attractive fixation targets for the 
child to view during the test.
Infantile esotropia is defined as convergent strabismus with onset 
within the first 6 months of life (see Fig. 43.4). Transient crossing or 
divergence of the eyes is common in newborns and is probably not 
significant unless it persists beyond 3 months of age. In the classic 
form of infantile esotropia, there is a large-angle, constant deviation. 
The child may alternate fixation (cross-fixate), in which case the visual 
acuity is usually good in both eyes. Cross-fixation may mimic bilateral 
sixth nerve palsy. If the crossing is present in only one eye, amblyopia 
occurs in the nonfixating eye. Binocular vision is disrupted in infantile 
esotropia. The cause of infantile esotropia is not known, but hereditary 
factors play a definite role. The incidence of infantile esotropia is <1% 
among neurologically normal infants.
Early surgical correction of infantile esotropia may result in full 
or nearly full restoration of normal binocular function, a result not 
believed to be obtainable with correction of misalignment at older ages. 
The ideal timing of surgery for infantile esotropia is not known, but 
children operated on before 2 years of age are more likely to obtain 
TABLE 43.1  Vision Screening Recommendations
Age
Tests
Referral Criteria Comments
Newborn to 12 mo
 • Ocular history
 • Vision assessment
 • External inspection of the eyes and lids
 • Ocular motility assessment
 • Pupil examination
 • Red reflex examination
 • Poor tracking after 3 mo of age
 • Abnormal red reflex
 • Ptosis
 • Positive ocular history of retinoblastoma in a parent or sibling
 • Positive history of metabolic disease with risk of cataract
 • Abnormal ocular alignment (strabismus) in infant older than 3 mo of age
 • Pupil asymmetry of >1 mm
12–36 mo
 • Ocular history
 • Vision assessment
 • External inspection of the eyes and lids
 • Ocular motility assessment
 • Pupil examination
 • Red reflex examination
 • Visual acuity testing
 • Objective screening device “photoscreening”
 • Ophthalmoscopy
 • Fail photoscreening
 • Visual acuity worse than 20/50 in one or both eyes
 • Visual acuity difference of two or more lines
 • Strabismus
 • Abnormal head position
 • Chronic tearing or discharge
 • Abnormal exam
36 mo–5 yr
 • Ocular history
 • Vision assessment
 • External inspection of the eyes and lids
 • Ocular motility assessment
 • Pupil examination
 • Red reflex examination
 • Visual acuity testing (preferred) or photoscreening
 • Ophthalmoscopy
 • Visual acuity thresholds below
 • Ages 36–47 mo: must correctly identify the majority of the optotypes on the 
20/50 line to pass
 • Ages 48–59 mo: must correctly identify the majority of the optotypes on the 
20/40 line to pass
 • Fail photoscreening
 • Visual acuity difference of two or more lines
 • Strabismus
 • Abnormal exam
5 yr and older*
 • Ocular history
 • Vision assessment
 • External inspection of the eyes and lids
 • Ocular motility assessment
 • Pupil examination
 • Red reflex examination
 • Visual acuity testing
 • Ophthalmoscopy
 • Children who cannot read at least 20/30 with either eye. Must be able to identify 
the majority of the optotypes on the 20/30 line
 • Visual acuity difference of two or more lines
 • Strabismus
 • Abnormal exam
*Repeat screening every 1–2 yr after the age of 5 yr.
From American Academy of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus Techniques for Pediatric Vision Screening, May 2014.
Fig. 43.3  The Lea symbols in chart format (middle) and the Lea sym­
bols and HOTV tests with crowding bars (right and left). All tests should 
be administered at a distance of 10 feet.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
787
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
binocular single vision. Early detection and prompt referral of infants 
with suspected esotropia are indicated.
A second category of esotropia occurs in children whose eyes are 
initially straight but start to cross, usually intermittently at first, at 1–3 
years of age. These children have excessive hyperopia and an abnormal 
relationship between accommodation and convergence. This type of 
esotropia is called accommodative esotropia. Amblyopia frequently 
develops. Treatment consists of correcting amblyopia and providing 
spectacles to correct hyperopia, thereby modulating the amount of 
accommodation required by the child (Fig. 43.7). Bifocal spectacles 
may also be necessary for some forms of accommodative esotropia.
Esotropia caused by paralysis of a lateral rectus muscle, a sixth 
cranial nerve palsy, occurs much more frequently in children than in 
infancy (Fig. 43.8). Approximately 30% of children will have an intra­
cranial tumor (brainstem glioma, medulloblastoma, ependymoma, 
craniopharyngioma). Other causes include head trauma or a recent 
benign viral illness. The sixth nerve palsy may resolve spontaneously 
if the cause is benign. Other acquired etiologies include acute demye­
linating encephalomyelitis (ADEM) or multiple sclerosis (MS), Lyme 
disease, pontine vascular malformations, raised intracranial pressure 
(nonlocalizing), and middle ear infection complicated by petrous 
apicitis (Gradenigo syndrome). An older child may present with com­
plaints of diplopia or a face turn or closure of one eye to avoid diplopia, 
whereas a younger child may present with only the esotropia because 
of rapid development of suppression to eliminate diplopia. Neurologic 
investigation is indicated if the history does not support a benign eti­
ology or the paralysis does not spontaneously abate in a few weeks 
(a so-called benign sixth nerve palsy believed to be postviral in ori­
gin) or if the child demonstrates other neurologic impairment or has 
papilledema.
Infantile exotropia is much less common than infantile esotropia. 
Infantile exotropia presents as a large deviation of the eyes prior to 6 
months of age. Infantile exotropia is uncommon in otherwise healthy 
infants. It is, however, commonly associated with craniofacial disorders 
or neurologic impairment. Surgery may be done early in life, but these 
patients are less likely to obtain good binocular vision than infantile 
esotropia.
Intermittent exotropia is the most common type of exotropia. This 
usually manifests by 5 years of age. Parents will notice that the eyes 
deviate out at times and yet not at others. The deviation is most likely 
to occur when the child is tired or ill. Because the child maintains the 
ability to keep the eyes aligned part of the time, amblyopia is uncom­
mon. Diplopia is prevented by active cortical suppression of input from 
the portion of the retina of the deviated eye that overlaps the central 
view of the fixating eye. When the eyes are straight, the child gener­
ally maintains normal binocular function, including stereopsis. The 
clinical management of intermittent exotropia is not clear. Treatment 
is not necessarily indicated as observation of children 3–11 years old 
shows that <15% of children are unlikely to develop a constant exo­
tropia or amblyopia or lose stereopsis. Part-time patching, additional 
minus power spectacles in patients with myopia, and orthoptic exer­
cises are treatment options, but there is insufficient evidence that these 
TABLE 43.2  Description of Alignment 
and Movement
Normal Ocular Alignment: Orthophoria
Latency
-phoria: development of abnormality only during certain conditions (fatigue, 
illness, cover test)
-tropia: abnormality present during normal conditions; deviation may be 
constant or intermittent
Direction of Deviation
Eso-: inward, horizontal deviation (“crossing”)
Exo-: outward, horizontal deviation (“wall eye”)
Hyper-: upward, vertical deviation
Hypo-: downward, vertical deviation
Incyclo-: nasal torsional deviation of the superior pole of the cornea
Excyclo-: temporal torsional deviation of the superior pole of the cornea
Equality of Deviation
Concomitant: misalignment is equal in all positions of gaze
Noncomitant: misalignment varies significantly in different positions of gaze
Neuromuscular Dysfunction
Paralytic: misalignment secondary to a cranial nerve palsy, muscle weakness, 
or mechanical restriction (usually noncomitant)
Nonparalytic: no underlying neuromuscular dysfunction; usually concomitant 
but can be noncomitant
Tandem Movements of Both Eyes
-version: both eyes move in same direction (conjugate); direction of 
movement: levo- (left), dextro- (right), supra- (up), infra- (down)
-vergence: eyes move in opposite directions (disconjugate); convergence 
(inward movement), divergence (outward movement)
Fig. 43.4  Corneal light reflex test reveals an asymmetrically placed 
reflex that is laterally displaced in the right eye. This indicates an inward 
deviation of the eye (esotropia). (From Lavrich JB, Nelson LB. Diag­
nosis and treatment of strabismus disorders. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1993;40:739.)
Fig. 43.5  A child with pseudoesotropia. Note that the wide nasal bridge 
and prominent epicanthal folds create the illusion of an esotropia. The 
corneal light reflexes are centered in each eye; therefore, the eyes are 
straight. (From Lavrich JB, Nelson LB. Diagnosis and treatment of stra­
bismus disorders. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1993;40:741.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
788
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
No movement
Orthotropia
Inward movement
Exotropia
Downward movement
Left hypertropia
Outward movement
Esotropia
Fig. 43.6  The cover test. In each instance, the occluder is placed over the right eye while the patient is view­
ing a fixation target and the examiner is watching for movement of the patient’s left eye. If the left eye is not 
aligned, it will need to move to look at the fixation target. If there is no movement of the left eye, the test 
needs to be repeated by occluding the left eye and watching for movement of the right eye.
Fig. 43.7  Accommodative esotropia (top). The deviation is completely 
controlled with glasses at both distant (middle) and near (bottom) fixa­
tion distances.
Fig. 43.8  Left sixth cranial nerve palsy in a 4-year-old. A large manifest 
esotropia is present when the child looks straight ahead (top). The left 
eye does not abduct beyond the midline in gaze to the left (middle). 
Gaze to the right is normal (bottom).
treatments are more effective than observation. For those patients 
whose control over an intermittent exotropia deteriorates, surgery can 
be offered.
Primary vertical strabismus is far less common than horizontal 
strabismus. A small vertical deviation (hypertropia or hypotropia) in 
association with a larger amount of horizontal strabismus, however, is 
common, and is managed in conjunction with the horizontal deviation. 
A common cause of hypertropia in children is congenital paralysis of 
the superior oblique muscle, a fourth cranial nerve paralysis. In some 
children, the “paralysis” is actually caused by an anatomic abnormality 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
789
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
of the superior oblique tendon. Acquired causes of a superior oblique 
palsy include trauma, CNS abnormalities, or brain tumors. Children 
with a superior oblique paralysis of any cause frequently present with a 
head tilt and face turn toward the side opposite the paralyzed superior 
oblique muscle. If there is a question as to the timing of the onset of 
the superior oblique palsy, a review of pictures at a younger age may be 
helpful in determining chronicity. Superior oblique paralysis is one of 
the more common causes of ocular torticollis. An eye muscle disorder 
needs to be ruled out in any child with a chronic abnormality of head 
position. The anomalous head position and hypertropia caused by a 
superior oblique paralysis can be improved by eye muscle surgery in 
most instances. An approach to the evaluation of strabismus is noted in 
Fig. 43.9, and less common forms of strabismus are listed in Table 43.3.
REFRACTIVE ERRORS
Refractive errors include myopia (nearsightedness), hyperopia (far­
sightedness), and astigmatism. Refractive errors may be similar 
(isometropia) or different (anisometropia) between the two eyes. 
Bilateral amblyopia may result from a high refractive error that is 
isometropic. Full-time spectacle correction will often correct bilat­
eral amblyopia. Unilateral amblyopia may result from anisometropia. 
Patching or atropine penalization may be necessary in these children.
Myopia
In patients with myopia (nearsightedness), the parallel rays of light in 
the resting (nonaccommodating) eye are focused in front of the retina. 
The symptoms of myopia are squinting, holding or viewing an object 
more closely than normal, and complaining of blurred far vision.
The incidence and degree of myopia increase with age, especially 
during growth spurts, as in adolescence. There is a complex interac­
tion between genetic and environmental factors in the development of 
myopia. The incidence of myopia varies with ethnicity and geographic 
regions and has been increasing in prevalence over the past 50 years. 
There have been several genetic markers linked to myopia, but the 
increasing frequency among younger generations suggests environ­
ment plays an important role. The increase in prevalence from 10% to 
90% in some populations is a public health concern, particularly with 
high myopia. Myopia can be associated with increased risk of retinal 
detachment, early cataract, and glaucoma. In very high myopia there 
can be thinning of the retina and retinal degeneration. This can result 
in decreased vision even with spectacle or contact lens correction. A 
promising strategy to slow the progression of myopia is application of 
a dilute formulation of atropine. Increasing the time spent outdoors 
appears to slow progression.
Myopia may be associated with other ocular abnormalities, such as 
keratoconus (central conical protrusion of the cornea), cataracts, ectopia 
lentis (dislocated lens), spherophakia (overly spherical lens), glaucoma, 
and medullated (myelinated) nerve fibers. There is an increased prev­
alence of myopia in premature infants, especially with ROP (retinop­
athy of prematurity). Children with high degrees of myopia may have 
an underlying systemic association, such as Marfan, Stickler, Noonan, 
or Down syndrome. If myopia is sufficient to produce visual symptoms, 
spherical concave (minus) lenses in the form of spectacles or contact 
lenses are prescribed to correct the refractive error. Prescription changes 
may be needed every 1–2 years and more often during growth spurts.
Hyperopia
In patients with hyperopia (farsightedness), parallel rays of light in the 
nonaccommodating eye would be focused behind the retina. The pro­
cess of accommodation (focusing), which alters the shape of the lens, 
can compensate for some degrees of hyperopia. Because most children 
have a tremendous range of accommodation, mildly hyperopic chil­
dren can see clearly without any visual symptoms. Moderate to severely 
NEUROMUSCULAR FUNCTION
USUAL AGE OF
PRESENTATION
USUAL AGE OF
PRESENTATION
Non-paralytic
Paralytic
Infantile esotropia
Nystagmus blockage
syndrome
Infantile exotropia
Dissociated vertical
deviation
<6 months
<3 months
Congenital fibrosis
syndrome
Duane syndrome
Möbius syndrome
Brown syndrome
Congenital nerve
palsy (birth trauma)
Congenital
syndromes
Cyclic esotropia
Acquired comitant 
 esotropia
Convergence 
 insufficiency
Accommodative
 esotropia
Intermittent
 exotropia
>6 months
Acquired ocular
nerve palsies
CNS tumor/lesion
Trauma (CNS, orbital)
Infection (meningitis)
Postinfectious
>3 months
Hydrocephalus
Ophthalmoplegic 
migraine
Myasthenia gravis
Gradenigo syndrome
(otitis media)
Fig. 43.9  Evaluation of strabismus. CNS, central nervous system.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
790
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
hyperopic children may be unable to fully compensate through accom­
modation. The greater accommodative effort may lead to symptoms of 
“eyestrain,” which consist of headaches, fatigue, or eye rubbing. These 
symptoms may lead to a lack of interest in reading or in prolonged 
close work. Some children may also develop accommodative esotropia. 
Some children have a decreased ability to accommodate, or accom­
modative insufficiency, and are symptomatic even with low degrees 
of hyperopia. If hyperopia produces symptoms, decreases vision, or 
causes esotropia, spherical convex (plus) lenses usually in the form of 
glasses are prescribed to correct the refractive error.
Astigmatism
In astigmatism, the refractive power differs in various meridians of 
the eye. In most cases, astigmatism is caused by abnormal curvature 
of the cornea; although rare, lens abnormalities or dislocation may 
cause astigmatism. Infants and children with corneal distortion sec­
ondary to scarring (trauma or infection) or to external compression 
(neurofibroma or hemangioma of eyelid) are at an increased risk for 
astigmatism. Moderate levels of astigmatism may produce blurring of 
vision (far and near), leading to squinting, fatigue, headaches, and lack 
of interest in close-up work in older children and amblyopia in younger 
children. Cylindric or spherocylindric lenses (usually glasses) are used 
to improve vision and comfort.
Anisometropia
In patients with anisometropia, the refractive error of one eye differs 
significantly from that of the other eye. The difference in refraction can 
be spherical (hyperopia or myopia) or cylindric (unequal amounts of 
astigmatism). Mild degrees of anisometropia usually cause no visual 
symptoms and do not lead to amblyopia. Amblyopia develops with 
higher degrees of anisometropia because the child uses the less ame­
tropic eye and suppresses vision in the other. Strabismus frequently 
coexists with anisometropia, and both conditions may be involved in 
the pathophysiologic mechanisms of amblyopia. Anisometropia may 
initially be detected by comparison of the red reflex between the two 
eyes (Brückner test). The affected eye has the duller red reflex. Early 
detection and treatment of anisometropia are essential for the develop­
ment of optimal visual function.
VISION IMPAIRMENT IN CHILDREN
Vision impairment is formally defined as best-corrected visual acuity of 
20/70 or worse in both eyes. Impairment of vision exists as a continuum 
from 20/70 to no light perception. Unrestricted, noncommercial driver’s 
license has a requirement of best-corrected vision of 20/40 or better in 
most states. Legal blindness is said to be present when best-corrected 
visual acuity is 20/200 or less in each eye. Constricted visual fields may 
also play a role in the diagnosis of vision impairment or legal blindness. 
An infant or child whose visual acuity and visual field cannot be quanti­
tated may be judged visually impaired on the basis of inability to fixate on 
and follow movement of the examiner’s face or other objects or, in severe 
instances, inability to perceive light. Milder vision impairment may be 
suspected on the basis of associated eye signs but can be difficult to con­
firm in a preverbal child because of compensatory behavior (holding 
objects close, a face turn) that allows the child to have relatively normal 
overall function and development. Observation of the child’s behavior 
in the examination room, examination of the eyes (Table 43.4), and a 
detailed history (Table 43.5) taken from the parents about the child’s 
visual behavior at home can be important in establishing the degree of 
impairment. Many visually impaired infants and children have objective 
signs such as nystagmus, sluggish pupillary light reflexes, or anatomic 
abnormalities such as optic nerve hypoplasia or chorioretinal scarring. 
Visual evoked potential (VEP) and electroretinogram (ERG) can help 
delineate optic nerve or retina pathology, respectively.
TABLE 43.3  Less Common Forms of Strabismus
Type of Strabismus
Presenting Symptoms and Signs
Cause
Treatment
Duane syndrome
Esotropia with deficient abduction or 
exotropia with deficient adduction of one 
eye; head turn
Absence of sixth nerve nucleus and 
aberrant innervation of lateral rectus 
muscle from third cranial nerve
Strabismus surgery for correction of large 
deviations or abnormal head position
Dissociated vertical deviation
One eye turns up intermittently, especially 
with fatigue
Eye movement abnormality related most 
commonly to congenital esotropia
Eye muscle surgery on superior rectus and 
inferior oblique muscles
Brown syndrome
Head tilt; inability to elevate eye in 
adduction
Restriction of free passage of superior 
oblique tendon through trochlea
Observation if not severe; superior oblique 
tendon surgery if severe
Möbius syndrome
Masklike facies; inability to abduct both 
eyes; difficulty closing eyes
Bilateral sixth and seventh nerve palsies
Protect corneas from exposure; strabismus 
surgery
Congenital fibrosis syndrome
Chin-up head position; inability to elevate 
eyes; ptosis
Autosomal dominant gene on 
chromosome 16 in some patients; 
superior division of third nerve in others
Surgical release of tight extraocular 
muscles
Third nerve palsy
Exotropia and hypertropia; ptosis; dilated, 
nonreactive pupil
Congenital absence of third nerve; 
trauma; tumor
Ptosis and strabismus surgery
Double elevator palsy
Chin-up head posture; inability to elevate 
one eye
Paresis of superior rectus muscle
Transposition strabismus surgery
Orbital floor fracture
Vertical diplopia; chin-up head position
Entrapment of orbital tissues in fracture
Repair of floor fracture; release of inferior 
rectus muscle restriction
Myasthenia: congenital or 
acquired
Variable ptosis and eye movement 
abnormalities
Blockage of acetylcholine receptor sites 
by immune complexes
Treatment of systematic myasthenia; 
strabismus surgery if patient is stable
Mitochondrial disorders
Ptosis, progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia, optic neuropathy, 
cardiomyopathy, peripheral myopathy
Various mitochondrial variants
Supportive
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
791
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
Visual inattentiveness in an infant deserves special attention 
because of the possibility that the child has a treatable but not obvious 
form of vision impairment such as bilateral congenital cataracts. Even 
if the cause of impairment is not remediable, early diagnosis is import­
ant for referral of the infant for physical and occupational therapy for 
visual impairment since these children have very specific needs. Vision 
impairment (monocular or binocular) acquired after infancy obli­
gates the physician to search for a cause such as a retinal degeneration 
because some causes are treatable (Tables 43.6, 43.7, and 43.8).
Optic neuropathies may be isolated or part of a broader multisys­
tem disease. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy, a mitochondrial disor­
der, presents with subacute and severe vision loss (Table 43.9). Other 
mitochondrial disorders with optic atrophy include Leigh syndrome 
TABLE 43.4  Red Flags in Inspection and 
Direct Ophthalmoscopy in Evaluating Visual 
Impairment
Physical Findings
Possible Pathologic Process
Inspection
Globe
Small
High hyperopia, persistent hyperplastic primary 
vitreous, phthisis bulbi (shrinkage related to 
deteriorating eye disease)
Large
Glaucoma, high myopia
Red eye
Inflammatory disease (infection, uveitis), trauma, 
tumor, glaucoma
Protrusion
Retrobulbar or orbital infection/tumor, 
hyperthyroidism, nonspecific orbital 
inflammation (orbital pseudotumor), sarcoidosis
Sunken
Orbital fracture, Horner syndrome, atrophy, 
microphthalmia
Misalignment
Impairment of extraocular muscles: congenital 
weakness, muscle entrapment (tumor/trauma), 
cranial nerve palsy (infection, tumor, stroke, 
congenital)
Ophthalmoscopy
Cloudy cornea
Anterior segment dysgenesis (Peter anomaly), 
glaucoma, trauma, infection, metabolic storage 
diseases (mucopolysaccharidoses)
Lens
Cloudy
Cataracts (congenital vs systemic diseases)
Dislocated
Homocystinuria, Marfan syndrome
Cloudy vitreous
Retinoblastoma, detached retina, 
endophthalmitis, uveitis, hemorrhage
Optic disk
Pale
Optic atrophy (congenital, trauma, tumor, 
hydrocephalus, degenerative neurologic disease)
Swollen
Increased intracranial pressure, optic neuritis
Hemorrhage
Optic neuritis, increased intracranial pressure
Retina/choroid
Abnormal color
Retinitis pigmentosa (spicule pattern), 
chorioretinitis (atrophy with 
hyperpigmentation), Tay-Sachs disease (cherry-
red macula), albinism
Exudates
Diabetes mellitus, Coats disease, increased 
intracranial pressure, sickle cell, arteriovenous 
malformations
Hemorrhage
Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, increased 
intracranial pressure, trauma, blood disorders
Phakomatoses
Tuberous sclerosis (yellow plaques, nodules), von 
Hippel–Lindau disease (reddish globular mass), 
Sturge-Weber syndrome (choroidal hemangioma), 
neurofibromatosis (yellow plaques)
Blood vessels
Constricted
Hypertension
Microaneurysm
Diabetes mellitus
Perivascular 
sheathing, cuffing, 
leakage, occlusion
Retinal vasculitis
TABLE 43.5  Red Flags in History for Visual 
Impairment
Manifestation
Possible Pathologic Process
Child’s Complaint
Generalized blurred vision
Far vision only
Myopia
Near vision only
Hyperopia, disorder of accommodation
Both far and near
Astigmatism or defect of visual pathways
Focal blurred vision (veil, 
shadow)
Unilateral
Ipsilateral retinal or optic nerve
Bilateral
Chiasmal, postchiasmal, or bilateral 
prechiasmal lesion
Ghost/double vision
With binocular vision
Cranial nerve or extraocular muscle
With monocular vision
Ocular media or macular disease
Changes in special visions
Poorer color vision
Retinal or optic nerve disease
Poorer night vision
Retinal disease (retinitis pigmentosa), 
congenital stationary night blindness, 
vitamin A deficiency
Visual sensations
Floaters, spots
Uveitis, retinal detachment, or hemorrhage
Shimmering lines or scotoma Migraines
Visual hallucinations
Cerebral lesion, psychogenic, autoimmune 
encephalitis
Parents’ Observations
Age-appropriate infant does 
not track
Severe ocular (myopia, cataracts) or 
systemic (meningitis) pathologic process
Objects viewed too closely
Decreased visual acuity related to 
refractive error; ocular or neurologic 
disorder
Squinting
Decreased visual acuity related to 
refractive error; ocular or neurologic 
disorder
Roving or wandering eyes
Nystagmus or strabismus; rule out ocular 
or neurologic disorder
Head tilting
Compensatory posturing for nystagmus, 
strabismus, astigmatism, or visual field 
defect
Bumping into objects
Visual field defect, decreased visual acuity
Reading problems
Visual impairment, visual processing disorder
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
792
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
and myoclonus epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF) syndrome. 
Hereditary neuropathies (Charcot-Marie-Tooth, familial dysautono­
mia, spinocerebellar ataxia, Friedreich ataxia), some leukodystrophies, 
and lipidosis are also associated with optic neuropathy.
RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
Premature infants are at risk for the development of ROP because the 
retinal vessels have not yet grown out to the periphery of the retina and 
are susceptible to a variety of postnatal influences, including oxygen 
that can adversely affect retinal vessel maturation. In advanced stages 
of ROP, retinal neovascularization and fibrosis may lead to traction on 
the retina and result in a retinal detachment, the most common cause 
of blindness in premature infants. In most cases, fortunately, ROP 
spontaneously resolves.
The international classification system for the acute stages of ROP 
describes the location, extent, and stage of the disease according to the 
position of the advancing wave of retinal vessels (Fig. 43.10). The retina 
is divided into zones I, II, and III. Zone I is centered on the optic nerve, 
from which the retinal arterioles emerge, and zone III exists as a cres­
cent of retina on the temporal side; zone II occupies the midportion of 
the retina in all four quadrants. The severity is indicated by stages 1–5, 
with stage 1 representing mild ROP and stage 5 representing a total 
retinal detachment.
The management of ROP begins with a systematic program of eye 
examinations at well-defined times in infants judged to be at risk for 
developing ROP. The frequency of examinations is dependent on the 
findings and progression of the disease. Infants with a birthweight of 
<1,500 g are first examined 4–6 weeks after birth. Follow-up exam­
inations are performed at regular intervals until the retina is fully 
TABLE 43.6  Childhood Amaurosis (Blindness): Principal Neurologic Considerations
Congenital Malformations
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Congenital hydrocephalus
Hydranencephaly
Porencephaly
Microencephaly
Encephalocele, particularly occipital type
Phakomatoses
Tuberous sclerosis
Neurofibromatosis (special association with optic glioma)
Sturge-Weber syndrome 
von Hippel–Lindau disease
Tumors
Retinoblastoma
Optic glioma
Perioptic meningioma
Craniopharyngioma
Cerebral glioma
Posterior and intraventricular tumors when complicated by hydrocephalus
Neurodegenerative Diseases
Cerebral storage disease
Gangliosidoses, particularly Tay-Sachs disease Sandhoff variant, generalized 
gangliosidosis
Other lipidoses and ceroid lipofuscinoses, particularly the late-onset such as 
Jansky-Bielschowsky and Batten-Mayou-Spielmeyer-Vogt
Mucopolysaccharidoses, particularly Hurler syndrome and Hunter syndrome
Leukodystrophies (dysmyelination disorders), particularly metachromatic 
leukodystrophy and Canavan disease
Demyelinating sclerosis (myelinoclastic diseases), especially Schilder disease 
and Devic neuromyelitis optica
Special types: Dawson disease, Leigh disease, Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome, 
Refsum disease
Retinal degenerations: “retinitis pigmentosa” and its variants, Leber 
congenital type
Optic atrophies: congenital autosomal recessive type, infantile and congenital 
autosomal dominant types
Leber disease, and atrophies associated with hereditary ataxias: Behr, Marie, 
and Sanger-Brown
Usher syndrome
Infectious Processes
Encephalitis, especially in the prenatal infection syndromes due to 
Toxoplasma gondii, cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, Treponema pallidum
Meningitis; arachnoiditis
Optic neuritis
Chorioretinitis
Hematologic Disorders
Leukemia with central nervous system involvement
Vascular and Circulatory Disorders
Inflammatory vascular diseases (lupus, sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis, vasculitis)
Coats disease*
Arteriovenous malformations: intracerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage
Susac syndrome†
Trauma
Contusion or avulsion of optic nerves or chiasm
Cerebral contusion or laceration
Intracerebral, subarachnoid, or subdural hemorrhage
Drugs and Toxins
*Coats disease: poor vision, leukocoria, retinal telangiectasia, and exudation.
†Susac syndrome: branch retinal artery occlusions, hearing deficits, central nervous system dysfunction.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
793
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
TABLE 43.7  Causes of Monocular Visual Loss
Disorder
Timing
Pattern 
of Loss
Other Clues
Fundus 
Appearance
Pupil
Refractive error
Gradual*
Varies
Improves with pinhole
Normal
Normal
Cataract
Very gradual
Tunnel?
Opacity visible
Normal
Normal, but red reflex 
decreased
Corneal disease
Acute or chronic
Murky
Opacity visible or positive 
fluorescein
Normal
Normal, but red reflex 
decreased
Iritis
Acute or chronic
Murky
Pain
Ciliary flush
Normal
Small
Disfigured?
Open-angle glaucoma
Gradual
Varies
Elevated pressures
Normal
Normal
Angle-closure glaucoma
Acute
Varies
Pain
Steamy cornea
Patient ill
Normal
Dilated
Fixed
Central retinal occlusion
Acute
Varies
Painless
Abrupt
Pale with cherry-red 
macula
Normal
Retinal detachment
Acute
Varies
Painless
Floaters
Unremarkable or 
diagnostic
Afferent pupillary defect 
if extensive
Vitreous hemorrhage
Acute
“Dark”
Cannot see in the eye
Obscured
Normal, but red reflex 
decreased
Amaurosis fugax
Acute
Transient
5–10 min
Carotid or heart disease, 
migraine
Normal
Normal
Migraine
Acute
Transient
5–30 min
Headache
History
Scintillations
Normal
Normal
Optic neuropathy, neuritis
Gradual or acute
Central scotoma
Decreased visual acuity, loss 
of color vision, pain on eye 
movement, may also have 
spinal cord lesion
Normal
Pale optic disk?
Afferent defect
Diffuse retinopathy
Gradual
Varies
Genetic
AIDS
Retinal lesions
Afferent defect?
Papilledema (chronic)
Late
Varies
CNS tumor
Pseudotumor cerebri
Hypertensive crisis
Diagnostic; optic atrophy
Normal
Endophthalmitis
Varies
Varies
Corneal, systemic infection
Penetrating injury
Systemic inflammation or injury
Hypopyon
Varies
Often obscured
Varies
*Refractive error may be more acute when caused by diabetes mellitus.
CNS, central nervous system.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:60.
TABLE 43.8  Organic Causes of Vision Loss in Neonates
Condition
Physical Findings
Comments
Corneal Disease
Corneal forceps injury
Cloudy cornea
May lead to astigmatism and amblyopia; associated with intraocular hemorrhage, retinal 
detachment
Sclerocornea
Opaque cornea
Scleralization of cornea; familial or sporadic; keratoplasty possibly needed to provide vision
Anterior microphthalmia
Small cornea
Familial inheritance; associated with congenital cataracts, glaucoma, and/or coloboma
Anterior Chamber Diseases
Peter anomaly
Corneal opacity with iridocorneal/
lenticulocorneal adhesions
Maldevelopment of anterior segment of eye; associated with glaucoma and lens 
abnormalities
Persistent pupillary 
membrane
Bands or membranes obscuring pupil
Rupture of vessels in membranes may lead to hyphema; membrane may need to be 
removed to restore vision
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
794
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
TABLE 43.8  Organic Causes of Vision Loss in Neonates—cont’d
Condition
Physical Findings
Comments
Anterior Chamber Diseases—cont’d
Glaucoma
Tearing, enlarged eye, photophobia, 
cloudy cornea, pale optic disk
Increased intraocular pressure leading to blindness (optic nerve damage)
Causes: anomalies of anterior segment, intraocular hemorrhage, ocular inflammatory 
disease, intraocular tumors
Treatment: surgery
Iris and Lens Disorders
Aniridia
Large, irregular, unreactive pupil
Hypoplasia of iris—may be heritable or sporadic, which is associated with a deletion of 
chromosome 11 and Wilms tumor or WAGR syndrome
Cataracts
Lens opacity
Multiple causes, ranging from familial inheritance to drugs
Anterior PHPV
Leukocoria (white pupillary reflex), lens 
opacity, cloudy cornea, small lens and 
eye
Persistence of fetal hyaloid vascular system, resulting in fibrovascular plaque on back of 
lens; as plaque contracts, ciliary process and lens become distorted
Complications: glaucoma, cataract, intraocular hemorrhage, rupture of posterior capsule
Treatment: removal of membrane, lens aspiration
Prognosis: poor visual outcome
Retinal and Optic Nerve Disorders
Posterior PHPV
Fibroglial veils around disk/macula, 
vitreous opacities (membrane, vessels)
Persistence of posterior fetal hyaloid vascular system; remnants of vascular system may 
cause traction detachment of retina
Chorioretinitis
Diffuse or local retinal atrophy 
demarcated by hyperpigmentation
Inflammation of posterior uvea with retinal involvement
Causes: toxoplasmosis, histoplasmosis, herpes simplex, cytomegalic inclusion virus, 
syphilis, tuberculosis, and toxocariasis
Other complications: glaucoma, detached retina
Retinoblastoma
Leukocoria
Neoplastic tumor with locus on chromosome 13; high incidence of secondary malignancy; 
poor prognosis with extraorbital metastasis
Retinopathy of prematurity
Leukocoria, cloudy vitreous; retinal white 
lines and ridges
Abnormal vascularization of retina; associated with retinal traction and detachment
Leber congenital retinal 
amaurosis
Normal findings to degeneration of retina
Failure of both rods and cones in retina; reduced or absent response to 
electroretinography; autosomal recessive
Achromatopsia
Color cannot be detected, photophobia
Failure of cone system in retina; autosomal recessive, or X-linked; diagnosed with ERG
Congenital stationary 
night blindness
Disk anomalies, poor night vision
Defect in rod system of retina; autosomal recessive, dominant, or X-linked recessive
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Pale, small optic disk; peripapillary halo 
of pigmentation
Secondary to failure in differentiation or degeneration of retinal ganglion cell axons
Some causes: septo-optic dysplasia (hypopituitary, midline CNS defects), chromosomal 
defects (trisomy 13), albinism, fetal drug exposure (phenytoin, ethanol), infant of 
diabetic mother, CNS defects (hydrocephalus, anencephaly, encephalocele)
Optic nerve aplasia
Absence of retinal vessels and optic disk
Maldevelopment of optic nerve; associated with severe eye and CNS anomalies
Morning glory disk 
anomaly
Enlarged, funnel-shaped disk
Associated with retinal detachments and midline defects (cleft palate, encephalocele, 
agenesis of corpus callosum)
Coloboma
White, wedge-shaped retinal defect; 
visual field loss
Malclosure of embryonic fissure that leaves a gap in the retina, hence exposing sclera; 
defect may extend to lens; associated with many congenital syndromes
Aicardi syndrome
Retinal lacunae, coloboma of optic disk
Occurs mostly in females; associated with agenesis of corpus callosum, seizures, 
intellectual disability, vertebral anomalies
Albinism
Photophobia; blue-gray to yellow-brown 
iris; macular hypoplasia
Defect in formation of melanin, resulting in lack of pigment in eyes and sometimes skin; 
increases risk of skin cancer with hypopigmented skin
CNS, central nervous system; ERG, electroretinogram; PHPV, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous; WAGR, Wilms tumor, sporadic aniridia, geni­
tourinary malformations, and mental retardation.
vascularized. If treatment is required, laser ablation of immature ret­
ina or intravitreal injections of anti–vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) medication such as bevacizumab are options. The choice of 
treatment depends on the zone and the rate of progression of disease. 
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 supplementation or alterations may 
be a means to prevent ROP in the future.
LEUKOCORIA AND RETINOBLASTOMA
Leukocoria or “white pupil” is a sign, not a specific disease (Table 
43.10). True leukocoria mandates prompt referral to an ophthalmol­
ogist as the causes may threaten either vision and/or life. Retinoblas­
toma is the most feared cause of leukocoria because of its potential to 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
795
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
metastasize and cause death. It is the most common malignant ocular 
tumor of childhood, with an incidence of about 1/15,000. Leukoco­
ria, the most common presenting sign, is caused by light reflection 
from the tumor’s white surface (Fig. 43.11) as opposed to the usual 
red reflex from the retina. Approximately 25% present with strabis­
mus. Less common presentations include periocular inflammation, 
glaucoma, and proptosis. Imaging is helpful to evaluate for calcifica­
tions that occur in retinoblastoma and to help confirm the diagnosis 
as well as to evaluate for pinealoblastoma and extension of the tumor 
into the orbit. MRI should be done because CT scan poses concern 
for radiation exposure and the development of secondary cancers, for 
which patients with retinoblastoma are at increased risk. Referral of a 
patient with suspected retinoblastoma to an ophthalmologist experi­
enced in its diagnosis and management is critical. Genetic counseling 
is indicated, as is examination of parents and siblings. In about 1% of 
cases a parent will have a regressed retinoblastoma or retinocytoma. 
Treatment options are focused on vision-sparing therapies including 
ophthalmic artery chemosurgery, laser photocoagulation, cryotherapy, 
intravitreal chemotherapy, systemic chemotherapy, and enucleation 
depending on laterality, location, extent of tumor, and vision potential. 
There is concerted effort to save the globes through advances in thera­
pies, and in most cases, this can be achieved.
CHILDHOOD CATARACTS
Congenital cataracts are a common cause of unilateral or bilateral 
vision loss in children, usually resulting from irreversible amblyopia 
in one or both eyes and occasionally from other accompanying struc­
tural ocular abnormalities (Table 43.11). Many infants with cataracts 
have leukocoria, but all visually significant cataracts can be detected by 
careful evaluation of the red reflex (Figs. 43.12 and 43.13). Infants with 
bilateral, visually significant cataracts may present with visual inatten­
tiveness or nystagmus, signs that significant impairment of vision has 
already occurred.
TABLE 43.9  Genetic and Clinical Features of Primary Hereditary Optic Atrophies and Their 
Respective Genes
OPA1
LHON
OPA3
TMEM126A
WFS1
Inheritance
Autosomal dominant
Maternal
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal recessive
Autosomal dominant
Age of onset
Childhood
Young adult, male >> female
Late childhood
Childhood
Childhood to adult
Ophthalmologic 
features
Slowly progressive, 
tritanomaly
Sudden visual loss 
Frequently beginning unilateral
Often additional 
cataract
Early manifestation and 
progression
Highly variable
Loss of visual acuity
Moderate-severe
Pronounced visual impairment
Moderate
Severe visual loss
Variable
Possible extraocular 
signs
∼20% of patients 
have neurologic 
symptoms (e.g., ataxia, 
neuropathy)
Mild neurologic symptoms 
possible; multiple sclerosis–
like symptoms
Late in life; mild 
neurologic signs 
possible late in life
Subclinical hearing 
impairment
Hearing impairment, 
disturbed glucose 
tolerance, behavioral 
abnormalities
LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; OPA1, optic atrophy type 1; OPA3, optic atrophy type 3; TMEM126A, optic atrophy type 7; WFS1, Wolfgram 
syndrome.
From Neuhann T, Rautenstrauss B. Genetic and phenotypic variability of optic neuropathies. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013;13(4):357–367.
Fig. 43.10  The international classification of retinopathy of prematurity 
(ROP). The stage of ROP is determined by the location, extent, and 
stage of disease according to the position of the advancing waves of 
retinal vessels. LE, left eye; RE, right eye.
TABLE 43.10  Differential Diagnosis of 
Leukocoria (White Pupillary Reflex)
Common Causes
Cataracts
Cicatricial retinopathy of prematurity
Coloboma
Exudative retinopathy
Fundus coloboma
Larval granulomatosis (toxocariasis)
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Retinoblastoma
Other Causes
Atrophic chorioretinal scars
Coats disease
Congenital retinal fold
Endophthalmitis
Glioneuroma
Hemangioma
Hamartoma
Leukemic ophthalmopathy
Incontinentia pigmenti
Medullated nerve fibers
Medulloepithelioma
Morning glory disk anomaly
Norrie disease
Organized vitreous hemorrhage
Phakomatoses
Retinal gliosis
Retinal dysplasia
Retinoschisis
Toxoplasmosis
Vitreoretinopathy (exudative)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
796
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Most cases of unilateral cataract are idiopathic in origin or associ­
ated with other ocular anomalies (persistent hyperplastic primary vit­
reous, anterior segment dysgenesis). Bilateral cataracts have a known 
genetic basis in about 60–70% of the cases, but this is increasing as 
novel pathologic genetic variants continue to be described. Cataracts 
are commonly inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but may 
be inherited in an autosomal recessive or X-linked pattern. They can 
be associated with metabolic disease such as galactosemia or Fabry 
syndrome. Cataracts found to be a result of a metabolic disease may 
be reversible by removal of the offending agent; galactosemic cat­
aracts are potentially reversible if lactose is eliminated from the diet 
promptly. Intrauterine TORCH(S) infections (toxoplasmosis, rubella, 
Fig. 43.11  Infant with leukocoria of right eye caused by retinoblastoma.
TABLE 43.11  Differential Diagnosis of Cataracts
Developmental Variants
Prematurity (“y” suture vacuoles) with or without retinopathy of prematurity
Genetic Disorders
Simple Mendelian Inheritance
Autosomal dominant (most common)
Autosomal recessive
X-linked
Major Chromosomal Defects
Trisomy disorders (13, 18, 21)
Turner syndrome (45X)
Deletion syndromes (11p13, 18p, 18q)
Duplication syndromes (3q, 20q, 10q)
Multisystem Genetic Disorders
Alport syndrome (hearing loss, renal disease)
Alström disease (nerve deafness, diabetes mellitus)
Apert syndrome (craniosynostosis, syndactyly)
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Cockayne syndrome (premature senility, skin photosensitivity)
Conradi syndrome (chondrodysplasia punctata)
Crouzon syndrome (dysostosis craniofacialis)
Hallermann-Streiff syndrome (microphthalmia; small, pinched nose; skin 
atrophy; and hypotrichosis)
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (anomalous dentition, hypohidrosis, 
hypotrichosis)
Ichthyosis (keratinizing disorder with thick, scaly skin)
Incontinentia pigmenti (dental anomalies, intellectual disability, cutaneous 
lesions)
Lowe syndrome (oculocerebrorenal syndrome: hypotonia, renal disease)
Marfan syndrome
Meckel-Gruber syndrome (renal dysplasia, encephalocele)
Myotonic dystrophy
Nail-patella syndrome (renal dysfunction, dysplastic nails, hypoplastic patella)
Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome (cerebellar ataxia, hypotonia)
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (autosomal dominant, basal cell 
carcinoma erupts in childhood)
Peter anomaly (corneal opacifications with iris-corneal dysgenesis)
Reiger syndrome (iris dysplasia, myotonic dystrophy)
Rothmund-Thomson (poikiloderma: skin atrophy)
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (broad great toe, intellectual disability)
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (toe syndactyly, hypospadias, intellectual 
disability)
Sotos syndrome (cerebral gigantism)
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (dwarfism, short trunk)
Stickler syndrome
Werner syndrome (premature aging in second decade of life)
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Abetalipoproteinemia (absent chylomicrons, retinal degeneration)
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX)
Fabry disease (α-galactosidase A deficiency)
Galactokinase deficiency
Galactosemia (galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase deficiency)
Homocystinemia (subluxation of lens, intellectual disability)
Hyperferritinemia
Infantile ceroid-lipofuscinosis
Mannosidosis (acid α-mannosidase deficiency)
Niemann-Pick disease (sphingomyelinase deficiency)
Refsum syndrome (phytanic acid α-hydrolase deficiency)
Wilson disease (accumulation of copper leads to cirrhosis and neurologic symptoms)
Zellweger syndrome
Endocrinopathies
Hypocalcemia (hypoparathyroidism)
Hypoglycemia
Diabetes mellitus
Congenital Infections
Toxoplasmosis
Cytomegalovirus infection
Syphilis
Rubella
Perinatal herpes simplex infection
Measles (rubeola)
Poliomyelitis
Influenza
Varicella-zoster
Ocular Anomalies
Microphthalmia
Coloboma
Aniridia
Mesodermal dysgenesis
Persistent pupillary membrane
Posterior lenticonus
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Primitive hyaloid vascular system
Retinitis pigmentosa
Miscellaneous Disorders
Atopic dermatitis
Drugs (corticosteroids)
Radiation
Trauma
Idiopathic
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
797
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and syphilis) can also cause cataracts. 
Usually these are bilateral but in the case of congenital rubella infection 
unilateral cataract may occur. Evaluation for a systemic cause should 
include a pediatric physical examination, ophthalmologic examina­
tion of the infant and family members, urine for reducing substances 
after lactose-containing milk feeding, and labs for TORCH infections, 
calcium, phosphorus, and glucose. Other metabolic studies, chromo­
somal evaluation, and genetic consultation may be indicated.
Cataracts in older children may be newly acquired due to a met­
abolic disease, drug exposure such as steroids, or a manifestation of 
progressive congenital cataracts. Cataract may rarely be the initial 
manifestation of diabetes type 1 but can occur as a complication 
particularly in patients with poor glycemic control. Bilateral cat­
aracts are often the presenting sign in patients with unrecognized 
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). These patients usually have 
had chronic diarrhea without a known cause. Unfortunately, CTX is 
often diagnosed late after mental and neurodegeneration has started 
to occur. Since chenodeoxycholic acid can be used to prevent mental 
and neurologic deterioration, CTX should be considered in the pres­
ence of a juvenile-onset cataract and chronic diarrhea. Occasionally 
cataracts, unilateral or bilateral, are caused by an underlying con­
genital lens defect, which develops into a visually significant cataract 
at a later age. Trauma is a common cause of an acquired unilateral 
cataract.
Ideally, unilateral cataracts must be removed, and amblyopia treat­
ment begun in the first or second month of life. Bilateral cataracts 
judged to be visually significant must be treated in the first 3 months 
of life to facilitate an optimal outcome. After this critical period max­
imum visual potential is decreased. Aphakic correction in infants 
younger than 6–12 months with bilateral cataracts is generally pro­
vided with extended-wear contact lenses or spectacles. Unilateral 
aphakia in this age group is best managed with a contact lens. A pos­
terior chamber intraocular lens may be placed in children over the age 
of 1 year unless the child has an underlying inflammatory condition 
such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). An intraocular lens may be 
placed in a child with a traumatic cataract if the intraocular structures 
that support the lens are intact. The management of a cataract goes 
well beyond cataract surgery. Amblyopia must be treated with occlu­
sion of the sound eye, often for several years, until stable visual acuity 
can be demonstrated. Most children (80%) will develop strabismus by 
age 5 years. Those who have had cataract surgery must be monitored 
indefinitely to evaluate for delayed complications such as glaucoma 
and retinal detachment.
GLAUCOMA IN CHILDHOOD
Pediatric glaucomas result from abnormalities of the aqueous outflow 
pathways (primary congenital glaucoma) or abnormalities that affect 
other parts of the eye (secondary glaucoma) (Table 43.12). Several 
genes causing primary congenital glaucoma, usually autosomal reces­
sive, have been identified. Primary congenital glaucoma is bilateral 
in about 65% of patients. This presents as a classic triad consisting 
of blepharospasm, photophobia, and epiphora (Fig. 43.14). The cor­
nea may be cloudy due to edema resulting from elevated intraocular 
pressure. The cornea also enlarges and the axial length of the eye may 
increase with elevated intraocular pressure. Onset usually occurs in the 
first year of life, but only 25% are present at birth. If glaucoma presents 
A
B
Fig. 43.12  A, Photograph of an infant taken when 4 months of age 
showing normal red reflexes in both eyes. B, Photograph of the same 
infant 2 months later showing loss of the red reflex in the right eye. At 
the time of cataract surgery, the right eye was found to have a dense 
central cataract and persistent fetal vasculature. (From Lambert SR, 
Lyons CJ, eds. Taylor & Hoyt’s Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabis­
mus. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:353, Fig. 37-22.)
A
B
Fig. 43.13  Autosomal dominant cataracts. A, A 3-month-old infant with bilateral dense cataracts. B, His 
mother has mild cataracts. (From Lambert SR, Lyons CJ, eds. Taylor & Hoyt’s Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:354, Fig. 37-23.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
798
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
after the age of 5 years, it is known as primary juvenile open-angle 
glaucoma. The natural history of untreated primary congenital glau­
coma is blindness resulting from progressive corneal opacification and 
optic nerve damage. Treatment is surgical, although eye pressure–low­
ering medications such as topical β blockers and topical or oral car­
bonic anhydrase inhibitors may be used as temporizing measures. 
Even with treatment, final visual acuity is worse than 20/50 in more 
than 50% of the patients.
Secondary glaucoma may present similarly to primary glau­
coma but is associated with other factors such as ocular trauma, 
inflammation, prolonged steroid use, or cataract. Some systemic 
conditions such as neurofibromatosis and Sturge-Weber syndrome 
are also associated with secondary glaucoma. The differential diag­
nosis of congenital glaucoma includes anterior segment dysgenesis 
and conditions that demonstrate corneal opacities (Table 43.13) 
or an enlarged cornea (Table 43.14). Epiphora also occurs with 
Fig. 43.14  Infant with right buphthalmos. (From Lambert SR, Lyons CJ, eds. Taylor & Hoyt’s Pediatric Oph­
thalmology and Strabismus. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:363, Fig. 38-1.)
TABLE 43.12  Classifications of Childhood Glaucomas
PRIMARY CHILDHOOD GLAUCOMA
SECONDARY CHILDHOOD GLAUCOMA—CONT’D
Chromosomal disorders such as trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
Connective tissue disorders
Marfan syndrome
Weill-Marchesani syndrome
Stickler syndrome
Metabolic disorders
Homocystinuria
Lowe syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Rubinstein-Taybi
Congenital rubella
Primary congenital glaucoma (isolated trabeculodysgenesis)
Neonatal or newborn onset (0–1 mo)
Infantile onset (>1 mo–2 yr)
Late onset or late recognized (>2 yr)
Spontaneously arrested (nonprogressive buphthalmos, Haab striae, normal 
intraocular pressure [IOP] and optic nerves)
Juvenile open-angle glaucoma
SECONDARY CHILDHOOD GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma Associated with Nonacquired Ocular Anomalies
Conditions with predominantly ocular anomalies present at birth that may or 
may not be associated with systemic signs:
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (“syndrome” if systemic associations)
Peters anomaly (“syndrome” if systemic associations)
Congenital ectropion uveae
Congenital iris hypoplasia
Aniridia
Persistent fetal vasculature (PFV) (if glaucoma present before cataract surgery)
Oculodermal melanocytosis (nevus of Ota)
Microphthalmos/microcornea
Ectopia lentis
Simple ectopia lentis (no systemic associations)
Ectopia lentis et pupillae
Glaucoma Associated with Nonacquired Systemic Disease or 
Syndrome
Conditions predominantly with known syndromes, systemic anomalies, or 
systemic disease present at birth that may be associated with ocular signs:
Phakomatoses
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Neurofibromatosis (NF-1)
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome
Glaucoma Associated with Acquired Condition
Conditions that are not inherited or present at birth but that develop after 
birth:
Uveitis
Trauma (hyphema, angle recession, ectopia lentis)
Steroid induced
Tumors (benign/malignant, ocular/orbital)
Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
Postsurgery other than cataract surgery
Glaucoma Following Cataract Surgery
Subdivided into three categories based upon cataract type and there being no 
glaucoma prior to cataract surgery:
Congenital idiopathic cataract
Congenital cataract associated with ocular anomalies/systemic disease or 
syndrome
Acquired cataract
Adapted from Beck A, Chang TCP, Freedman S. Definition, classification and differential diagnosis. In: Welnreb RN, Grajewskl A, Papadopoulos M, 
et al., eds. Childhood Glaucoma, WGA Consensus Series - 9. Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 2013:3–10.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
799
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
TABLE 43.13  STUMPED: Differential Diagnosis of Neonatal Corneal Opacities
Diagnosis
Laterality
Opacity
Ocular 
Pressure
Other Ocular 
Abnormalities
Natural History
Inheritance
S – Sclerocornea
Unilateral or 
bilateral
Vascularized, blends 
with sclera, clearer 
centrally
Normal (or 
elevated)
Cornea plana
Nonprogressive
Sporadic
T – Tears in endothelium 
and Descemet membrane
Birth trauma
Unilateral
Diffuse edema
Normal
Possible hyphema, 
periorbital ecchymoses
Spontaneous 
improvement in 
1 mo
Sporadic
Infantile glaucoma
Bilateral
Diffuse edema
Elevated
Megalocornea, 
photophobia and 
tearing, abnormal 
angle
Progressive unless 
treated
Autosomal 
recessive
U – Ulcers
Herpes simplex keratitis
Unilateral
Diffuse with geographic 
epithelial defect
Normal
None
Progressive
Sporadic
Congenital rubella
Bilateral
Disciform or diffuse 
edema, no frank 
ulceration
Normal or 
elevated
Microphthalmos, 
cataract, pigment 
epithelial 
mottling
Stable, may clear
Sporadic
Neurotrophic – exposure
Unilateral or 
bilateral
Central ulcer
Normal
Lid anomalies, 
congenital sensory 
neuropathy
Progressive
Sporadic
M – Metabolic (rarely 
present at birth) 
(mucopolysaccharidoses 
IH, IS; mucolipidoses 
type IV)*
Bilateral
Diffuse haze, denser 
peripherally
Normal
Few
Progressive
Autosomal 
recessive
P – Posterior corneal 
defect
Unilateral or 
bilateral
Central, diffuse haze or 
vascularized leukoma
Normal or 
elevated
Anterior chamber 
cleavage syndrome
Stable; sometimes 
early clearing or 
vascularization
Sporadic, autosomal 
recessive
E – Endothelial dystrophy
Congenital hereditary 
endothelial dystrophy
Bilateral
Diffuse corneal edema, 
marked corneal 
thickening
Normal
None
Stable
Autosomal 
dominant or 
recessive
Posterior polymorphous 
dystrophy
Bilateral
Diffuse haze, normal 
corneal thickness
Normal
Occasional peripheral 
anterior synechiae
Slowly progressive
Autosomal 
dominant
Congenital hereditary stromal 
dystrophy
Bilateral
Flaky, feathery
stromal opacities; 
normal corneal 
thickness
Normal
None
Stable
Autosomal 
dominant
D – Dermoid
Unilateral or 
bilateral
White vascularized 
mass, hair, lipid arc
Normal
None
Stable
Sporadic
*Mucopolysaccharidosis IH, Hurler syndrome; mucopolysaccharidosis IS, Scheie syndrome.
From Nelson LB, Calhoun JH, Harley RD. Pediatric Ophthalmology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:210.
conjunctivitis, corneal trauma, and nasolacrimal duct obstruction 
(NLDO). Photophobia is observed in infants with corneal trauma, 
corneal deposits, cystinosis, and inflammation (uveitis). Corneal 
opacification can also be found in infants with corneal dystrophies, 
metabolic storage diseases such as mucopolysaccharidoses, and for­
ceps-related obstetric trauma.
The diagnosis of primary congenital glaucoma or secondary 
glaucoma is generally confirmed by performing an examination 
with the patient under anesthesia. The child needs to be quiet and 
very cooperative in order to get an accurate intraocular pressure 
reading and a careful examination of the cornea and anterior seg­
ment structures. The diagnosis rests on a constellation of abnormal 
ocular findings, including elevated intraocular pressure, corneal 
enlargement, increased axial length, anomalies of the drainage 
angle, and signs of damage to the optic nerve in conjunction with 
medical history.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
800
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
CHILDHOOD UVEITIS
Uveitis is defined as inflammation of the uveal tissue of the eye, 
which includes the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. Inflammation 
can involve any or all of these structures, and terms such as iritis 
(Fig. 43.15), iridocyclitis, choroiditis, and chorioretinitis are used to 
designate which portion of the uveal tissue is involved. Anatomic 
location such as anterior, posterior, intermediate, or panuveitis or 
associated with meningitis is useful in determining etiology (Table 
43.15). Masquerade syndromes such as lymphoma or leukemia can 
mimic uveitis since they can have a leukocyte response that can be 
mistaken for inflammation.
JIA (juvenile idiopathic arthritis) is the most common cause of 
childhood anterior uveitis. JIA uveitis is most common in the pauci­
articular form, when the onset occurs before the age of 7 years, and 
when the antinuclear antibody blood test is positive. Females are at 
higher risk than males; 10–15% of children with JIA develop uveitis 
and 10% of those who develop uveitis do so prior to the diagnosis 
of JIA. It is common for children with JIA to have no symptoms of 
inflammation in the eye. Despite the lack of symptoms, uveitis can 
cause severe vision loss due to the development of edema or depo­
sition of calcium (band keratopathy) in the cornea or retinal edema 
(Fig. 43.15). A cataract and/or glaucoma may result from inflamma­
tion in the eye or chronic use of steroids used to quiet the inflamma­
tion. The pupil may have an irregular shape as a result of adhesions to 
the underlying lens (posterior synechiae). Visual impairment occurs 
in up to 40% of children with JIA uveitis and blindness occurs in 10% 
of affected eyes. For this reason there are screening guidelines for the 
recommended frequency of eye exams based on the risk factors that 
predispose patients with JIA to uveitis including category of arthritis 
(oligoarthritis vs polyarthritis), age of onset of arthritis, presence of 
antinuclear antibody positivity, and duration of disease (Fig. 43.16).
The diagnosis of uveitis can be made from an eye examination. 
Because uveitis can be caused by infections, trauma, or autoimmune 
disorders and often is idiopathic, evaluation of the cause of the uveitis 
requires a thorough pediatric physical examination as well as supple­
mentary radiologic and laboratory testing. A chest radiograph may 
demonstrate tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. Serologic evaluation may 
include tests for syphilis, sarcoidosis, JIA, Lyme disease, herpes, mea­
sles, and toxoplasmosis. In males, haplotype testing for human leuko­
cyte antigen B27 may be indicated because of the association between 
iritis and pauciarticular arthritis that may later evolve into ankylosing 
spondylitis.
The management of iritis in children is the elimination of intra­
ocular inflammation. In some cases of noninfectious uveitis, local 
treatment with topical corticosteroid drops or periocular corticoste­
roid injections may control the inflammation. In many cases, local 
corticosteroids are not sufficient to control chronic uveitis. Immu­
nomodulatory agents such as oral corticosteroids and corticoste­
roid-sparing agents, including nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), antimetabolites, T-cell inhibitors, alkylating agents, and 
antitumor necrosis factor biologic agents, are options. Short courses 
of corticosteroids may be used, but corticosteroid-sparing drugs are 
the first-line therapy for long-term use due to the many side effects 
of corticosteroids. Biologic agents are commonly used in severe 
disease or when the child has not responded to NSAIDs. Mydriatic 
drops are used to prevent the formation of posterior synechiae.
Toxoplasmosis caused by the intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gon­
dii is the most common cause of posterior uveitis in children. Most 
ocular toxoplasmosis in the pediatric age group is probably acquired 
from the mother during pregnancy. In some instances, the infection 
is inactive at birth and goes unrecognized until inflammation occurs. 
Toxoplasmosis that is active at birth may result in widespread fetal 
tissue damage or may be associated with chorioretinitis, encephalo­
myelitis, and visceral disease. The diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is based 
on clinical findings, intracranial calcification in some children, and 
laboratory tests for specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immuno­
globulin M antibodies. Isolated ocular toxoplasmosis does not require 
TABLE 43.14  Differential Diagnosis of Enlarged Cornea
Anterior
Primary Infantile 
Simple Megalocornea
Megalophthalmos
Glaucoma with Buphthalmos
Inheritance
Autosomal dominant (?)
X-linked recessive (male preponderance)
Sporadic
Time of appearance
Congenital
Congenital
First year of life
Bilaterality
Bilateral
Bilateral
Unilateral or bilateral
Symmetric
Symmetric
Asymmetric
Natural history
Nonprogressive
Nonprogressive
Progressive
Symptoms
None
None
Photophobia, epiphora
Corneal clarity
Clear
Clear or mosaic dystrophy
Diffuse edema, tears in Descemet membrane
Intraocular pressure
Normal
Elevated in some adults
Elevated
Corneal diameter
13–18 mm
13–18 mm
13–18 mm
Corneal thickness
Normal
Normal
Thick
Keratometry
Normal
Normal; astigmatism
Flat
Gonioscopy
Normal
Excessive mesenchymal tissue
Excessive mesenchymal tissue
Globe diameter (A scan)
23–26 mm
23–26 mm
27–30 mm
Major ocular complications
None
Lens dislocation; cataract, <40 yr; secondary glaucoma
Optic disk damage, late corneal edema
Associated systemic disorders
None
Occasionally Marfan and other skeletal abnormalities
None consistent
From Nelson LB, Calhoun JH, Harley RD. Pediatric Ophthalmology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:201.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
801
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
TABLE 43.15  Differential Diagnosis and 
Etiology of Uveitis
Anterior Uveitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Trauma
Herpes
Syphilis
Lyme disease
Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis
Kawasaki syndrome
Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis syndrome
Enthesitis related arthritis
Orbital pseudotumor
Ulcerative colitis
Idiopathic
Intermediate Uveitis
Pars planitis
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Lyme disease
Idiopathic
Posterior Uveitis and Panuveitis
Toxoplasmosis
Toxocariasis
Herpes, rubella, rubeola, measles
Histoplasmosis
Syphilis
Sympathetic ophthalmia
Sarcoidosis
Bartonella
Candida albicans
Lyme disease
Familial juvenile systemic granulomatosis (Blau syndrome)
Diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis (DUSN)
Tuberous sclerosis
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
Behçet disease
Idiopathic
Uveo-Meningeal Syndromes
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease
Behçet
Sarcoidosis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Cat-scratch disease
Whipple disease
Syphilis
Lyme disease
Acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy
Lymphoma
Herpes simplex
Cytomegalovirus
From Basic and Clinical Science Course, Section 6. Ophthalmology 
and Strabismus. San Francisco: American Academy of Ophthalmology; 
2013–2014:268, Table 22-1.
Fig. 43.15  Ciliary flush associated with iritis. Note the straight, radially ori­
ented vessels extending out from the iris. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strate­
gies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:41.)
treatment unless it threatens vision. When treatment is indicated, it 
involves the use of one or more antimicrobial drugs. The most com­
mon therapy consists of combination therapy with pyrimethamine and 
sulfadiazine. Steroids may be given in combination with antibiotics. 
Intravitreal clindamycin with dexamethasone may be as effective as 
systemic therapies. Several other entities can simulate uveitis in chil­
dren and must be considered. These entities include retinoblastoma, 
leukemia, lymphoma, juvenile xanthogranuloma, and an intraocular 
foreign body.
NASOLACRIMAL PROBLEMS IN CHILDHOOD
The nasolacrimal system consists of tear-secreting glands and a drainage 
system. The lacrimal gland, located in the superotemporal orbit, is the 
primary producer of tears; accessory lacrimal glands in the upper eye­
lid supplement its output. The lacrimal drainage apparatus begins with 
puncta on the nasal aspect of the upper and lower eyelid margins. The 
puncta continue as canaliculi that course nasally to empty into the lacri­
mal sac. The lacrimal sac in turn drains inferiorly through the nasolacri­
mal duct just under the inferior turbinate in the nose (Fig. 43.17).
The most common developmental anomaly of the nasolacrimal 
drainage system is nasolacrimal duct obstruction (NLDO), which 
occurs in up to 20% of infants. A thin mucosal membrane at the dis­
tal end of the duct, the valve of Hasner, is the most common cause of 
obstruction. Typically, the infant has epiphora and a mucopurulent dis­
charge that causes matting of the eyelids beginning at about 1 month 
of age. Pressure applied to the lacrimal sac with a finger or cotton swab 
often results in reflux of cloudy fluid from the puncta. If infected, the 
source is usually polymicrobial, but a bacteriologic diagnosis is not 
necessary for clinical management. Eyelash washes with dilute baby 
shampoo can decrease the frequency of infections. Topical antibiot­
ics can be used to decrease purulence, but this likely leads to resistant 
organisms. Recurrent infections may be considered an indication for 
early probing. Lacrimal sac massage may push fluid through the muco­
sal membrane and thereby open the duct, but the pressure applied to 
the lacrimal sac needs to be forceful. Most NLDOs will spontaneously 
resolve. If resolution does not occur within the first year of life, probing 
of the duct can be done and is effective in 90% of cases. Effectiveness of 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
802
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
nasolacrimal duct probing decreases after the age of 18 months. A sil­
icon stent can be placed temporarily to maintain an open duct, which 
increases the success of long-term patency.
NLDO must be differentiated from atresia of the puncta or cana­
liculi causing tearing but not infection and lacrimal-cutaneous fistula 
causing tears to drain to the skin surface. These conditions require sur­
gery to re-form the canalicular system and puncta and repair the fistula 
if present. NLDO should be differentiated from infectious conjunctivi­
tis, especially gonococcal, chlamydial, and herpetic infections. Chronic 
tearing also occurs in congenital glaucoma in addition to blepharo­
spasm and photophobia.
A dacryocystocele is a variation of congenital NLDO that occurs in 
newborns. These infants present with a bluish mass in the naso-orbital 
region below the medial canthal tendon. This mass is a dilated lacrimal 
sac that has both distal obstruction from a membrane and proximal 
obstruction from a one-way valve effect from an incompetent valve of 
Rosenmüller (Fig. 43.18). A hemangioma or dermoid cyst may have 
a bluish hue, but hemangiomas typically do not present at birth. An 
encephalocele or dermoid cyst may also appear to be a bluish mass 
but will lie above the medial canthus. On occasion, the dilated sac is 
accompanied by bulging of the nasal mucosa at the distal end of the 
nasolacrimal duct. The nasal mucocele can compromise the infant’s 
breathing. Imaging may help determine the location of the medial can­
thus in the presence of swelling, confirm the suspected diagnosis, and 
evaluate for the presence of a nasal mucocele, which is important for 
surgical planning. If the dacryocystocele fails to resolve with topical 
antibiotics and massage, or if cellulitis develops, systemic antibiotics 
and surgical decompression must be considered. Decompression is 
accomplished by relieving the distal obstruction by probing the naso­
lacrimal duct, removing any nasal cyst, and possibly placing a stent.
RED EYE
The term red eye usually refers to inflammation of the conjunctiva that 
causes the eye to appear red. Much less commonly (and much more 
Systemic JIA, polyarthritis
[RF positive], enthesitis-
related arthritis
Oligoarthritis, polyarthritis
[RF negative], psoriatic,
and undifferentiated
ANA positive, JIA
age of onset < 7
years, and disease
duration ≤ 4 years
ANA negative, JIA
age of onset ≥ 7
years, or disease
duration > 4 years
Screen every 3 months
(high risk)
Screen every 6-12 months
(low or moderate risk)
Fig. 43.16  Ophthalmology screening recommendations. ANA, antinuclear antibody; JIA, juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis; RF, rheumatoid factor. (From Angeles-Han ST, Ringold S, Beukelman T, et al. 2019 American College 
of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation Guideline for the Screening, Monitoring, and Treatment of Juvenile 
Idiopathic Arthritis-Associated Uveitis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019;71(6):703–716.)
Fig. 43.18  Dacryocystocele of the left lacrimal sac in a 2-week-old 
infant. The dacryocystocele resolved with a probing of the left tear duct.
Lacrimal sac
Punctum
Canaliculus
Nasolacrimal duct
Inferior turbinate
Fig. 43.17  Anatomy of the nasolacrimal drainage system. (Modified 
from Rev Ophthalmol. 2001;8:122. Reprinted with permission from 
Jobson Publishing: New York.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
803
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
seriously), the sclera is injected. Causes of red eye include infection of 
the ocular surface (cornea, conjunctiva, and sclera), allergy, intraocular 
inflammation, glaucoma, foreign body, and trauma. Evaluation must 
be directed toward discerning whether a child’s red eye is caused by a 
benign condition that will spontaneously resolve (viral conjunctivitis) 
or easily be treated with topical medication (bacterial conjunctivitis) 
or whether the cause is potentially vision threatening (iritis, corneal 
ulceration, glaucoma) and requires urgent ophthalmologic evalua­
tion (Table 43.16). Signs that should raise concerns for a serious eti­
ology of red eye are in an immunocompromised host, severe pain, 
TABLE 43.16  The Red Eye
Condition
Cause
Signs/Symptoms
Treatment
Bacterial 
conjunctivitis
Haemophilus influenzae, H. influenzae 
aegyptius, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Yersinia species, cat-scratch bacillus 
less common
Mucopurulent unilateral or bilateral discharge, normal 
vision, photophobia usually absent
Conjunctival injection and edema (chemosis); gritty 
sensation
Topical antibiotics: systemic 
ceftriaxone for gonococcus, 
H. influenzae
Viral conjunctivitis
Adenovirus, ECHO virus, coxsackievirus, herpes 
simplex virus, coronavirus
As above; may be hemorrhagic, unilateral enlarged 
preauricular lymph nodes
Self-limited
Neonatal 
conjunctivitis
Chlamydia trachomatis, gonococcus, chemical 
(silver nitrate), S. aureus
Palpebral conjunctival follicle or papillae; as above
Ceftriaxone for gonococcus 
and oral erythromycin for C. 
trachomatis
Allergic 
conjunctivitis
Seasonal pollens or allergen exposure
Itching, incidence of bilateral chemosis (edema) greater 
than that of erythema, tarsal papillae
Antihistamines, steroids, 
cromolyn
Keratitis
Herpes simplex, adenovirus, S. pneumoniae, 
S. aureus, Pseudomonas species, 
Acanthamoeba species, chemicals
Severe pain, corneal swelling, clouding, limbus erythema, 
hypopyon, cataracts; contact lens history with amebic 
infection
Specific antibiotics for bacterial/
fungal infections; keratoplasty, 
acyclovir for herpes
Endophthalmitis
S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, Candida albicans, 
associated surgery or trauma
Acute onset, pain, loss of vision, swelling, chemosis, 
redness; hypopyon and vitreous haze
Antibiotics
Anterior uveitis 
(iridocyclitis)
JIA, reactive arthritis, sarcoidosis, Behçet 
disease, Kawasaki disease, inflammatory 
bowel disease
Unilateral/bilateral; erythema, ciliary flush (in circumcorneal 
area), irregular pupil, iris adhesions; pain, marked 
photophobia, small pupil, poor vision, no discharge
Topical steroids, plus therapy 
for primary disease
Posterior uveitis 
(choroiditis)
Toxoplasmosis, histoplasmosis, Toxocara canis
No sign of erythema, decreased vision, no discharge
Specific therapy for pathogen
Episcleritis/scleritis
Idiopathic autoimmune disease (e.g., SLE, 
Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Localized pain, intense erythema, unilateral; blood vessels 
bigger than in conjunctivitis; scleritis may cause globe 
perforation, no discharge
Episcleritis is self-limiting; 
topical steroids for fast relief
Foreign body
Occupational exposure
Unilateral, red, gritty feeling; visible or microscopic size
Irrigation, removal; check for 
ulceration
Blepharitis
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, seborrheic, blocked 
lacrimal duct: rarely, molluscum contagiosum, 
Pthirus pubis, Pediculosis capitis
Bilateral, irritation, itching, hyperemia, crusting, affecting 
lid margins
Topical antibiotics, warm 
compresses
Dacryocystitis
Obstructed lacrimal sac: S. aureus, H. 
influenzae, pneumococcus
Pain, tenderness, erythema and exudate in area of lacrimal 
sac (inferomedial to inner canthus); tearing (epiphora); 
possible orbital cellulitis
Systemic, topical antibiotics; 
surgical drainage
Dacryoadenitis
S. aureus, Streptococcus species, CMV, 
measles, EBV, enteroviruses, trauma, 
sarcoidosis, leukemia
Pain, tenderness, edema, erythema over gland area (upper 
temporal lid); fever, leukocytosis
Systemic antibiotics; drainage 
of orbital abscesses
Orbital cellulitis
Paranasal sinusitis: H. influenzae, S. aureus, S. 
pneumoniae, other Streptococcus species
Trauma: S. aureus
Fungi: Aspergillus, Mucor species if 
immunodeficient
Rhinorrhea, chemosis, vision loss, painful extraocular 
motion, proptosis, ophthalmoplegia, fever, lid edema, 
leukocytosis
S. aureus
Systemic antibiotics (postseptal 
cellulitis), drainage of orbital 
abscesses
Periorbital cellulitis
Trauma: S. aureus, Streptococcus species
Bacteremia: H. influenzae, pneumococci, S. 
pyogenes, S. aureus
Cutaneous erythema, warmth, normal vision, minimal 
involvement of orbit, fever, leukocytosis, toxic 
appearance
Systemic antibiotics (preseptal 
cellulitis)
CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ECHO, enteric cytopathogenic human orphan; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus.
Modified from Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998; with data from Rosenbaum 
JT, Nozik RA. Uveitis: many diseases, one diagnosis. Am J Med. 1985;79:545–547; Elkington AR, Khaw PT. The red eye. BMJ. 1988;296:1720–
1724; Wilhemus KR. The red eye. Infectious conjunctivitis, keratitis, endophthalmitis, and periocular cellulitis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1988;2:99–
116; Forrester JV. Uveitis: pathogenesis. Lancet. 1991;338:1498–1501; Gioliotti F. Acute conjunctivitis of childhood. Pediatr Ann. 1993;22:353–356.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
804
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
proptosis, limitation of eye movements, opacified cornea, abnormal 
pupil response, or lack of response to therapy.
In taking the history, the examiner should inquire about lateral­
ity, onset, associated illnesses, contact with others with “pink eye,” the 
presence of pain or itching, the characteristics of any discharge (watery, 
mucoid, purulent), and blurring of vision. The examination of the child 
should start with as precise a measurement of visual acuity as possible. 
The presence and type of discharge should be noted. Inspection of the 
surface of the eye with a penlight should determine whether the cornea 
is clear. Fluorescein staining of the cornea to assess for a corneal abra­
sion should be done. The red reflex should be checked. The presence of 
foreign bodies should be considered.
The most common cause of a red eye in a child is infectious con­
junctivitis (Table 43.17). Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most fre­
quent bacterial pathogen, followed by some Haemophilus species 
and Moraxella. However, infections from Haemophilus species have 
decreased because of immunization. In hospitalized patients, staph­
ylococcal infections (including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus) are more common. A bacterial culture is not necessary in 
mild cases of suspected bacterial conjunctivitis because the infection 
tends to be self-limiting but may last up to 2 weeks. Treatment with a 
broad-spectrum topical antibiotic may relieve symptoms and shorten 
the course of infection, allowing the child to return to school or day­
care. Topical antibiotic options include trimethoprim–polymyxin B, 
erythromycin, gentamicin or tobramycin, ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, 
gatifloxacin, azithromycin, and sulfacetamide. Sulfacetamide prepara­
tions are inexpensive but have a narrower range of effectiveness and 
cause a great deal of stinging. Sulfa drugs also have an association with 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Gentamicin can cause redness, which 
can cause difficulty in determining whether or not the conjunctivitis 
is treated. The aminoglycosides are less effective with gram-positive 
organisms, particularly streptococcal species. Trimethoprim sulfate/
polymyxin B is bacteriostatic and a 7–10-day course of therapy is rec­
ommended. The fluoroquinolones are rapidly effective but have differ­
ent dosing recommendations. Azithromycin has a very short course. 
Steroid-antibiotic combinations should be avoided because of the risk 
of worsening a bacterial corneal ulcer or an unsuspected herpes sim­
plex infection.
Viral conjunctivitis tends to be associated with a watery or mucoid 
discharge. Follicles may be visible with low magnification on the pal­
pebral conjunctiva, and a preauricular lymph node can often be pal­
pated. Adenovirus is a common pathogen; epidemic outbreaks are 
frequent. In children as old as 2 years, adenovirus can manifest with 
severe periorbital edema and erythema that mimics bacterial preseptal 
or orbital cellulitis; a conjunctival pseudomembrane is common in this 
setting. Adenovirus types 8, 19, and 35; enterovirus 70; and coxsackie 
24 are associated with subconjunctival hemorrhages or hemorrhagic 
conjunctivitis. Pharyngoconjunctival fever, conjunctivitis accompa­
nied by a sore throat and fever, is associated with adenovirus types 
3 and 7. Cultures are not usually necessary but can be performed if 
there is a question of etiology. Antibiotics are ineffective in adenovirus 
infections. Treatment is largely supportive, with cool compresses and 
artificial tears providing symptomatic relief. Adenovirus is highly con­
tagious so careful attention to hygiene should be taken among family 
members, caregivers, and contacts to prevent the spread of infection.
Less frequent causes of viral conjunctivitis are herpes simplex and 
varicella. These may be associated with vesicular involvement of the 
eyelid and face. Treatment with oral antiviral medications can be used 
if lesions are very near the cornea or there is corneal involvement. 
Oral antivirals are also considered in individuals who are immuno­
compromised. Topical antivirals are also used in patients with corneal 
involvement. Topical corticosteroid medications are contraindicated in 
TABLE 43.17  Conjunctivitis: Differential Diagnosis
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Cause
Unilateral or Bilateral
Discharge
Lids
Onset/Course
Treatment
Viral* (usually 
adenovirus)
Bilateral
Thin, mucoid
Follicular
Gradual
Upper respiratory tract infection?
Preauricular adenopathy
Compresses
Herpes simplex
Unilateral
Thin, mucoid
Follicular
Gradual
Keratitis
Dendritic ulcer
Acyclovir
Bacterial
Unilateral or bilateral
Purulent
Papillary, purulent
Gradual
Topical antibiotics
Gonococcal
Unilateral
Purulent
Edema, inflamed
Hyperacute
Systemic antibiotics
Chlamydial
Unilateral or bilateral
Thin, mucoid
Follicular
Indolent
Persistent
Neonatal period
Sexually active
Oral erythromycin any 
age or tetracycline 
(>10 yr of age)
Allergic
Bilateral
Watery
Papillary
Gradual
Seasonal
Pruritic
Topical vasoconstrictors
Systemic antihistamine
Topical steroids
Vernal
Bilateral
Watery
Giant papillary
Adolescence
Seasonal
Cromolyn?
Contact lens irritation
Bilateral
Watery
Giant papillary
Lenses
Adjust lens
Change solution
Chemical
Unilateral or bilateral
Watery
Variable
Acute
Irrigate
Remove irritant
*Undifferentiated viral conjunctivitis, not caused by herpes virus infection.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:46.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
805
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
herpetic infections because of the potential for worsening the infec­
tion. However, the ophthalmologist often uses topical steroids to con­
trol inflammation after the viral infection has been treated.
The DNA poxvirus Molluscum contagiosum can cause a chronic 
conjunctivitis when lesions are located on the eyelid margin (Fig. 
43.19). The conjunctivitis is caused by release of poxvirus particles into 
the tear film. Additional waxy, umbilicated lesions are oftentimes found 
elsewhere on the face. The infection may be self-limited, but treatment 
of more severe cases requires incision and debridement of the central 
core from each lesion.
Allergic conjunctivitis manifests with a bilateral watery or mucoid 
discharge and must always be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of bilateral red eyes. The child may rub the eyes because of pruritus; 
nasal allergic symptoms may also be present. About 80% of individuals 
with allergies have ocular symptoms and these may occur in isolation. 
A more severe form of allergic conjunctivitis, vernal keratoconjuncti­
vitis (VKC), tends to occur in males in the first 2 decades of life and 
is seasonal, occurring in the spring and fall. Ulceration of the cornea 
can occur. Usually the ulceration is sterile but it can impair vision. 
Treatment of allergic conjunctivitis includes topical antihistamines, 
mast cell stabilizers, or a combination of the two. Systemic treatment of 
allergies often improves the ocular symptoms. In severe cases of aller­
gic conjunctivitis or VKC, steroids or cyclosporines can be used.
Systemic syndromes must also be considered in a child with a 
red eye. In Stevens-Johnson syndrome, conjunctival inflammation is 
associated with other mucous membrane or cutaneous involvement. 
This disease can have severe ophthalmic consequences as a result of 
conjunctival scarring, changes of the eyelid position, and dry eye syn­
drome. Kawasaki syndrome is a febrile illness of young children who 
frequently manifest bilateral nonpurulent conjunctival injection and, 
in rare cases, iritis. Similarly, self-limited conjunctivitis can also be 
seen in COVID-19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children (MIS-C) and COVID-19 infections. Ophthalmic consultation 
may be indicated to assist in the diagnosis and management of children 
with Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
EYELID ABNORMALITIES
Congenital abnormalities of the eyelids can be severe as in the case of 
cryptophthalmos, in which there is a failure of differentiation of eyelid 
structures and the skin passes uninterrupted from the forehead to the 
cheek. This is often associated with corneal abnormalities and systemic 
abnormalities. Colobomas of the eyelid can occur and are usually on 
the upper lid and can range in severity from a notch to the entire length 
of the eyelid. Eyelid colobomas are often associated with Goldenhar 
and CHARGE (coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, retardation, 
and ear abnormalities) syndromes. Surgery can be done to reconstruct 
the eyelids. More common eyelid abnormalities include entropion 
(inward turning of the eyelid margin), ectropion (eversion of the eye­
lid margin), epiblepharon (in which a horizontal fold of skin in the 
lower eyelid causes the lashes to rub against the cornea), and distichi­
asis (in which an accessory row of eyelashes is more posterior than the 
normal ones and can rub against the cornea). All these may resolve 
spontaneously or, if necessary, can be corrected with eyelid surgery. 
Epiblepharon tends to be well tolerated by patients. Epicanthus, a cres­
cent-shaped fold of skin, is usually most prominent in the upper eyelid 
that can make the child appear esotropic by obscuring the underlying 
nasal sclera.
Congenital ptosis (Fig. 43.20A), droopiness of the upper eyelid, is 
usually caused by abnormal development of the levator muscle. Other 
causes in children are trauma, congenital third nerve palsy, and congen­
ital Horner syndrome. Acute onset of ptosis in the absence of trauma 
requires evaluation for new-onset Horner syndrome, which may be 
associated with neuroblastoma, and evaluation for a third nerve palsy, 
which may be associated with an intracranial mass. A child with con­
genital ptosis needs to be monitored for deprivational amblyopia due 
to the eyelid occluding their visual axis. Also, these children are at risk 
of refractive amblyopia since they commonly have refractive errors. 
Treatment of ptosis is delayed until the child is several years old unless 
it is causing amblyopia due to occlusion of the visual axis or astigma­
tism that is difficult to treat with glasses, or when severe chin-up head 
posture is necessary to allow the child to see (Fig. 43.20B). Surgical cor­
rection consists of resection of the levator muscle or suspension of the 
upper eyelid to the frontalis muscle with a silicon sling or autogenous 
or cadaveric fascia lata.
A diagnostic approach to congenital and acquired ptosis is noted in 
Figs. 43.22 and 43.23, respectively.
ORBITAL TUMORS
Orbital tumors, either benign or malignant, may occur in children. 
The space-occupying lesions can present with proptosis, swelling or 
Fig. 43.19  Chronic eczematoid and follicular conjunctivitis in only the 
left eye, caused by Molluscum contagiosum, in a 5-year-old. Note the 
elevated lesions on the lateral aspect of the left upper eyelid.
A
B
Fig. 43.20  A, Congenital ptosis of the right upper eyelid. B, The child 
adopted a compensatory chin-up head posture to allow use of both 
eyes together and did not have amblyopia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
806
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
discoloration of the eyelids, ptosis, or strabismus. Some of the most 
common benign tumors are vascular lesions. Hemangiomas occur in 
1–3% of term newborns and are more common in premature infants. 
Hemangiomas are classified by depth of skin involvement and type 
of orbital involvement. The natural history involves rapid prolifer­
ation over the first several months of life. Ulceration, hemorrhage, 
and occlusion or induced astigmatism of the eye causing amblyopia 
(Fig. 43.21) can occur. After the first year of life, the lesion begins to 
regress. Systemic diseases such as PHACE syndrome (posterior fossa 
malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, coarctation of the 
aorta and cardiac defects, eye abnormalities) and multiple cutaneous 
hemangiomas with hepatic hemangiomas may have an orbital or eye­
lid hemangioma as the presenting finding. First-line treatment consists 
of oral propranolol 1–3 mg/kg/day divided into three oral doses. Side 
effects include bradycardia, hypoglycemia, hypotension, somnolence, 
bronchospasm, and cough. Treatment initiation is done under medical 
supervision and care is taken to administer the medicine with feeds to 
limit the side effects. Topical timolol maleate may be used with mini­
mal side effects for superficial skin lesions but is not effective in deeper 
or orbital lesions. A pulsed dye laser can also be used to treat the super­
ficial lesions.
Lymphangiomas may cause proptosis. Most commonly these pres­
ent in the second or third decade but may present in infancy. The size 
may increase with the onset of an upper respiratory infection. Lymph­
angiomas are usually managed conservatively but short courses of 
steroids can be used. Rapid expansion may occur if bleeding into the 
lesion occurs. This may require surgical intervention if the pressure in 
the orbit is threatening damage to the optic nerve.
Dermoid cysts are benign choristomas that arise from primitive 
dermal elements that develop in fetal suture lines. This tissue forms a 
keratinized epithelium cyst and includes hair follicles, sweat glands, 
and sebaceous glands. It most commonly occurs superotemporally in 
the zygomatic frontal suture but may be superonasal in the frontal-­
nasal suture. Imaging can be valuable in confirming the diagnosis and 
determining if the dermoid extends into the orbit. If the cyst ruptures, 
a marked inflammatory reaction ensues, so removal is recommended 
prior to the child becoming very active, which increases the chances 
of the child rupturing the cyst traumatically.
Malignant tumors of the orbit can rapidly enlarge, which makes 
them difficult to differentiate from inflammatory and infectious 
causes. Rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common primary pediat­
ric orbital tumor. Average age of onset is 5–7 years. Usually the tumor 
arises in the orbit but it can arise in the conjunctiva, eyelid, or uveal tis­
sue. Patients present with rapidly progressing proptosis. Tumors need 
to be removed completely and chemotherapy or radiation may also be 
needed.
Neuroblastoma is the most common metastatic orbital tumor of 
childhood. It usually arises from the adrenal gland or sympathetic gan­
glion chain, hence the association with acquired Horner syndrome. 
Unilateral or bilateral proptosis and eyelid ecchymosis are the classic 
B
A
Fig. 43.21  A, A capillary hemangioma of the right upper eyelid and ante­
rior orbit. This lesion necessitated treatment because it was causing 
amblyopia from astigmatism as a result of pressure against the globe 
and by occlusion of the visual axis. B, This capillary hemangioma of 
the left lower eyelid is not causing amblyopia and does not necessitate 
treatment unless it grows substantially.
No other signs
Idiopathic
congenital
ptosis
Malformation
syndromes
Inability to move
the eyes in one
or more directions
Congenital
fibrosis
Extraocular
muscles
Gonadal dysgenesis, webbed neck, shield chest
Turner syndrome
Heart and chest anomalies, webbed neck
Noonan syndrome
Underdeveloped external genitalia, post-axial polydactyly,
pre- and postnatal microcephaly
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
Distinctive facial features, broadening of the thumbs and big toes
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Congenital
myasthenic
syndromes
Congenital
facial
palsy
With facial palsy
Duane
retraction
syndrome
Absent horizontal
eye movements
Globe retraction
Narrowing of
palpebral fissure
Blepharophimosis
Ptosis epicanthus
Inversus syndrome
Narrowing of the
eye opening
Droopy eyelids
Upward fold of the
inner lower eyelids
Marcus-
Gunn
syndrome
Synkinetic
phenomenon
Unilaterally ptotic
eyelid elevated with
jaw winking
Horner
syndrome
Ipsilateral globe
miosis and
anhidrosis
Ocular and
limb muscles
involvement
Congenital ptosis
Fig. 43.22  Flow chart outlining congenital types of ptosis. (From Pavone P, Cho YC, Pratico AD, et al. Ptosis 
in childhood: a clinical sign of several disorders. Medicine. 2018 Sep;97[36]:e12124, Fig. 8A.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
807
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
presentations. Opsoclonus (rapid, multidirectional eye movements) is 
a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with neuroblastoma and is not 
related to orbital involvement. The mean age of diagnosis of orbital 
metastasis of neuroblastoma is 2 years.
Other, less common orbital tumors in childhood are Ewing sar­
coma, Burkitt lymphoma, leukemia, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. 
Ewing sarcoma is the second most common solid tumor metastatic to 
the orbit (after neuroblastoma). Orbital involvement occurs in 1–2% 
of children with leukemia and this must be differentiated from orbital 
infections.
Nonspecific Orbital Inflammation/Idiopathic Orbital 
Inflammation/Orbital Pseudotumor
Nonspecific orbital inflammation (NSOI) is an acute or subacute 
benign idiopathic inflammatory process associated with multiple 
orbital structures. After thyroid-associated disease and lymphoprolif­
erative disorders, it is the third most common noninfectious masslike 
inflammatory lesion of the orbit. It is unilateral in ∼75% of patients who 
often present with periorbital edema, blepharoptosis, limited extra­
ocular motion, pain, proptosis, conjunctival injection, or decreased 
visual acuity. There are five subtypes involving specific orbit tissues: 
dacryoadenitis (Fig. 43.24), myositis (Fig. 43.25), anterior orbit (Fig. 
43.26), orbit apex (optic nerve) (Fig. 43.27), and diffuse. There is an 
association with IgG4-related disease, which may also manifest with 
inflammation and fibrosis in extraorbital tissue (pancreas, retroperito­
neal); systemic IgG4-related disease is more common in patients with 
bilateral lacrimal gland involvement.
The differential diagnosis of NSOI includes sarcoidosis, granulo­
matosis with polyangiitis, lymphoma, and thyroid orbitopathy. Biopsy 
is not initially needed for patients with a typical presentation (usually 
myositis) or a higher risk (orbital apex-optic nerve). Therapy is usually 
initiated with systemic corticosteroids.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Neurologic Disease
Ocular abnormalities frequently accompany neurologic disease, and 
their detection can help in the localization and diagnosis of a specific 
condition. Abnormal findings of pupillary reaction, decreased visual 
acuity, or decreased color vision can indicate abnormities of the optic 
nerve, which can be associated with other neurologic conditions. An 
afferent pupillary defect is an important finding that may signify uni­
lateral optic nerve disease. The condition may be intrinsic to the optic 
Chronic
Acute
Progressive
bilateral
Bilateral ptosis
CPEO
Oculo-pharyngeal
muscular dystrophy
Miller-Fischer
syndrome
Botulin
infection
Bell palsy
Ophthalmoplegia
migraine
3rd cranial
nerve palsy
KSS
Retinitis pigmentosa
Heart-block
PMPS
Sideroblastic anemia
Pancreatic dysfunction
MELAS
Lactic acidosis
SANDO
Sensory ataxia
Dysarthria
Ophthalmoplegia
Other disorders
With muscle
involvement
Spinocerebellar degeneration
Refsum disease
Abetalipoproteinemia
Swallowing anomalies
Proximal limb weakness
Nuclear aggregates
in muscles
Ataxia
Areflexia
Dysphagia
Dyspraxia
Dysarthria
Hemifacial
paralysis
Lagophthalmos
Migraine
Strabismus
Dyslexia
Acquired ptosis
Fig. 43.23  Flow chart outlining acquired types of ptosis. CPEO, chronic progressive external ophthalmo­
plegia; KSS, Kearns-Sayre syndrome; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike 
episodes; PMPS, Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome; SANDO, sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria, and 
ophthalmoparesis. (From Pavone P, Cho YC, Pratico AD, et al. Ptosis in childhood: a clinical sign of several 
disorders. Medicine. 2018 Sep;97[36]:e12124, Fig. 8B.)
Fig. 43.24  Noncontrast axial CT study exhibiting right acute dacryoad­
enitis with inflammation adjacent to the lateral orbital wall and lateral 
rectus muscle. (From Maamari RN, Couch SM. Nonspecific orbital 
inflammation. Adv Ophthalmol Optom. 2018;3[1]:315–335, Fig. 3.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
808
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
nerve such as a glioma in neurofibromatosis type 1, extrinsic such as 
an orbital tumor, applying pressure on the nerve, or inflammation of 
the optic nerve as seen with optic neuritis in MS, neuromyelitis optica, 
and ADEM. Color perception and the visual acuity of the affected eye 
are usually reduced in comparison with that of the normal eye. The 
presence of an afferent pupillary defect necessitates a comprehensive 
eye examination and imaging studies of the orbit and brain.
Optic nerve edema (Fig. 43.28) is a worrisome sign because of its 
association with conditions that cause increased intracranial pressure. 
A
B
Fig. 43.25  Left superior rectus myositis in a 16-year-old boy. Ptosis 
(A) and pain limitation of upgaze with diplopia were the presenting 
signs; this was due to left superior rectus myositis shown as a thick­
ened muscle complex on CT scan (B). (Patient from the University of 
British Columbia.) (From Lambert SR, Lyons CJ, eds. Taylor & Hoyt’s 
Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2017:277, Fig. 30-8.)
Fig. 43.26  Bilateral anterior orbital nonspecific orbital inflammation. 
Contrast-enhanced, T1-weighted, coronal MRI with fat suppression 
demonstrating bilateral scleritis and enhancement of the Tenon space. 
Dilated fundus examination also revealed bilateral choroidal effusions. 
(From Maamari RN, Couch SM. Nonspecific orbital inflammation. Adv 
Ophthalmol Optom. 2018;3[1]:315–335, Fig. 6.)
Fig. 43.27  Nonspecific orbital inflammation involving the orbital apex. 
Contrast-enhanced, T1-weighted, axial MRI with fat suppression show­
ing inflammatory tissue at the left orbital apex resulting in compression 
and obliteration of the optic nerve. (From Maamari RN, Couch SM. Non­
specific orbital inflammation. Adv Ophthalmol Optom. 2018;3[1]:315–
335 [Fig. 7, p. 322].)
A
B
Fig. 43.28  Right (A) and left (B) fundi showing acute papilledema. (From 
Lambert SR, Lyons CJ, eds. Hoyt and Taylor Pediatric Ophthalmology 
and Strabismus. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:593, Fig. 55.1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
809
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
The elevation of the optic nerve and blurring of the disk margins must 
be differentiated from optic nerve drusen, which can have similar 
clinical appearances. Autofluorescent photography and ultrasound 
(B-scan) of the optic nerves can help differentiate optic nerve edema 
and optic nerve drusen. Papilledema, swelling of the optic nerve as 
a result of increased intracranial pressure, is almost always bilateral. 
Visual acuity may be normal initially but decreases with chronic or 
severe optic nerve swelling. Color vision may be decreased prior to a 
decrease in visual acuity.
Strabismus of truly acute onset is most often incomitant and 
caused by paralysis of extraocular muscles innervated by the third or 
sixth cranial nerves. Cranial trauma, brain tumors, and viral infections 
are the most common causes of acute, incomitant strabismus in chil­
dren. A sixth nerve palsy is of less localizing value than a third nerve 
palsy because of the more tortuous intracranial course of the sixth 
nerve. This nerve can be affected by direct pressure from a mass and 
indirectly by conditions that cause diffuse increased intracranial pres­
sure. A patient with an acute sixth nerve paralysis typically has esotro­
pia that increases when they gaze toward the affected side (see Fig. 
43.8). The patient may have a compensatory face turn toward the side 
of the lesion to allow fusion and prevent diplopia. A third nerve paral­
ysis usually causes exotropia and hypotropia of the involved eye (Fig. 
43.29). There may also be ipsilateral ptosis and a dilated, nonreactive 
pupil. A verbal child will typically complain of diplopia at the onset. A 
general approach to an acquired diplopia is noted in Fig. 43.30.
The neurocutaneous syndromes are a group of inherited dis­
orders featuring multiple, discrete lesions of two or more organ 
systems, most commonly the skin and brain. These include 
neurofibromatosis, 
tuberous 
sclerosis, 
angiomatosis 
of 
the 
retina and cerebellum (von Hippel–Lindau disease), and encephalo­
facial or encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis (Sturge-Weber syndrome). 
Sometimes ataxia-telangiectasia, incontinentia pigmenti, and race­
mose angioma are included in neurocutaneous syndromes. Ocular 
involvement is common and may be a site of comorbidity or may 
serve as a marker for the overall condition. Lisch nodules are benign 
tan, smooth-surfaced lesions on the iris surface that look somewhat 
gelatinous and are seen in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1). They are 
usually not present until 3 years and thereafter about 10% of patients 
develop Lisch nodules per year. They do not have malignant potential. 
Other ocular features of NF-1 are plexiform neurofibromas of the eye­
lid that give the eyelid margin a sigmoid shape and cause a variable 
amount of ptosis, astigmatism, and possibly amblyopia. Glaucoma is a 
significant problem in patients with NF-1. It is usually unilateral and 
associated with an ipsilateral plexiform neurofibroma of the upper eye­
lid. This is generally managed surgically. Visual prognosis in patients 
who develop glaucoma is poor.
Optic gliomas, such as low-grade pilocytic astrocytomas, have the 
potential to cause severe vision loss in patients with NF-1. The gliomas 
can involve one or both optic nerves as well as the optic chiasm. They 
are found prospectively in 15% of patients with NF-1 but cause visual 
symptoms such as vision loss or proptosis in only 1–5% of patients. 
Treatment of optic gliomas is reserved for lesions that are documented 
to be growing and causing visual morbidity, although it is difficult to 
determine which patients require treatment before vision loss occurs. 
NF-2 is much less common than NF-1 and involves primarily the 
acoustic nerves. Ocular involvement can consist of posterior lens opac­
ities and hamartomas of the retina.
Tuberous sclerosis is an autosomal dominant disorder localized 
to chromosome 9. In children with tuberous sclerosis, angiofibromas 
of the eyelids and retinal lesions known as astrocytic hamartomas can 
occur but rarely cause significant problems with vision. The retinal 
lesions are not pathognomonic of tuberous sclerosis, inasmuch as sim­
ilar lesions have been reported in NF-1 and in unaffected individuals.
Von Hippel–Lindau disease is autosomal dominant. Both benign 
and malignant tumors can occur in affected individuals as a result of a 
variant in a tumor suppressor gene. Hemangioblastomas of the retina 
can produce a lipid exudate in the retina as a result of leakage from 
the thin vessel walls. This can lead to vision loss and ultimately a reti­
nal detachment. Symptoms of vision loss do not occur until extensive 
leakage or retinal detachment occurs. More than 65% of lesions can 
be treated effectively with laser photocoagulation. Because lesions are 
most effectively treated prior to the development of symptoms, chil­
dren known to have von Hippel–Lindau disease should have regular 
eye examinations beginning at the age of 5 years.
Sturge-Weber syndrome results from a somatic pathologic genetic 
variant in GNAQ. Ocular involvement is common. Abnormalities of 
the ocular circulation can occur when the eyelids are affected. These 
abnormalities range from increased conjunctival vascularity to angio­
mas of the choroid. Choroidal angiomas usually remain asymptomatic 
in childhood but can thicken in adolescence and cause degeneration 
of the overlying retina. Glaucoma is the most serious ocular complica­
tion and occurs in 70% of affected patients. Regular eye examinations 
in infancy are necessary to rule out glaucoma. Treatment of glaucoma 
associated with Sturge-Weber syndrome may be difficult. Topical drops 
may be effective in initially lowering eye pressure, but the patient may 
eventually require surgical intervention.
Ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome is an autosomal recessive disor­
der. Oculomotor abnormalities may be early manifestations of this syn­
drome. In 90% of patients, telangiectasia develops in the conjunctiva in 
children between the ages of 3 and 5 years.
Incontinentia pigmenti syndrome is an X-linked dominant con­
dition in which proliferative retinal vasculopathy develops in about 
30% of affected patients. The retinal changes can mimic ROP with 
Fig. 43.29  Left third cranial nerve palsy. The boy has exotropia (top), 
limitation of adduction of his left eye (middle), and normal gaze to his 
left (bottom).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
810
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
incomplete peripheral retinal vascularization. Retinal detachment can 
occur. Treatment includes laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy, but 
these treatments have varying degrees of success.
In Wyburn-Mason syndrome, an arteriovenous malformation 
syndrome can affect the retina with shunting of blood directly from 
arteries to veins. Vision can be normal or markedly reduced, depend­
ing on the location of the lesion.
Dermatologic Disease
Albinism is a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders resulting 
from absence of melanin in the eye, skin, or both. Clinically, albinism 
is divided into ocular and oculocutaneous forms. Oculocutaneous 
albinism (OCA) results from variants in the tyrosinase gene (TYR) 
or OCA1 gene. There are two subtypes and hair color can range from 
blond to light brown as the most prevalent type of albinism worldwide. 
Ocular albinism is autosomal recessive or an X-linked gene variant in 
the OCA1 gene. Ocular albinism mainly affects pigmentation in the 
visual system and the most common ocular finding is iris transillu­
mination, which may be observable in a darkened room by placing a 
penlight against the lower eyelid and noting the red reflex and passage 
of light from both the pupil and the iris. Other frequent ocular find­
ings are nystagmus, light fundus pigmentation (blonde fundus), foveal 
hypoplasia, and high refractive errors. Visual acuity usually ranges 
from 20/40 to 20/400. The Chédiak-Higashi and Hermansky-Pudlak 
syndromes can manifest features of albinism. If either of these condi­
tions is suspected, hematologic consultation is recommended because 
of the lethal nature of these forms of albinism. All patients with OCA 
are at an increased risk of skin cancer and should be counseled as such.
Suspect 3rd nerve
palsy or
myasthenia gravis
Suspect myasthenia
gravis
Suspect thyroid
myopathy
Binocular diplopia
Suspect cranial neuropathy,
internuclear ophthalmoplegia,
skew deviation
Suspect increased ICP
Suspect orbital
fracture
Is there associated
ptosis?
Does diplopia resolve when
1 eye is occluded?
Is diplopia variable?
Does diplopia worsen
during the day?
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Monocular diplopia
Problem with contact
lenses, spectacles,
or eye
May be psychogenic
NO
Is there proptosis,
lid edema, lid lag,
or lid retraction?
Are there associated
neurologic signs?
Is there a history of
facial trauma?
Fig. 43.30  General approach to diplopia. The clinician should first distinguish monocular from binocular dip­
lopia and, in patients with binocular diplopia, address the five questions on the right side of the figure. Only 
then should the clinician identify which muscle is weak, although this is unnecessary if the clinician already 
suspects myasthenia (from fatigability) or full third nerve palsy (from weakness of the medial rectus, superior 
rectus, inferior rectus, and inferior oblique muscles, with or without a dilated pupil). Uncommon causes of 
diplopia and associated ptosis, not presented in the figure, are botulism, the Miller-Fisher variant of Guil­
lain-Barré syndrome, and aberrant regeneration of the third nerve. Uncommon causes of diplopia and associ­
ated orbital findings (e.g., proptosis) are carotid-cavernous fistula (which causes an orbital bruit), orbital tumor, 
and pseudotumor. ICP, intracranial pressure. (From McGee S. Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012:522, Fig. 57-1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
811
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
Stevens-Johnson syndrome is an acute inflammatory condition 
affecting skin and mucous membranes. Drugs, particularly sulfon­
amide medications, are common precipitating factors. Microbial 
agents, especially Mycoplasma pneumoniae, have also been implicated 
in this condition. Ocular involvement, which occurs in half of the 
patients, consists of eyelid edema and ulceration, conjunctival injec­
tion with vesicle formation, and, in severe cases, conjunctival scar for­
mation that may result in adhesions between the palpebral and bulbar 
conjunctiva (symblepharon). The severity of late ocular complications 
depends primarily on the extent of conjunctival involvement. Malposi­
tion of the eyelids with corneal irritation from inward-turned eyelashes 
(trichiasis) can occur from severe conjunctival scarring. The most seri­
ous complication is dry eye syndrome, caused by damage to the ducts 
of the lacrimal glands and obliteration of conjunctival mucus-forming 
cells (goblet cells). Eyelid surgery may be required, and the child with a 
dry eye may face a lifetime of needing ocular lubrication from artificial 
tears and ointments. Aggressive lubrication during the acute phase of 
the disease is recommended to keep tissues moist and prevent con­
junctival adhesions. Treatments may include regular debridement of 
the fornices of the eye or placement of symblepharon rings or amniotic 
membranes in severe cases.
Hyperkeratotic disorders such as lamellar ichthyosis can cause 
scaling of the eyelids, ectropion, lagophthalmos, and exposure kera­
topathy. Although eyelid surgery may be required, the mainstay of 
treatment is ocular lubrication with artificial tears and ointments. Con­
nective tissue disorders such as Marfan syndrome, Stickler syndrome, 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) are 
associated with particular ocular abnormalities. Patients with Stick­
ler syndrome, Marfan syndrome, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have 
myopic retinal degeneration and can develop retinal detachment. Lens 
subluxation is common in Marfan syndrome. Cracks in the Bruch 
membrane of the retina, known as angioid streaks, occur in 85% of 
patients with PXE, and 70% of these patients experience vision loss 
from hemorrhage, extension into the macula, choroidal sclerosis, and 
atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium. Angioid streaks rarely occur 
before the second decade of life.
Skin disorders causing neoplasia such as juvenile xanthogranu­
loma can affect the eye, sometimes even in the absence of typical skin 
lesions. Ocular complications from juvenile xanthogranuloma occur 
most commonly in infants and consist of nodular tumors of the iris 
and ciliary body. The iris lesions have thin-walled vessels that are prone 
to bleeding and to causing a hyphema. Glaucoma and iridocyclitis can 
also occur. The iris lesions may respond to topical corticosteroids.
Hematologic Disorders
The hemoglobinopathies can have direct ocular consequences. 
Patients with hemoglobin SC or S thalassemia are more prone to retinal 
vascular occlusive disease because of a higher hematocrit and greater 
blood viscosity than are patients with hemoglobin SS, but retinal com­
plications are frequently not seen until adolescence or early adulthood. 
Patients develop hemorrhages, angioid streaks, and arterial occlusions. 
Patients with sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait are at higher risk of 
complications of trauma, particularly hyphema. These patients may 
develop glaucoma, optic nerve damage, and artery occlusion in this 
setting and require close monitoring.
Leukemia in children is usually acute. All ocular structures may 
be affected by direct infiltration of leukemic cells, hemorrhage, or 
infection. Conjunctival thickening, hypopyon, corneal ulcers, iris 
infiltrates, retinal hemorrhages, and neovascularization may occur. 
Infiltration of the optic nerve can be difficult to distinguish from pap­
illedema secondary to CNS relapse. Infectious processes may pres­
ent with similar findings as leukemia and can be difficult to discern 
from leukemic infiltrates. Papilledema and intraocular infection are 
true emergencies as the findings not only threaten vision but also are 
highly correlated with CNS involvement. Prompt diagnosis and treat­
ment are necessary.
Congenital Heart Disease
Eye disease can be related to congenital heart disease by associa­
tion, which is not surprising because there is a temporal relation­
ship between the embryogenesis of the heart and that of the eyes; an 
embryopathic insult may result in malformations of both systems. 
CHARGE syndrome is a result of a pathologic genetic variant in the 
CHD7 transcription regulator of tissue-specific genes. The effects are 
tissue and developmental stage dependent. Colobomas of the eyelid, 
iris, retina, choroid, and optic nerve occur. They are usually bilateral 
and the effects on vision are determined by the extent of the colo­
boma. If the macula is involved, the visual prognosis is poor. Con­
genital heart disease can be a cause of eye disease as a direct effect 
of complications such as cyanosis or systemic hypertension. Severe 
hypoxia can cause cortical visual impairment or damage to the optic 
nerve resulting in optic atrophy.
Gastrointestinal Disorders
Ocular manifestations of inherited metabolic abnormalities of the gas­
trointestinal system occur primarily in the cornea and retina. Wilson 
disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabolism. The 
excess copper is deposited in the liver, basal ganglia, cornea, and kid­
ney. Liver damage and neurologic and psychiatric disorders result at 
a young age. The deposition of copper in the Descemet membrane of 
the cornea creates the Kayser-Fleischer ring, which is pathognomonic 
of the disease. Copper may also be deposited in the lens. The corneal 
deposition of copper is not generally symptomatic, but lens deposition 
may adversely affect vision.
Alagille syndrome, an autosomal dominant condition with intra­
hepatic bile duct hypoplasia, is associated with a peripheral corneal 
finding known as posterior embryotoxon. This finding consists of 
thickening and anterior displacement of the Schwalbe line, which is the 
peripheral extent of the Descemet membrane of the cornea. It can best 
be seen with a slit-lamp biomicroscope. Posterior embryotoxon occurs 
in more than 90% of patients with Alagille syndrome, but because it 
also occurs in up to 15% of normal individuals, it is not pathogno­
monic for this syndrome.
Inflammatory bowel disease also can be associated with ocular 
disease. Anterior uveitis occurs in both Crohn disease and ulcerative 
colitis. Uveitis is diagnosed in almost half of cases of Crohn disease and 
fewer in ulcerative colitis. In turn, untreated chronic uveitis can lead to 
cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal edema. Conjunctivitis, keratitis, and 
retinal vasculitis are less frequent complications of these diseases.
Genitourinary Disease
Oculorenal syndromes may result from chromosomal abnormality 
syndromes or from inherited metabolic or developmental defects. The 
Wilms tumor gene WT1 lies near the PAX6 gene locus on 11p13. A 
chromosomal deletion of both results in Wilms tumor and aniridia. A 
larger deletion may result in WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, sporadic 
aniridia, genitourinary malformations, and mental retardation). Any 
child with nonfamilial aniridia is at risk for Wilms tumor and needs 
appropriate genetic evaluation.
The Bardet-Biedl syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder 
combining retinal dystrophy, polydactyly, obesity, renal abnormalities, 
and hypogenitalism. An ERG may be the earliest means of detecting 
the cone-rod dystrophy in suspected cases. Visual acuity and the fun­
duscopic appearance may be normal in early childhood. Vision may 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
812
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
then decrease and pigmentary retinopathy, which appears around the 
age of 8 years, becomes more prominent with age.
Cystinosis is also an autosomal recessive disorder of cystine trans­
port from lysosomes that leads to intracellular accumulation of cys­
tine in many tissues, including the eyes and kidneys. Cystine crystals 
accumulate in the anterior layer of the cornea beginning in the first 
year of life. This can cause photophobia, which can be severe. Retinal 
deposits of cystine can lead to focal degeneration of the retinal pigment 
epithelium. Frequent topical administration of cysteamine drops (6–12 
times per day) can clear the cornea of cystine crystals and relieve ocu­
lar discomfort.
Alport syndrome is an X-linked syndrome characterized by 
nephritis, hearing loss, and ocular signs, particularly of the lens. An 
“oil droplet” appearance can be seen in the pupil with an ophthalmo­
scope. This represents an abnormality in the anterior capsule of the 
lens, anterior lenticonus, which can sometimes be associated with a 
cataract. Perimacular flecks are frequently present in the retina but do 
not tend to reduce visual acuity.
The Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome is also an X-linked disor­
der comprising congenital cataracts, intellectual disability, and renal 
tubular dysfunction. Glaucoma develops in a high proportion of 
affected boys and men. The carrier state can frequently be detected in 
girls and women by the appearance of numerous punctate opacities of 
the lens.
Endocrine Disease
Optic nerve hypoplasia is the most common congenital optic nerve 
anomaly. It can involve only a segment of the optic nerve. A superior 
segmental hypoplasia sometimes occurs in children of diabetic moth­
ers. Optic nerve hypoplasia can occur with other CNS abnormalities. 
Patients with optic nerve hypoplasia may have septo-optic dysplasia, 
which denotes the absence of the septum pellucidum and agenesis of 
the corpus callosum or additional findings including pituitary abnor­
malities and cerebral hemisphere abnormalities. Evaluation of hypo­
thalamic and pituitary functions is indicated in patients found to have 
pituitary abnormalities on imaging or if there is clinical suspicion of 
endocrine abnormalities such as neonatal jaundice, hypoglycemia, or 
difficulty with temperature control.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) results in retinopathy at some point in 
nearly all persons with insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes. The prev­
alence of retinopathy is directly proportional to the duration of dis­
ease after puberty. It rarely occurs within 5 years of diagnosis, occurs 
in about 50% of patients at 7 years after diagnosis, and is seen in 90% 
at 15 years after diagnosis. Funduscopic signs of diabetic retinopathy 
are microaneurysms, retinal hemorrhages, cotton wool spots, and hard 
exudates. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy with neovascularization 
is uncommon in children. Intensive glucose control as monitored by 
hemoglobin A1c decreases the incidence and progression of diabetic 
retinopathy. Type 2 DM patients are more likely to develop diabetic 
retinopathy at a younger age. Screening for diabetic retinopathy can 
be done by dilated eye exam or retinal photography. In type 1 DM, 
screening should start by age 11 or at the onset of puberty, younger 
when the patient has had DM for a minimum of 3 years. Children with 
type 2 DM should undergo a dilated eye exam at the time of diagnosis.
Diabetic cataracts caused by sorbitol accumulation in the lens are 
also complications of DM in children. Refractive changes such as 
myopia can occur with rapid rises in blood sugar because of osmotic 
changes in the lens.
Thyroid ophthalmopathy related to Graves disease occurs in chil­
dren much less frequently than in adults. It can be a cause of proptosis, 
lid edema, eyelid retraction, or restrictive strabismus due to lympho­
cytic infiltration of the muscles.
Infectious Diseases
Intrauterine or maternally transmitted infections can cause tissue dam­
age or malformation. The common types of congenital infections are 
the TORCH. The infectious agent, T. gondii, is acquired transplacen­
tally or postnatally and has particular affinity for the CNS, including 
the retina. Chorioretinitis and uveitis may occur and resolution leaves 
scarring. Reactivation can occur and thus serial eye examinations are 
necessary. The macula is commonly involved, and vision can be quite 
poor. Intrauterine rubella infection has become a rarity in the United 
States because of immunization with the measles-mumps-rubella vac­
cine. A fetus infected transplacentally in the first trimester of preg­
nancy is prone to multiple congenital defects, including heart disease, 
microcephaly with intellectual disability, and deafness. Ocular sequelae 
include cataracts, glaucoma, and chorioretinitis. Cataracts may be uni­
lateral. Permanent visual impairment despite cataract surgery is com­
mon in these children. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common 
congenital infection in humans occurring in 1% of infants, although 
over 90% are asymptomatic and may not require treatment. Ophthal­
mic manifestations include retinochoroiditis, optic nerve anomalies, 
microphthalmos, cataract, and uveitis. CMV retinitis can be acquired 
in children who are immunocompromised.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) may be acquired during passage 
through the birth canal or by close contact. Skin lesions on the eyelids 
(Fig. 43.31), keratoconjunctivitis, uveitis, or retinitis may occur. Acute 
retinal necrosis may occur in conjunction with CNS involvement. Ker­
atitis is treated with topical antivirals, while systemic disease or retinitis 
is treated with oral or intravenous antiviral therapy. Congenital syph­
ilis may occur following maternal infection. Early eye involvement is 
rare and symptoms may occur as late as adolescence. Chorioretinitis 
appears as a salt-and-pepper granularity. Uveitis, glaucoma, or intersti­
tial keratitis may occur. Affected children are treated with intravenous 
penicillin G and monitored until serologic tests become nonreactive or 
the titer has decreased fourfold.
Ophthalmia neonatorum is defined as conjunctival infection or 
inflammation occurring in the first month of life. Almost any bac­
terial pathogen can cause conjunctivitis in a newborn, but infection 
with Neisseria gonorrhoeae is of particular concern because it pro­
duces a hyperacute, profusely purulent conjunctivitis that can lead 
to corneal perforation and blindness. The U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force recommends prophylactic topical 1% tetracycline or 0.5% 
erythromycin ointment administered within 24 hours after birth 
for prevention of gonococcal neonatorum. A 2.5% solution of povi­
done-iodine is used effectively and inexpensively in other countries 
but has not been approved for this use in the United States at this 
Fig. 43.31  Vesicular eruptions of the right lower eyelid and the right side 
of the nose, caused by primary herpes simplex infection. The cornea was 
not involved.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
813
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
time. Chlamydia trachomatis (also known as trachoma–inclusion 
conjunctivitis or TRIC) is a common cause of neonatal conjunctivi­
tis and is acquired from an infected cervix during delivery. Because 
this organism can also cause pneumonia, systemic treatment with 
oral erythromycin is indicated for treatment. In a child presenting 
with ophthalmia neonatorum it is important to obtain the history of 
whether prophylaxis has been given, particularly in cases of home 
births, where this is unlikely. Evaluation with Gram and Giemsa 
stains and bacterial cultures are indicated. Polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) testing can be done for suspicion of HSV infection. Chlamydia 
can be diagnosed by culture, fluorescent antibody-staining tech­
niques, or enzyme immunoassays.
Preseptal cellulitis, defined as infection confined to the eyelid 
tissues anterior to the orbital septum, is a common infection in chil­
dren and needs to be distinguished from infection involving the orbit 
(Fig. 43.32). Preseptal infections may result from trauma and insect 
bites involving the eyelids, severe conjunctivitis, primary bactere­
mia, or upper respiratory infection, or they may spread to the eye­
lids from the paranasal sinuses. The affected eyelids are swollen and 
red, and the infection can spread further into the eyebrow, forehead, 
and cheek. Proptosis and limitation or pain of eye movements do not 
occur in preseptal cellulitis, but confirmation of this can be problem­
atic because of the difficulty of opening the eye. S. aureus, group A 
streptococcus, and S. pneumoniae are the most common pathogens. 
Patients with signs and symptoms of systemic toxicity should be hos­
pitalized for intravenous antibiotics; milder cases of preseptal cellulitis 
may be managed with oral antibiotics as long as appropriate follow-up 
is ensured.
Orbital cellulitis is an infection of the orbit that involves the tis­
sues posterior to the orbital septum. Most frequently, this is a result of 
spread of infection from the ethmoid or frontal sinuses. Ocular signs 
include eyelid edema and erythema, proptosis, and inferior and lateral 
displacement of the globe with limited eye movements. Ocular move­
ment is painful; visual activity may be reduced. If orbital cellulitis is 
suspected, CT of the orbit and sinuses is indicated. Children younger 
than 9 years are more likely to have an infection caused by a single aer­
obic pathogen, whereas children older than 9 years may have complex 
infections with multiple pathogens. Often, orbital cellulitis begins as 
a subperiosteal abscess that forms in the potential space between the 
periorbital (analogous to the periosteum of long bones) and the orbital 
bones (Fig. 43.33). Left untreated, this space-occupying mass can apply 
pressure to the optic nerve and cause permanent damage to vision. It 
can also spread into the intracranial space and result in a cavernous 
sinus thrombosis, a subdural empyema, or cerebral abscess. Systemic 
toxicity is quite common and severe with orbital cellulitis. Most chil­
dren younger than 9 years who have small- to medium-sized sub­
periosteal abscesses can be treated successfully with broad-spectrum 
intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone and vancomycin, ampicillin/sul­
bactam, or piperacillin/tazobactam). Close observation with periodic 
checks of vision and pupillary function is important in the first 24–48 
hours of treatment. Older children, those with large subperiosteal 
abscesses, and children who fail to respond to intravenous antibiotics 
within 48 hours require surgical drainage of the abscess. Emergency 
drainage is indicated in a patient of any age where there is compromise 
of the optic nerve.
NYSTAGMUS
Nystagmus is defined as an involuntary rhythmic, to-and-fro move­
ment of the eyes. Horizontal nystagmus is the most common form of 
nystagmus, but vertical nystagmus and torsional nystagmus also occur 
(Table 43.18). Nystagmus may be congenital or acquired. Gaze posi­
tions can affect the eye movement. Congenital nystagmus is somewhat 
of a misnomer because the abnormal eye movements are generally not 
noted until an infant is 1 or 2 months of age, when the fixation reflex 
becomes established. The etiologies of nystagmus are varied. A child 
presenting with infantile nystagmus without neurologic symptoms is 
more likely to have an ocular etiology than neurologic. Non-nystagmus 
eye movements are noted in Table 43.19.
Fig. 43.32  Preseptal cellulitis in a young girl. The infection is confined 
to the space anterior to the superior and inferior orbital septa and does 
not involve the orbit.
A
B
Fig. 43.33  A, A 7-year-old child with right orbital cellulitis, proptosis, 
white eye, limitation of eye movements, but no optic nerve compromise. 
B, CT scan shows ethmoid sinusitis, significant proptosis, and a small 
medial subperiosteal abscess (arrow). He was successfully treated with 
antibiotics alone and did not need surgical intervention. (From Lambert 
SR, Lyons CJ, eds. Taylor & Hoyt’s Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabis­
mus. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:95, Fig. 14.11.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
814
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Idiopathic infantile motor nystagmus syndrome (INS) in some 
patients is associated with variants in the GPR143 gene, which is an 
X-linked recessive disorder that also produces isolated ocular albinism. 
Patients with idiopathic infantile nystagmus with this variant do not 
have decreased ocular pigmentation. In these patients, visual acuity is 
only moderately impaired, and the fundus examination findings and 
the ERG are normal. Usually an affected individual will have a null 
point or a preferred position in which the eye movements are mini­
mized. This may affect the head position as the patient tries to keep the 
eyes in the null point. In patients with INS there is often dampening 
or quieting of the nystagmus with convergence. Vision may be quite 
good (20/40 or better) in the patient’s preferred gaze and head position. 
Sometimes surgery is done on the eye muscles to move them into a 
position such that the head is straighter. A family history of nystagmus 
can frequently be ascertained.
Congenital sensory nystagmus occurs with disorders that impair 
normal image formation (bilateral congenital cataracts) or image 
processing in both eyes (a retinal dystrophy or bilateral optic nerve 
atrophy or hypoplasia). Eye movements may be searching and there 
is no null point. Visual acuity is more severely impaired than in idio­
pathic congenital nystagmus (20/200 or less), and visual loss may be 
progressive in some instances. The evaluation of a child with congen­
ital nystagmus entails a thorough health and family history, a general 
physical examination, and an eye examination by an ophthalmologist 
with expertise in pediatric eye disorders. Electroretinography, VEPs, 
or optical coherence tomography (OCT) may be useful in establishing 
a specific diagnosis.
A cranial MRI scan is indicated when the optic nerves are anoma­
lous, the child is delayed or has neurologic abnormalities, or the nys­
tagmus is acquired. Early determination of the etiology of nystagmus is 
important with the availability of gene therapy treatments for specific 
retinal dystrophies. Gene therapy for Leber congenital amaurosis is 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved for children as young 
as 1 year old, and multiple clinical trials for other retinal dystrophy 
therapies are ongoing. Acquired nystagmus is less common than con­
genital nystagmus. Nystagmus that is truly acquired beyond the first 
few months of life is of concern and may represent a significant neuro­
logic abnormality. It may be caused by CNS disorders, particularly of 
the cerebellum, brainstem, or suprasellar region. In children, the most 
common tumor causing acquired nystagmus is a craniopharyngioma. 
Vertically oriented nystagmus is also of concern; it may be associated 
with the Arnold-Chiari malformation or with pharmacologic agents 
such as lithium, tranquilizers, or anticonvulsants.
Spasmus nutans is a special form of acquired nystagmus with 
onset in the first 2 years of life. The usual triad of findings consists of 
nystagmus (often a shimmering type of nystagmus that is frequently 
asymmetric or even monocular), head nodding, and torticollis. This 
form of nystagmus is generally benign and disappears by the age of 3–4 
years. In some cases, spasmus nutans can be associated with chiasmal 
or suprachiasmal lesions or retinal dystrophies. Neuroradiologic inves­
tigation is indicated.
Opsoclonus is a special form of eye movement abnormal­
ity that is not truly nystagmus in that the bizarre, seemingly ran­
dom oscillations of the eyes are not rhythmic and are frequently 
TABLE 43.18  Specific Patterns of Nystagmus
Pattern
Description
Associated Conditions
Latent nystagmus
Conjugate jerk nystagmus toward viewing eye
Congenital vision defects, occurs with occlusion of eye
Manifest latent nystagmus
Fast jerk to viewing eye
Strabismus, congenital idiopathic nystagmus
Periodic alternating
Cycles of horizontal and horizontal-rotary movements 
that change direction
Caused by both visual and neurologic conditions
Seesaw nystagmus
One eye rises and intorts as other eye falls and extorts
Usually associated with optic chiasm defects
Retraction nystagmus
Eyes jerk back into orbit or toward each other
Caused by pressure on mesencephalic tegmentum (Parinaud syndrome)
Gaze-evoked nystagmus
Jerk nystagmus in direction of gaze
Caused by medications, brainstem lesion, or labyrinthine dysfunction
Gaze-paretic nystagmus
Eyes jerk back to maintain eccentric gaze
Cerebellar disease
Downbeat nystagmus
Fast-phase beating downward
Posterior fossa disease, drugs
Upbeat nystagmus
Fast-phase beating upward
Brainstem and cerebellar disease, and some visual conditions
Vestibular nystagmus
Horizontal-torsional or horizontal jerks
Vestibular system dysfunction
Asymmetric or monocular nystagmus
Pendular vertical nystagmus
Disease of retina and visual pathways
Spasmus nutans
Fine, rapid, pendular nystagmus
Torticollis, head nodding; idiopathic or gliomas of visual pathways
TABLE 43.19  Specific Patterns of Non-Nystagmus Eye Movements
Pattern
Description
Associated Conditions
Opsoclonus
Multidirectional conjugate movements of varying rate and amplitude
Hydrocephalus, diseases of brainstem and cerebellum, neuroblastoma
Ocular dysmetria
Overshoot of eyes on rapid fixation
Cerebellar dysfunction
Ocular flutter
Horizontal oscillations with forward gaze and sometimes with blinking
Cerebellar disease, hydrocephalus, or central nervous system neoplasm
Ocular bobbing
Downward jerk of eyes from primary gaze; eyes remain for a few 
seconds, then drift back
Pontine disease
Ocular myoclonus
Rhythmic to-and-fro pendular oscillations of the eyes, with 
synchronous nonocular muscle movement
Damage to red nucleus, inferior olivary nucleus and ipsilateral 
dentate nucleus
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
815
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
multivectorial. The most common cause of opsoclonus in children 
is acute cerebellar ataxia. The child presents with “dancing eyes and 
dancing feet.” Opsoclonus can occur also with occult neuroblas­
toma, as a paraneoplastic phenomenon, with viral encephalitis, and 
with hydrocephalus.
OCULAR TRAUMA
Trauma is a major cause of acquired visual loss in children. Ninety 
percent of trauma cases are preventable and 50% occur in the home. 
The nature of the traumatic injury varies by age but there is a per­
sistent male preponderance. In school-aged children, sports-related 
injuries are the most common cause of ocular injury, accounting for 
25% of hospitalizations. There is some effort to reduce injuries by 
legislation. The incidence of eye injuries from ice hockey are almost 
zero since the institution of mandatory face masks in children play­
ing organized hockey. Projectile injuries from firearms, air guns, 
and fireworks are relatively frequent in the United States; however, 
these injuries are very rare in countries without easy access to guns 
or fireworks.
The extent of the eye examination is determined by the child’s 
level of cooperation. If the circumstances of the injury suggest a high 
likelihood of a perforating injury (from a sharp object that could go 
through the cornea or sclera), the eye should not be forced open but 
rather should be covered with a protective shield to prevent further 
injury until the child can be seen by an ophthalmologist and an exam 
under anesthesia can be done if necessary. If a perforating injury is 
considered unlikely (a blunt or scratching type of injury), a sterile, top­
ical ophthalmic anesthetic agent can be applied to the eye to reduce 
surface pain, which is a major cause of the child’s reluctance to open 
the eye. The eye can then be inspected for foreign bodies or corneal 
abrasion. Fluorescein dye may be of help in diagnosing a corneal abra­
sion. The fluorescein may have a linear pattern of staining that suggests 
a foreign body may be on the tarsal conjunctiva under the upper eyelid 
and during an eye blink the cornea is being abraded. Lid eversion is 
needed to investigate this possibility. The inferior fornix should also be 
inspected for foreign bodies.
Corneal or conjunctival foreign bodies can sometimes be irri­
gated out of the eye. Otherwise, the foreign body may be removed at 
a slit-lamp using topical anesthesia if the patient is cooperative. If not, 
the patient will require anesthesia. Management of a corneal abra­
sion entails relief of pain, prevention of infection, and promotion of 
healing of the corneal epithelium. Ibuprofen or similar analgesics are 
usually sufficient for pain relief. Topical anesthesia, while used in the 
office, should not be used at home as it prevents epithelial healing and 
can be toxic to the cornea with longer-term use. A drop of a cyclople­
gic agent (cyclopentolate) may provide comfort by relieving ciliary 
spasm. Application of a topical antibiotic ointment such as erythro­
mycin helps prevent infection and provides lubrication to the ocular 
surface to allow the new epithelium to form and adhere to the base­
ment membrane of the cornea. Patching the eye has not been shown 
to be of any additional benefit. Close follow-up is indicated to make 
sure that the cornea is healing and has not developed an infection that 
could lead to a corneal ulcer. Most abrasions heal completely within 
24–48 hours.
Hyphema
Any child with blunt trauma to the eye should be evaluated for blood 
in the anterior chamber of the eye, known as a hyphema (Fig. 43.34). 
The visual acuity of the injured eye should be measured if possible. 
The anterior segment and pupillary function should be assessed if 
the hyphema only partially fills the anterior chamber. Fundoscopy 
should be attempted to look for associated retinal hemorrhage, 
edema (Fig. 43.35; also see Fig. 43.34), or detachment. The view of 
the retina may be obscured by blood. If necessary, ultrasound can 
be used to determine if the retina is attached. Usually the blood 
will resolve if the patient can limit their activity. NSAIDs should be 
avoided. The complications of hyphema include glaucoma, corneal 
blood staining, and rebleeding. The glaucoma may be managed ini­
tially with topical medications but the blood may need to be washed 
out of the anterior chamber surgically if the intraocular pressure 
cannot be controlled, blood is not resolving, or corneal blood stain­
ing is severe and threatening vision.
Hemorrhage into vitreous
Retinal
hemorrhage
Subretinal
hemorrhage
Retinal edema
Hyphema
Fig. 43.34  Various types of ocular hemorrhage after blunt trauma to the 
globe. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:68.)
Fig. 43.35  Hemorrhage and edema of the retina from blunt ocular 
trauma (commotio retinae).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
816
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Eye Injuries in Child Abuse
In cases of child abuse, the presenting sign may involve the eye. Ocu­
lar injuries are also detected in the course of examining many other 
child abuse injuries. Blunt injuries to the eyelids and anterior segment 
of the eye from fingers, fists, or belts may cause eyelid ecchymosis, sub­
conjunctival hemorrhage, hyphema, cataract, and lens dislocation. The 
finding of such an injury should alert the physician to the possibility of 
child abuse. Abusive head trauma is caused by forceful acceleration and 
deceleration motion such as shaking, which results in subdural hemor­
rhage and retinal or vitreous hemorrhages (Fig. 43.36). The vitreous is 
adherent to the retina and the traction of the moving vitreous results in 
multiple retinal hemorrhages, often in all layers of the retina. In severe 
cases, the optic nerve may be avulsed. Vitreous or retinal hemorrhage 
may take a long time to resolve and the child is at risk for amblyopia 
during the time the vision is obscured by blood. In cases of persistent 
hemorrhage, a vitrectomy may need to be done to clear the blood in 
the visual axis. Cortical brain damage also has a role in limiting visual 
function. Fewer than half of the patients diagnosed with abusive head 
trauma with retinal or vitreous hemorrhage see better than 20/40 after 
recovery.
FUNCTIONAL VISION LOSS
Some patients complain of vision loss or blurring or other visual distur­
bances (seeing spots, colors, or patterns) while the eye exam is normal. 
Functional visual disturbances occur most commonly in girls of ages 
8–15 years. The key to confirming functional vision loss is to demon­
strate objective findings that indicate better vision than the subjective 
responses. The patient’s responses to visual acuity testing are frequently 
inconsistent. Stereoacuity testing may demonstrate better visual acuity 
than the patient is reporting. There are several examining techniques 
that the ophthalmologist can employ to get this information. There are 
also objective tests available to further delineate etiologies of possible 
vision loss; however, these are rarely needed. These include imaging 
tests such as OCT, fluorescein angiogram, ERG, or VEPs. The relation­
ship of functional vision loss to true psychologic disease is unclear but 
it is worth keeping in mind that there is a higher incidence of func­
tional vision loss in children who are experiencing psychologic stress­
ors. Some children willfully complain of vision loss because they want 
glasses. The treatment should consist of reassurance. It may be of bene­
fit to refer the patient to a psychiatrist if the symptoms do not subside.
VISUAL COMPLAINTS OF CHILDREN
Frequently, a child is brought to the pediatrician because of a subjective 
visual complaint from the child rather than because of an abnormality 
observed by a parent. Symptoms associated with reading are common 
and include seeing blurred print, words “swimming” together, and 
skipping words or lines. Other children complain primarily of blurred 
distance vision. Uncommon visual phenomena may include seeing 
colored lights, objects appearing larger or smaller, seeing spots, and 
double vision. Eye pain localized to one or both eyes is also common. 
There may be physiologic explanations for each of the complaints, and 
the child is usually interested in an explanation of the reason proposed 
for their complaint. A careful history of the exact nature of the com­
plaint and any associated concerns should be sought and a screening 
eye examination performed. Specifically, distance and near visual acu­
ity should be measured in each eye. A cover test or stereopsis test rules 
out manifest strabismus. An external eye examination may reveal a rea­
son for eye pain (conjunctival injection, tearing, corneal abrasion, for­
eign body). Pupillary reactions should be assessed. Fundoscopy should 
be done to evaluate optic nerve and retinal status. A color vision test 
may be helpful. Having the child read an age-appropriate passage may 
reveal information about the child’s reading ability and the severity 
of the reading complaint. If the examination is normal, simple reas­
surance may ease the concerns of the child and parent, particularly if 
combined with an offer to follow up on the complaint if it persists or if 
the parent notes objective changes in the child’s eyes. If difficulty read­
ing persists despite correction of any refractive error and an otherwise 
normal eye exam, the child may have learning disabilities that war­
rant further evaluation. Behavioral vision therapy has not been proven 
to improve reading skills, learning disabilities, or dyslexia and is not 
recommended.
Fig. 43.36  Gross pathologic specimen from an infant who died of 
shaken baby syndrome. Note the diffuse retinal hemorrhages.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Ocular manifestations of vision loss, strabismus, and nystagmus may 
be caused by isolated ocular pathologic processes or by significant 
systemic disease. Vision screening and basic evaluations done in the 
pediatrician’s office are important for detection of vision loss. Impaired 
visual function resulting from strabismus, cataracts, or other conditions 
may produce amblyopia and blindness. It is important to detect ambly­
opia because in most cases, amblyopia is reversible if discovered early 
and treated appropriately. Symptoms and signs that suggest potentially 
life- or vision-threatening diseases are listed in Table 43.20.
   
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
817
CHAPTER 43  Eye Disorders
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 43.20  Concerning Symptoms and 
Signs That Should Raise Red Flags
Symptom or Sign
Most Worrisome or Urgent Cause
Leukocoria
Retinoblastoma
Acute onset of strabismus
Cranial nerve palsy from brain tumor, ↑ ICP
Acute vision loss
Compression or infiltration of optic nerve by 
an orbital or intracranial lesion
Proptosis
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Sudden onset of ptosis
Third nerve palsy from tumor, ↑ ICP
Severe progressive headaches ↑ ICP
Black eye
Trauma with associated hyphema
Light sensitivity
Uveitis
Head tilt or turn
Cranial nerve palsy causing strabismus, ↑ ICP
Loss of corneal luster
Corneal edema from glaucoma or uveitis
Purulent conjunctivitis in a 
newborn
Gonococcal infection
Acquired anisocoria
Horner syndrome caused by cervical 
neuroblastoma, ↑ ICP
Bilateral cataracts in a 
newborn
Galactosemia
Retinal hemorrhage in an 
infant or toddler
Child abuse
Onset of nystagmus after 
early infancy
Brainstem or posterior fossa tumor
↑ ICP, increased intracranial pressure.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
817.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Basic and clinical science course, section 6. Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus. San Francisco: American Academy of Ophthalmology; 
2020–21.
Wright KW, Strube Y, eds. Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus. 3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 2012.
Anatomy and Neurophysiology of the Visual System
Livingstone MS. Art, illusion and the visual system. Sci Am. 1988;258:78.
Development of the Eye and Visual System
Tripathi BJ, Tripathi RC. Development of the human eye. In: Bron AJ, Tripathi 
RC, Tripathi BJ, eds. Wolff’s Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit. 8th ed. London: 
Chapman & Hall; 1997.
Amblyopia and Vision Screening
Berardi N, Sale A, Maffei L. Brain structural and functional development: 
genetics and experience. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2015;57(suppl 2):4–9.
Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine, Section on Ophthalmology, 
et al. Visual system assessment in infants, children and young adults by 
pediatricians. Pediatrics. 2016;137(1):28–30.
Dolgin E. The myopia boom. Nature. 2015;519:276–278.
Donahue SP, Arthur B, Neely DF, et al. On behalf of the AAPOS Vision 
Screening Committee. Guidelines for automated preschool vision 
screening: a 10-year, evidence based update. J AAPOS. 2013;17:4–8.
Holmes JM, Lazar EL, Melia BM, et al. Pediatric eye disease investigator 
group. Effect of age on response to amblyopia treatment in children. Arch 
Ophthalmol. 2011;129:1451–1457.
Repka MX, Kraker RT, Holmes JM, et al., Pediatric Eye Disease Investigator 
Group. Atropine vs. patching for treatment of moderate amblyopia: follow 
up at 15 years of age of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Ophthalmol. 
2014;132(7):799–805.
Wiesel TN, Hubel DH. Single-cell responses in striate cortex of kittens 
deprived of vision in one eye. J Neurophysiol. 1963;26:1003.
Strabismus
Hug D. Management of infantile esotropia. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 
2015;26(5):371–374.
Lavrich JB. Intermittent exotropia: continued controversies and current 
management. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2015;26(5):375–381.
Magli A, Carelli R, Esposito F, et al. Essential infantile esotropia: 
postoperative sensory outcomes of strabismus surgery. Semin Ophthalmol. 
2017;32(6):663–671.
Pediatric Eye Disease Investigator Group, Cotter SA, Mohney BG, et al. 
Three-year observation of children 3 to 10 years of age with intermittent 
exotropia. Ophthalmology. 2019;126(10):1249–1260.
Pediatric Eye Disease Investigator Group, Mohney BG, Cotter SA, et al. A 
randomized trial comparing part time patching with observation for 
intermittent exotropia in children 12 to 35 months of age. Ophthalmology. 
2015;122(8):1718–1725.
Simonsz HJ, Kolling GH, Ummenbrink K. Final report of early vs. late infantile 
strabismus surgery study (ELISSS): a controlled, prospective, multicenter 
study. Strabismus. 2005;13:169–199.
Refractive Errors
Chia A, Lu QS, Tan D. Five-year clinical trial on atropine for the treatment of 
myopia 2: myopia control with atropine 0.01% eyedrops. Ophthalmology. 
2016;123:391.
He M, Xiang F, Zeng Y, et al. Effect of time spent outdoors at school on the 
development of myopia among children in China: a randomized clinical 
trial. J Am Med Assoc. 2015;314:1142.
Vision Impairment in Children
Dörr J, Krautwald S, Wildemann B, et al. Characteristics of Susac syndrome: a 
review of all reported cases. Nature Rev Neurol. 2013;9(6):307–316.
Driving restrictions per state. Updated June 6, 2020.
EyeWiki.aao.org
Mervis CA, Yeargin-Allsopp M, Winter S, et al. Aetiology of childhood vision 
impairment, metropolitan Atlanta, 1991–93. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 
2000;14:70.
Sigler EJ, Randolph JC, Calzada JI, et al. Current management of Coats disease. 
Surv Ophthalmol. 2014;59(1):30–46.
Steinkuller PG. Legal vision requirements for drivers in the United States. 
AMA J Ethics. 2010;12(12):938–940.
Retinopathy of Prematurity
Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity Cooperative Group. Revised 
indications for the treatment of retinopathy of prematurity: results of the 
early treatment for retinopathy of prematurity randomized trial. Arch 
Ophthalmol. 2003;121:1684–1696.
Good WV, Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity Cooperative 
Group. Final results of the early treatment for retinopathy of prematurity 
(ETROP) randomized trial. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2004;102:233–248.
Mintz-Hittner HA, Kennedy KA, Chuang AZ, BEAT-ROP Cooperative Group, 
et al. Efficacy of intravitreal bevacizumab for stage 3+ retinopathy of 
prematurity. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(7):603–615.
Nasolacrimal Problems in Childhood
Becker BB. The treatment of congenital dacryocystocele. Am J Ophthalmol. 
2006;142(5):835–838.
Lueder GT. Endoscopic treatment of intranasal abnormalities associated with 
nasolacrimal duct obstruction. J AAPOS. 2004;8(2):128–132.
The Red Eye
Azari AA, Barney NP. Conjunctivitis. A systemic review of diagnosis and 
treatment. J Am Med Assoc. 2013;310(16):1721–1729.
Nakra NA, Blumberg DA, Herrera-Guerra A, et al. Multi-system inflammatory 
syndrome in children (MIS-C) following SARS-CoV-2 infection: 
review of clinical presentation, hypothetical pathogenesis and proposed 
management. Children. 2020;7(7):69.
Seth D, Khan FI. Causes and management of red eye in pediatric 
ophthalmology. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2011;11(3):212–219.
Sethuramen U, Kamat D. The red eye: evaluation and management. Clin 
Pediatr (Phila). 2009;48(6):588–600.
Leukocoria and Retinoblastoma
Abramson DH, Frank CM, Susman M, et al. Presenting signs of 
retinoblastoma. J Pediatr. 1998;132:505.
Abramson DH, Shields CL, Munier FL, et al. Treatment of retinoblastoma in 2015: 
agreement and disagreement. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015;133:1341.
Mendoza PR, Grossniklaus HE. The biology of retinoblastoma. Prog Mol Biol 
Transl Sci. 2015;135:503–516.
Childhood Cataracts
Birch EE, Stager DR. The critical period for surgical treatment of dense 
congenital unilateral cataract. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1996;37:1532.
Bothun ED, Lynn MJ, Christiansen SP, et al. Sensorimotor outcomes by age 
5 years after monocular cataract surgery in the Infant Aphakia Treatment 
Study (IATS). J AAPOS. 2016;20(1):49–53.
Francis PJ, Moore AT. Genetics of childhood cataract. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 
2004;15(1):10–15.
Infant Aphakia Treatment Study Group, Lambert SR, Lynn MJ, et al. 
Comparison of contact lens and intraocular lens correction of monocular 
aphakia during infancy: a randomized clinical trial of HOTV optotype 
acuity at age 4.5 years and clinical findings at age 5 years. JAMA 
Ophthalmol. 2014;132(6):676–682.
Infant Aphakia Treatment Study Group, Plager DA, Lynn MJ, et al. 
Complications, adverse events, and additional intraocular surgery 
1 year after cataract surgery in the Infant Aphakia Treatment Study. 
Ophthalmology. 2011;118(12):2330–2334.
Mignarri A, Gallus GN, Dotti MT, et al. A suspicion index for early diagnosis 
and treatment of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. J Inherit Metab Dis. 
2014;37(3):421–429.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
817.e2
Glaucoma in Childhood
Aponte EP, Diehl N, Mohney BG. Medical and surgical outcomes in childhood 
glaucoma: a population based study. J AAPOS. 2011;15(3):263–267.
Bohnsack BL, Freedman SF. Surgical outcomes in childhood uveitic glaucoma. 
Am J Ophthalmol. 2013;155(1):134–142.
Lewis CJ, Hedberg-Buenz A, DeLuca AP, et al. Primary congenital and 
developmental glaucomas. Hum Mol Genet. 2017;26(R1):R28–R36.
Childhood Uveitis
American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Rheumatology and Section on 
Ophthalmology, Cassidy J, Kivlin J, et al. Ophthalmologic examinations in 
children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Pediatrics. 2006;117(5):1843–1845.
	American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation guideline for 
screening, monitoring and treatment of juvenile idiopathic arthritis-
associated uveitis. Arthritis Care Res. 2019;71(6):703–716.
Brazis PW, Stewart M, Lee AG. The uveo-meningeal syndromes. Neurol. 
2004;10(4):171–184.
Harrell M, Carvounis PE. Current treatment of toxoplasma retinochoroiditis: 
an evidence-based review. J Ophthalmol. 2014;2014:273–506.
Klotz SA, Penn CC, Negvesky GJ, et al. Fungal and parasitic infections of the 
eye. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2000;13(4):662–685.
Levy-Clark G, Jabs DA, Read RW, et al. Expert panel recommendations for 
the use of anti-tumor necrosis factor biologic agents in patients with ocular 
inflammatory disorders. Ophthalmology. 2014;121(3):785–796.
Street D, Sivaguru A, Sreekantan S, et al. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease. Pract 
Neurol. 2019;19:364–367.
Eyelid and Orbital Problems
Al-Haddad C, El Salloukh NA, El Moussawi Z. β-blockers in the treatment 
of periocular infantile hemangioma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2019;30(5):
319–325.
Drolet BA, Frommelt PC, Chamlin SL, et al. Initiation and use of propanolol 
for infantile hemangioma: a report of a consensus conference. Pediatrics. 
2013;131(1):128–140.
Gandhi NG, Lin LK, O’Hara M. Sildenafil for pediatric orbital lymphangioma. 
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013;131(9):1228–1230.
Gooding C, Meyer D. Intralesional bleomycin: a potential treatment 
for refractory orbital lymphangiomas. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2014;30(3):e65–e67.
Holland KE, Drolet BA. Approach to the patient with an infantile 
hemangioma. Dermatol Clin. 2013;31(2):289–301.
Holland KE, Drolet BA. Infantile hemangioma. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2010;57:1069–1083.
Maamari RN, Couch SM. In: Nonspecific Orbital Inflammation in Advances in 
Ophthalmology and Optometry. Vol. 3. 2018:315–335.
Rao AA, Naheedy JH, Chen JY, et al. A clinical update and radiologic review of 
pediatric orbital and ocular tumors. J Oncol. 2013;2013:975908.
Spindle J, Tang SX, Davies B, et al. Pediatric idiopathic orbital inflammation: 
clinical features of 30 cases. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016;32(4):270–274.
Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease
Ali Z, Khadije D, Elahe A, et al. Prophylaxis of ophthalmia neonatorum: 
comparison of betadine, erythromycin and no prophylaxis. J Trop Pediatr. 
2007;53(6):388–392.
American Diabetes Association. 13. Children and adolescents: standards of 
medical care in diabetes—2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:S148.
American Diabetes Association. 13. Children and adolescents: standards of 
medical care in diabetes—2020. Diabetes Care. 2020;43:S163.
Dabelea D, Stafford JM, Mayer-Davis EJ, et al. Association of type 1 diabetes 
vs. type 2 diabetes diagnosed during childhood and adolescence with 
complications during teenage years and young adulthood. J Am Med Assoc. 
2017;317:825.
Garcia GH, Harris GJ. Criteria for nonsurgical management of subperiosteal 
abscess of the orbit: analysis of outcomes, 1988-1998. Ophthalmology. 
2000;107(8):1454–1458.
Ocular prophylaxis for gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum. U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement. Am Family 
Physician. 2012;85:195–196.
Summers CG. Albinism: classification, clinical characteristics, and recent 
findings. Optom Vis Sci. 2009;86(6):659–662.
Virk SA, Donaghue KC, Wong TY, et al. Interventions for diabetic retinopathy 
in type 1 diabetes: systemic review and meta-analysis. Am J Ophthalmol. 
2015;160:1055–1064.
Nystagmus
Bertsch M, Floyd M, Kehoe T, et al. The clinical evaluation of infantile 
nystagmus: what to do first and why. Ophthalmic Genet. 2017;38(1):22–23.
Brodsky MC. Pediatric Neuro-Ophthalmology. 2nd ed. New York: Springer; 2010.
clinicaltrials.gov – a website of ongoing clinical trials.
Ehrt O. Infantile and acquired nystagmus in childhood. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 
2012;16(6):567–572.
Ocular Trauma
Kivlin JD, Simons KB, Lazoritz S, et al. Shaken baby syndrome. 
Ophthalmology. 2000;107:1246.
Levin AV. Retinal hemorrhages in abusive head trauma. Pediatrics. 
2010;126(5):961–970.
SooHoo JR, Davies BW, Braverman RS, et al. Pediatric traumatic hyphema: a 
review of 138 consecutive cases. J AAPOS. 2013;17(6):565–567.
Trief D, Adebona OT, Turalba AV, et al. The pediatric traumatic hyphema. Int 
Ophthalmol Clin. 2013;53(4):43–57.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
