145
A heart murmur is a sign, the audible turbulence of blood flow through 
the heart or the major vessels; symptoms associated with heart mur­
murs vary by the underlying cause, as well as the nature and severity of 
any cardiac lesion producing the murmur. While the majority of heart 
murmurs are normal or innocent, they must be distinguished from 
the pathologic murmurs of congenital or acquired cardiac disease. 
Whereas <1% of the population has significant structural congenital 
cardiac disease, as much as 85% of the population may have a heart 
murmur during childhood; causes vary by the age of the patient at pre­
sentation (Table 9.1). The causes of congenital heart disease are varied 
and include genetic disorders, metabolic disorders, teratogens, and 
syndrome complexes (Table 9.2). The causes of acquired heart diseases 
in children include rheumatic fever, endocarditis, and cardiac injury 
caused by systemic illnesses. Whereas the echocardiogram defines the 
significance of pathologic heart abnormalities, the only way to defini­
tively diagnose an innocent murmur is with a stethoscope.
THE THORAX
Knowing the location of the heart chambers and valves within the tho­
rax helps in the interpretation of the heart sounds (Fig. 9.1). The left 
atrium is located posteriorly, close to the spine. The right atrium and 
right ventricle are located anteriorly, immediately beneath the sternum. 
The outflow tract of the right ventricle, which contains the pulmonary 
valve, rises to the left of the sternum. The parts of the left side of the 
heart that are close to the chest wall include the left ventricular apex 
and the ascending aorta as it passes up to the right of the sternum. In 
other areas, lung tissue lies between the heart and chest wall, which 
may diminish or distort the intensity of heart sounds.
ORIGINS OF THE HEART SOUNDS
Normal heart sounds originate from the vibration of heart valves when 
they close and from heart chambers when they fill rapidly. The amount 
of pressure that forces valve closure influences the intensity of a heart 
sound. Other mechanical factors such as valve stiffness, thickness, and 
excursion have lesser effects on sound intensity.
Cardiac murmurs are the direct result of blood flow turbulence. The 
amount of turbulence and consequently the intensity of a cardiac mur­
mur are directly proportional to both the pressure difference or gradi­
ent across a narrowing or defect and the blood flow or volume moving 
across the site. In contrast to intensity, the frequency or pitch of a car­
diac murmur is proportional to pressure difference or gradient alone.
As sound radiates from its source, sound intensity diminishes with 
the square of the distance. Consequently, heart sounds should be loud­
est near the point of origin. However, factors other than distance may 
influence this relationship. Sound passage through the body is affected 
by the transmission characteristics of the tissues through which the 
sound is being transmitted. Fat has a more pronounced dampening 
effect on higher frequencies than does more dense tissue such as bone. 
If the difference in tissue density is significant—for example, between 
the heart and lungs—more sound energy is lost. Only the loudest 
sounds may be heard when lung tissue is positioned between the heart 
and chest wall.
THE CARDIAC CYCLE
The timing of events in the cardiac cycle allows for a more thorough 
understanding of heart sounds and murmurs. The relationship between 
the normal heart cycle and that of the heart sounds is noted in Figure 9.2.
The cardiac cycle begins with atrial systole, the sequential activa­
tion and contraction of the two thin-­walled upper chambers. Atrial 
systole is followed by the delayed contraction of the more powerful 
lower chambers, termed ventricular systole. Ventricular systole has 
three phases:
	1.	 Isovolumic contraction: the short period of early contraction 
when the pressure builds within the ventricle but has yet to rise suf­
ficiently to permit ejection
	2.	 Ventricular ejection: when the ventricles eject blood to the body 
(via the aorta) and to the lungs (via the pulmonary artery)
	3.	 Isovolumic relaxation: the period of ventricular relaxation when 
ejection ceases and pressure falls within the ventricles
During ventricular contraction, the atria relax (atrial diastole) 
and receive venous return from both the body and the lungs. Then, in 
ventricular diastole, the lower chambers relax, allowing initial passive 
filling of the thick-­walled ventricles and emptying of the atria. Later, 
during the terminal period of ventricular relaxation, the atria contract. 
This atrial systole augments ventricular filling just before the onset of 
the next ventricular contraction.
The sequence of contractions generates pressure and blood flow 
through the heart. The relationship of blood volume, pressure, and flow 
determines opening and closing of heart valves and generates charac­
teristic heart sounds and murmurs.
CHANGES IN THE CIRCULATION AT BIRTH
The majority of significant structural congenital heart disease is recog­
nizable in the first few weeks of life. The age at recognition or presen­
tation often correlates with the nature of the cardiac anomaly and the 
urgency with which assessment and treatment are necessary.
In the fetus, oxygen is acquired from the placenta and returns via the 
umbilical vein and through the ductus venosus to enter the inferior vena cava 
and right atrium (Fig. 9.3). Preferentially, flow is directed across the foramen 
ovale to enter the left atrium and, subsequently, the left ventricle. Deoxygen­
ated blood returning from the superior vena cava and upper body segment 
is preferentially directed by the flap of the eustachian valve to enter the right 
Murmurs
Andrew N. Pelech
9
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
146
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
ventricle and then, via the ductus arteriosus, to enter the descending aorta to 
return via the umbilical arteries to the placenta. The pressures within both 
ventricles are essentially equal, inasmuch as both chambers pump to the sys­
temic circulation. However, in utero, the right ventricle does the majority of 
the work, pumping 66% of the combined cardiac output. At transition (see 
Fig. 9.3), with the first breath, pulmonary arterial resistance begins to fall as 
the lungs begin the process of respiration. Pulmonary venous return to the 
left atrium closes the flap of the foramen ovale. Through mechanical and 
chemical mechanisms, the ductus arteriosus begins to close. In the normal 
full-­term infant, this is accomplished by 10–15 hours after birth. Intermittent 
right-­to-­left atrial level shunting through the foramen ovale may occur, par­
ticularly if pulmonary vascular resistance fails to drop.
The time when congenital heart disease becomes symptomatic is 
influenced by the specific lesion. Some structural cardiac abnormali­
ties require patency of the ductus arteriosus for maintenance of either 
pulmonary blood flow (e.g., pulmonary atresia) or systemic blood 
flow (e.g., hypoplastic left heart syndrome). These and other ductus-­
dependent abnormalities, such as transposition of the great arteries, 
coarctation of the aorta, or significant outflow obstruction (e.g., critical 
aortic valve stenosis), manifest in the first few hours or days after birth 
when the ductus arteriosus begins to close. In the absence of an asso­
ciated anomaly, hemodynamically significant ventricular septal defects 
(VSDs) do not manifest before 2–4 weeks after birth. Atrial septal 
defects (ASDs) are seldom symptomatic in infancy.
NORMAL INTRACARDIAC PRESSURES
In the neonate, after birth and successful transition, resistance to flow 
in the pulmonary circuit is much lower than in the systemic circuit. As 
such, the pressures in the right-­sided chambers are lower than those in 
the left-­sided chambers. The higher values within the ventricles reflect 
the pressure during the period of ventricular systole in a normal heart 
(see Fig. 9.3). Pressure in the great vessels during systole is identical to 
that in the corresponding ventricles, though this relationship changes 
if there is outflow obstruction. In ventricular diastole, the semilunar 
valves (aortic and pulmonary) close. Resistance to blood flow in the 
vascular bed determines the diastolic pressures in the great arter­
ies. The thin-­walled atria generate much lower pressures than do the 
ventricles, both during the phase of passive atrial filling (v wave) and 
during atrial contraction (a wave). Only the mean (m) or average atrial 
pressure is shown in Figure 9.3. During ventricular relaxation, the dia­
stolic pressures are lower than those in the atria, enabling filling.
PEDIATRIC CARDIOVASCULAR EVALUATION
History
Historical assessment of the pediatric patient referred for evaluation of 
a cardiac murmur should include questions about the family history, 
pregnancy (including fetal ultrasonography), and perinatal course, in 
addition to questions about symptoms of cardiovascular disease. An 
assessment of exercise or play or feeding capacity should be sought, 
as should an assessment of growth and development. The presence of 
congenital abnormalities of other major organ systems is associated 
with structural cardiac problems in as many as 25% of patients.
Structural heart disease is frequently seen in association with recog­
nizable syndromes (see Table 9.2). Children with clearly definable chro­
mosomal disorders known to be strongly associated with structural 
cardiac abnormalities, such as trisomy 21 or Turner syndrome, should 
be referred for further diagnostic evaluation. Family history of sudden 
unexplained death, rheumatic fever, sudden infant death syndrome, or a 
structural cardiac abnormality in a first-­degree relative may be relevant. 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a first-­degree relative is associated with 
TABLE 9.1  Causes of Heart Murmurs by Age at Presentation
Neonate*
Infant
Older Child
Transient patency of the ductus arteriosus
Peripheral pulmonic stenosis
Cyanotic congenital heart disease
Congenital valvular obstruction
Arteriovenous malformation (CNS, hepatic, 
pulmonary)
Anemia
Asphyxia-­related myocardial ischemia (transient 
TI or MI)
Pulmonary hypertension
Congenital heart disease (L→R shunt or R→L shunt)†
Ejection murmurs (normal)
Anemia
Arteriovenous malformation
Infective endocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Hunter syndrome
Hurler syndrome
Fabry syndrome
Congenital valvular obstruction
Ejection murmurs (normal)
Repaired congenital heart disease
Anemia
Mitral valve prolapse
Venous hum
Infective endocarditis
Rheumatic fever
Marfan syndrome
Prosthetic valves
Obstructive (hypertrophic) cardiomyopathy (subaortic 
stenosis)
Carotid or abdominal bruit
Tumor (atrial myxoma)
Thyrotoxicosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pericardial friction rub
ASD, atrial septal defect; CNS, central nervous system; L, left; MI, mitral insufficiency; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; R, right; TI, tricuspid insuffi­
ciency; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
*Common causes of congenital heart disease in low birthweight infants include PDA, VSD, tetralogy of Fallot, coarctation of the aorta–interrupted 
aortic arch, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, heterotaxy, and dextrotransposition of the great arteries, in that order. Common causes of congenital 
heart disease in term infants include VSD, dextrotransposition of the great arteries, tetralogy of Fallot, coarctation of the aorta, pulmonary stenosis, 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, and PDA; other causes represent a smaller percentage.
†The relative percentages of congenital heart lesions are VSD (25–30%); ASD (6–8%); PDA (6–8%); coarctation of aorta (5–7%); tetralogy of Fallot 
(5–7%); pulmonary valve stenosis (5–7%); aortic valve stenosis (5–7%); dextrotransposition of great arteries (3–5%); and hypoplastic left ventricle, 
truncus arteriosus, total anomalous venous return, tricuspid atresia, single ventricle, and double-­outlet right ventricle representing 1–3% each. Other 
and more complex lesions (e.g., forms of heterotaxy) together represent 5–10% of all lesions.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
147
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
TABLE 9.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
Syndrome
Features
Chromosomal Disorders
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
Endocardial cushion defect, VSD, ASD
Trisomy 21p (cat-­eye syndrome)
Miscellaneous, total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Trisomy 18
VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or pulmonary valve
Trisomy 13
VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or pulmonary valve
Trisomy 9
Miscellaneous, VSD
XXXXY
PDA, ASD
Penta X
PDA, VSD
Triploidy
VSD, ASD, PDA
XO (Turner syndrome)
Bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of aorta
Fragile X
Mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilatation
Duplication 3q2
Miscellaneous
Deletion 4p (Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome)
VSD, PDA, aortic stenosis
Deletion 9p
Miscellaneous
Deletion 5p (cri du chat syndrome)
VSD, PDA, ASD, TOF
Deletion 10q
VSD, TOF, conotruncal lesions*
Deletion 13q
VSD
Deletion 18q
VSD
Deletion 1p36
ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF, cardiomyopathy
Deletion/duplication 1q21.1
ASD, VSD, PS
Deletion 7q11.23 (Williams syndrome)
Supravalvular AS, branch PS
Deletion 11q 24-­25 (Jacobsen syndrome)
VSD, left-­sided lesions
Syndrome Complexes
CHARGE association (coloboma, heart, atresia choanae, growth retardation, 
genital, and ear anomalies)
VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, endocardial cushion defect
DiGeorge syndrome, CATCH 22 (cardiac defects, abnormal facies, thymic 
aplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia, and deletion 22q11)
Aortic arch anomalies, conotruncal anomalies
Alagille syndrome (arteriohepatic dysplasia)
Peripheral pulmonic stenosis, PS, TOF, abdominal coarctation
VATER association (vertebral, anal, tracheoesophageal, radial, and renal 
anomalies)†
VSD, TOF, ASD, PDA
OAVS (oculo-­auriculo vertebral spectrum), including Goldenhar syndrome
TOF, VSD
CHILD (congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma, limb defects)
Miscellaneous
Mulibrey nanism (muscle, liver, brain, eye)
Pericardial thickening, constrictive pericarditis
Asplenia syndrome
Complex cyanotic heart lesions with decreased pulmonary blood flow, transposi­
tion of great arteries, anomalous pulmonary venous return, dextrocardia, single 
ventricle, single atrioventricular valve
Polysplenia syndrome
Acyanotic lesions with increased pulmonary blood flow, azygos continuation of 
inferior vena cava, partial anomalous pulmonary venous return, dextrocardia, 
single ventricle, common atrioventricular valve
PHACE syndrome (posterior brain fossa anomalies, facial hemangiomas, arterial 
anomalies, cardiac anomalies and aortic coarctation, eye anomalies)
VSD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, arterial aneurysms
Teratogenic Agents
Congenital rubella
PDA, peripheral pulmonic stenosis
Fetal hydantoin/phenytoin syndrome
VSD, ASD, coarctation of aorta, PDA
Fetal alcohol syndrome
ASD, VSD, TOF
Fetal valproate effects
Coarctation of aorta, hypoplastic left side of heart, aortic stenosis, pulmonary 
atresia, VSD
Maternal phenylketonuria
VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta
Retinoic acid embryopathy
Conotruncal anomalies
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
148
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
a high incidence of inheritance, and this condition is sufficiently subtle 
that echocardiographic screening is mandatory. Unexplained fever, leth­
argy, a history of intravenous drug use, or additional symptoms arising 
after recent dental work should arouse suspicion of possible endocarditis.
Infants born to mothers with diabetes mellitus (type 1 or gesta­
tional) have as high as a 30% chance of transient hypertrophic cardio­
myopathy and are also at risk for congenital structural abnormalities. 
Additional maternal risk factors for congenital structural heart disease 
include acute or chronic maternal illness, vertically transmitted infec­
tions, illicit drug use, or the use of certain teratogenic medications.
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF HEART DISEASE
The general health of a child with a suspected cardiac malformation 
is important to assess. Particularly relevant are the rate of growth and 
history of past illnesses. Although symptoms of failure to thrive are 
nonspecific, patterns of growth reflect the severity of the disease and 
effectiveness of treatment (see Chapter 12). In an infant, feeding dif­
ficulties are often the first evidence of congestive heart failure. Feed­
ing problems are common manifestations of cardiac disease and may 
be evidenced as disinterest, excessive fatigue, long feeding duration, 
diaphoresis, tachypnea, dyspnea, or a change in the pattern of respi­
ration. It is important to obtain an objective measure of caloric intake 
by quantitating the number and/or volume of feedings. Some index of 
exertional tolerance should be sought in all children as an index of 
cardiovascular fitness and a sign of functional capability. This index 
should be age relevant and, in an infant, might include assessment of 
the vigor and duration of feeding and the time period of interactive 
play. In a toddler, the index might include the ability to keep up with 
peers, climb stairs, or walk for extended periods. In an older child, a 
comparison with peer sporting interactions, level of function in physi­
cal education, and an index of aerobic ability should be sought.
Tachypnea may occur as a consequence of increased pulmonary 
blood flow. With increasing pulmonary congestion, particularly obstruc­
tion to pulmonary venous drainage, dyspnea is manifested as an anxious 
look with grunting, flaring of the alae nasi, head bobbing, and intercostal, 
suprasternal, and subcostal retractions. Respiratory rates and the pat­
tern of breathing should be assessed for a full minute in the quiet infant 
because rates may vary considerably with activity and feeding (Table 9.3), 
or even over shorter time periods in a quiet infant. Cardiac asthma or 
exercise-­inducible reactive airway disease may occur as a consequence of 
passive or active pulmonary congestion (see Chapter 4). Compression of 
airways by plethoric vessels may contribute to the stasis of secretions and 
atelectasis, which predisposes to respiratory tract infections.
Cyanosis in association with a cardiac murmur suggests a struc­
tural lesion with restriction to pulmonary blood flow (Table 9.4). Cya­
nosis, or a blue discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes, is 
a consequence of reduced hemoglobin being present in >5 g/dL of 
TABLE 9.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
Syndrome
Features
Others
Apert syndrome
VSD
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Mitral valve prolapse
Carpenter syndrome
PDA
Char syndrome
PDA
Conradi syndrome
VSD, PDA
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
VSD, TOF
Crouzon disease
PDA, coarctation of aorta
Cutis laxa
Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonic stenosis
Ellis–van Creveld syndrome
Single atrium, VSD
Holt-­Oram syndrome
ASD, VSD, first-­degree heart block
Infant of diabetic mother
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, VSD, conotruncal anomalies
Kartagener syndrome
Dextrocardia
Laurence-­Moon
TOF, VSD
Marfan
Aortic root dissection, mitral valve prolapse
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
ASD, VSD
Noonan syndrome (with or without multiple lentigines)
Pulmonic stenosis, ASD, cardiomyopathy
Pallister-­Hall syndrome
Endocardial cushion defect
Pierre Robin sequence
ASD, VSD, PDA, coarctation of aorta
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Heterotaxy disorders
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
PDA, PS, coarctation of aorta, VSD
Scimitar syndrome
Hypoplasia of right lung, anomalous pulmonary venous return to inferior vena cava
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
VSD, PDA
TAR syndrome (thrombocytopenia and absent radius)
ASD, TOF, VSD
Treacher Collins syndrome
VSD, ASD, PDA
ASD, atrial septal defect; AV, aortic valve; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
*Conotruncal includes TOF, pulmonary atresia, truncus arteriosus, and transposition of great arteries.
†Also known as VACTERL (vertebral, anal, cardiac, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal, limb).
Modified from Bernstein D. History and physical examination in cardiac evaluation. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2346–2354.e1, Chapter 449.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
149
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
hemoglobin and is evident in one third of infants with potentially lethal 
congenital heart disease. Central cyanosis is distinguished from acro­
cyanosis (peripheral cyanosis) by involvement of the warm mucous 
membranes, including the tongue and buccal mucosa. Acrocyanosis or 
peripheral cyanosis is generally confined to the perioral and perinasal 
regions, extremities, or nail beds and occurs in the child who is cold, 
vasoconstricted, or at rest. A distinctive feature is that central cyanosis 
generally worsens with activity and increasing cardiac output, whereas 
acrocyanosis generally improves or resolves with increased activity.
General Physical Examination
Overall Appearance
Height and weight should be measured and plotted on a growth chart. 
An assessment of the child’s overall growth, appearance, and state of 
distress serves as a guide to the urgency of further investigation and 
management. The sick infant often appears anxious, fretful, diapho­
retic, pale, or breathless and is seldom consolable. Cyanosis, pallor, 
digital clubbing, an abnormal pattern of respiration, and possible dys­
morphic features may suggest specific structural cardiac anomalies.
Vital Signs
Normal resting heart rates and respiratory rate values for age are pre­
sented in Table 9.3. Blood pressure should be measured using an appro­
priately sized cuff. Every child should have a comparison of upper and 
lower blood pressures on at least one occasion. The lower limb sys­
tolic blood pressure is normally 10 mm Hg higher than the upper limb 
pressure in older children. On occasion, the subclavian arteries may 
arise aberrantly beyond the site of ductal ligament insertion. Therefore, 
both upper limb pressures should be measured and compared with the 
lower limb pressure. Normal values for blood pressure in children are 
presented in Figure 9.4.
Respiratory Assessment
Respiratory distress may suggest cardiac disease. In addition to noting 
the rate, depth, and effort of respiration, the inspection should include 
observation for evidence of air trapping, increased chest diameter, 
or the presence of Harrison sulci (horizontal grooves in the anterior 
chest at the diaphragm insertion site along the sixth and seventh cos­
tal cartilages) as an indication of chronic upper airway obstruction. 
Midfacial hypoplasia with chronic mouth breathing may also suggest 
upper airway obstructive disease with predisposition to hypercapnia 
and pulmonary hypertension. Although crackles in the lungs in infants 
and even young children usually indicate infection, pulmonary edema 
should also be a consideration.
CARDIOVASCULAR ASSESSMENT
Arterial Examination
Pulses should be assessed for rate, rhythm, volume, and character. The 
dynamic character of the pulse may provide information about the car­
diac output. A clinical index of cardiac output includes the warmth of 
the digits and measured capillary refill time, obtained by blanching the 
nail beds or digits and estimating the time to full reperfusion, which 
is normally <2 seconds. Initially, the radial and brachial pulses should 
be assessed simultaneously in the upper limb. By palpating the pulse 
at two sites and altering the pressure applied by the palpating fingers, 
a more accurate assessment of the rate of rise, volume, and contour 
may be obtained. Assessment of the femoral pulse requires that the 
infant be quiet. Palpating parallel to the inguinal crease and allowing 
the leg to continue to flex is generally more effective than extending 
the leg. Blood pressures in the arm and leg should be assessed, and the 
radial and femoral pulses should be palpated simultaneously. When­
ever possible, the radial pulse should be brought in close apposition to 
the femoral pulse to compare for any delay, allowing for a more accu­
rate appreciation of any temporal delay and enabling more accurate 
detection of the presence of coarctation of the aorta. The presence of a 
palpable femoral pulse is by itself an inadequate screen for coarctation 
Fig. 9.1  Location of the heart within the thorax. The right atrium and 
right ventricle lie immediately beneath the sternum. The left atrium lies 
posteriorly against the spine. The left ventricle extends laterally toward 
the chest wall, whereas the left ventricular outflow tract extends to the 
right side of the sternum, going up toward the cardiac base.
O
ejection
ejection
Ventricle
Atrium
JP
ACG
ECG
RFW
SFW
QRS
T
X
Y
A
A
P
Z
C
E
Mechanical
activity
right
left
OS
S3
S2
S1
S4
TC PO
AC
MC AO
MO
TO
PC
seconds
0
0.7
V
IR
clicks
Fig. 9.2  The cardiac cycle. Relationship among electrical and mechan­
ical events, valvular motion, heart sounds (S1, S2, S3, and S4), the jugu­
lar pulse wave (JP), and the apexcardiogram (ACG). AC and AO, aortic 
component and opening; IR, isovolumic (isochronic) relaxation wave; 
MC and MO, mitral component and opening; O, opening of mitral valve; 
OS, opening snap of atrioventricular valves; PC and PO, pulmonic com­
ponent and opening; RFW, rapid-­filling wave; SFW, slow-­filling wave; TC 
and TO, tricuspid component and opening. (From Tilkian AG, Conover 
MB. Understanding Heart Sounds and Murmurs: With an Introduction 
to Lung Sounds. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
150
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
because a widely patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or collateral vessels, 
particularly in the older patient, may provide delayed perfusion. Pre­
vious arterial instrumentation, injury, or congenital variability may 
account for reduction in palpable peripheral pulses.
Venous Examination
In infants and young children, the liver size and character offer more 
reliable indicators of right atrial pressure and systemic congestion than 
does the jugular venous pressure. The position, size, and consistency of 
the liver should be assessed with quiet respiration. The character of the 
normal liver margin is generally likened to that of the cartilage of the 
external pinna, and the margin should be sharp and angulated. In the 
newborn, the liver may be normally palpable at 1.5–2.5 cm below the 
right costal margin in the midclavicular line. This distance decreases 
to approximately 1–2 cm by 1 year of age and remains just palpable 
until school-­entrance age. In the presence of congestive heart failure, 
the liver enlarges and distends downward. The congested liver mar­
gin becomes rounded and firm and is often more difficult to feel. An 
enlarged liver may be tender, and aggressive palpation may cause dis­
comfort and tensing of the abdominal musculature, making accurate 
assessment difficult. A transverse liver is suggestive of a heterotaxy 
syndrome with abnormal abdominal organ location (i.e., situs abnor­
malities) and complex congenital heart lesions. The spleen should 
always be sought; enlargement suggests endocarditis in the patient 
with a heart murmur. Splenic enlargement in association with conges­
tive heart failure is unusual (see Chapter 17).
Precordial Examination
Inspection of the chest may suggest the presence of a precordial bulge of 
long-­standing right ventricular volume overload. The examiner’s entire 
palm and hand should be warmed and then fully applied to the patient’s 
chest wall to maximize ability to detect thrills or heaves. Whereas the 
examiner’s fingertips are best utilized to localize an abnormality, the pal­
mar surface of the metacarpals and first phalanges is more sensitive for 
the detection of low-­frequency events. The fingertips should be used to 
localize the most lateral displacement of the apical impulse. In patients 
of all ages, the apical impulse should be confined to one intercostal inter­
space, in which case the impulse would be described as localized; how­
ever, if the apical impulse is equally dynamic in two or more interspaces, 
then it is best described as diffuse. In the neonate, a right ventricular 
impulse may be felt close to the sternum. Later in life, the same degree 
of parasternal activity is likely to suggest pulmonary hypertension, right-­
sided heart volume overload, or right ventricular outflow obstruction. 
The lateral displacement of the apex, normally located in the midclavicu­
lar line, should be compared to existing landmarks. A dynamic or thrust­
ing character to an apical impulse may be detected in association with an 
Ao
Ao
DA
DA
PA
PA
RV
RV
LV
LV
LA
LA
RA
RA
IVC
IVC
PV
PV
65
65
65
68
55
55
60
60
97
97
97
97
67
70
70
40
SVC
SVC
m3
m2
m2
m4
A
B
50
3 
50
30 m38
70
45 m55
70
45 m55
70
45 m55
70
4
70
3
70
5
Ao
PA
RV
LV
LA
RA
IVC
PV
65
65
65
65
60
99
99
99
99
SVC
m2
m4
C
80
50 m60
30
3
30
12 m18
80
5
Fig. 9.3  Fetal (A), transitional (B), and neonatal (C) circulations. The course of the circulation in the heart 
and great arteries of the late-­gestation fetal lamb, within a few hours of delivery and as a newborn, are pre­
sented. The figures in the circles within the chambers and vessels represent percent oxygen saturation. The 
numbers alongside the chambers and vessels are pressures in mm Hg related to amniotic fluid pressure as 
zero. Ao, aorta; DA, ductus arteriosus; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; m, mean; PA, 
pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary vein; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava. (Modified 
from Rudolph AM. Chapters 2 and 3. In: Congenital Disease of the Heart. Chicago: Year Book Medical; 1974.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
151
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
TABLE 9.3  Normal Values of Respiratory and Heart Rates in Infants and Children
AGE
Birth–6 Wk
6 Wk–2 Yr
2–6 Yr
6–10 Yr
Older Than 10 Yr
Respiratory rate
45–60/min
40/min
30/min
25/min
20/min
Heart rate
125 ± 30/min
115 ± 25/min
100 ± 20/min
90 ± 15/min
85 ± 15/min
TABLE 9.4  Categories of Cyanotic Heart Lesions in the Neonate
Group
Heart Size
Pulmonary Blood 
Flow
Low Cardiac 
Output
Respiratory Distress
Examples
I
Small
Reduced
No
None
Hypoplastic RV with pulmonary atresia
Hypoplastic RV with tricuspid atresia
Tetralogy of Fallot (severe)
II
Small or slight 
­cardiomegaly
Increased
No
Moderate
Transposition of great arteries with intact 
ventricular septum
III
Large
Increased
Yes
Yes
Complicated coarctation of aorta with VSD, 
hypoplastic LV
IV
Small
Pulmonary venous 
congestion
Yes
Yes
Obstructed total anomalous pulmonary veins
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Modified from Gillette PC. The cardiovascular system. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1994:503.
Systolic
Diastolic
Age
A
Percentile
Blood
Pressure
mm Hg
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
90
80
70
60
50
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Systolic
Diastolic
Age
B
Percentile
Blood
Pressure
mm Hg
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
90
80
70
60
50
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Fig. 9.4  Normal blood pressure percentiles for boys (A) and girls (B), aged 2–18 years. The Korotkoff IV sound 
is used for diastolic blood pressure. (Modified from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Report of 
the Second Task Force On Blood Pressure Control In Children, 1987. Pediatrics. 1987;79:1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
152
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
elevated cardiac output or various forms of obstruction to left ventricular 
outflow. On occasion, an apical filling impulse, coinciding with an audi­
ble S3, may be normally palpable, particularly in the adolescent or athlete 
with a relative bradycardia and increased stroke volume.
A thrill is a palpable murmur and should be sought in the precor­
dial and suprasternal areas. The palmar surface of the examiner’s hand is 
most sensitive in detection of a thrill; however, only the tips of the dig­
its fit in the patient’s suprasternal notch. A palpable second heart sound 
(S2), indicative of a significant level of pulmonary hypertension, may be 
detected as a sharp or distinctive impulse in the pulmonary outflow.
Auscultation
Thorough auscultation in the cooperative patient may take as long as 
5–10 minutes and should include listening in the principal areas of the 
precordial auscultation (tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and aortic) with 
both the bell and diaphragm of the stethoscope, with the patient in 
the supine, sitting, and standing positions. These four areas serve as a 
guide to auscultation of the heart (Fig. 9.5). These are the optimal sites 
for listening to sounds that arise within the chambers and great vessels:
	1.	 The tricuspid area is represented by the fourth and fifth intercostal 
spaces along the left sternal edge but extends to the right of the ster­
num as well as downward to the subxiphisternal area.
	2.	 The pulmonary area is the second intercostal space along the left 
sternal border. Murmurs that are best heard in this area may also 
extend to the left infraclavicular area and often lower, along the left 
sternal edge to the third intercostal space.
	3.	 The mitral area involves the region of the cardiac apex and gen­
erally is at the fifth intercostal space in the midclavicular line. This 
area may also extend medially to the left sternal edge and laterally 
to the region of the axilla.
	4.	 The aortic area, although centered at the second right intercostal 
space, may extend to the suprasternal area, to the neck, and inferi­
orly to the third left intercostal space.
The margins of these areas are ill defined, and auscultation should 
not be limited to these sites and may extend to the axillae, neck, back, 
or infraclavicular areas.
A step-­by-­step auscultation—first for heart sounds, subsequently 
for systolic murmurs, and then separately for diastolic murmurs—is 
essential. The ability to clearly characterize the S2 is perhaps more cru­
cial than for any other sound; the effects of respiration are important. 
The components of the S2 in childhood are normally split with inspi­
ration and become single on expiration. A loud pulmonary closure 
sound should suggest the possibility of pulmonary artery hyperten­
sion. The S2 may be widely split and/or fixed in association with right 
ventricular volume overload or delayed right ventricular conduction. 
Normal inspiratory splitting of the S2 should be sought and established 
in all patients. As timing may be difficult in the infant with a rapid 
respiratory rate, the presence of splitting at any time during the respi­
ratory cycle may be accepted as normal.
The right ventricle is normally just beneath the sternum. This prox­
imity generally makes sounds emanating from the right heart louder 
and less diffuse. In addition, right heart sounds and murmurs are more 
influenced by the effects of respiration.
Heart Sounds
Examination should first focus on identifying the normal heart sounds 
in sequence; subsequent attention should be directed at establishing 
the effects of inspiration and expiration on the heart sounds. Next, 
examination should address the presence or absence of additional 
heart sounds and murmurs. Finally, examination should ascertain any 
variability that occurs with a change of body position.
First Heart Sound
The first heart sound (S1) (see Fig. 9.2) arises from closure of the atrio­
ventricular (mitral and tricuspid) valves in early isovolumic ventricular 
contraction and, consequently, is best heard in the mitral and tricuspid 
valve areas. Mitral valve closure occurs slightly in advance of tricuspid 
valve closure, and, on rare occasion, near the lower left sternal edge two 
components (splitting) of the S1 may be heard. There is usually a single 
first heart sound. The S1 is most easily heard when the heart rate is slow 
because the interval between the S1 and S2 is shorter than the interval 
between the S2 and subsequent S1. The intensity of the S1 is influenced 
Aortic valve stenosis
Supravalvular AS
Subvalvular AS
Pulmonary valve stenosis
Atrial septal defect
Pulmonary ejection murmur, innocent
Pulmonary flow murmur of newborn
Pulmonary artery stenosis
Aortic stenosis
Coarctation of the aorta
Patent ductus arteriosus
PAPVR
TAPVR
Mitral regurgitation
Vibratory innocent murmur
Mitral valve prolapse syndrome
Aortic stenosis
IHSS
Ventricular septal defect,
     including ECD
Vibratory innocent murmur
     (Still’s murmur)
HOCM (IHSS)
Tricuspid regurgitation
Tetralogy of Fallot
Fig. 9.5  Diagram showing the locations at which certain systolic murmurs are most readily auscultated. Less 
common conditions are shown in smaller type. AS, aortic stenosis; ECD, endocardial cushion defect; HOCM, 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; IHSS, idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis; PAPVR, partial 
anomalous pulmonary venous return; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return. (From Park MK. 
Park’s Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:33, Figure 2-­12.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
153
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
by the position of the atrioventricular valve at the onset of ventricular 
contraction.
Second Heart Sound
Shortly after the onset of ventricular contraction, the semilunar valves 
(aortic and pulmonary) open and permit ventricular ejection. This 
opening does not usually generate any sound. The atrioventricular 
valves remain tightly closed during ventricular ejection. As ventric­
ular ejection nears completion, the pressure begins to fall within the 
ventricles, and the semilunar valves snap closed. This prevents regur­
gitation from the aorta and pulmonary artery back into the heart. The 
closure of the semilunar valves generates the S2 (see Fig. 9.2). The S2 
usually consists of a louder and earlier aortic valve closure sound (A2), 
followed by a later and quieter pulmonary valve closure sound (P2). 
Normal physiologic splitting or variability is generally only appreciated 
in the pulmonary area during or near the end of inspiration. During 
expiration, the aortic and pulmonary valves close almost synchro­
nously and produce a single or narrowly split S2. Normal splitting of 
S2 is caused by (1) increased right-­sided heart filling during inspiration 
because of increased blood volume returning via the venae cavae and 
(2) diminished left-­sided heart filling because blood is retained within 
the small blood vessels of the lungs when the thorax expands. During 
inspiration, when the right ventricle is filled more than the left, it takes 
slightly longer to empty. This causes the noticeable inspiratory delay 
in P2 in relation to A2. Splitting of the S2 during inspiration is a normal 
finding and should be sought in all patients.
The aortic and pulmonary pressure in diastole close the semilunar 
valves. Many forms of congenital or acquired heart disease have an 
impact on the pulmonary circulation and, consequently, often affect 
the S2. Thus, the higher the pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, the 
more intense and earlier the P2 is. Pulmonary hypertension in children 
is suggested when the P2 is palpable, loud, and narrowly split or cannot 
be separated from A2. If the P2 is audible outside of the pulmonary area, 
particularly at the apex, then pulmonary hypertension is likely. A single 
or narrow split S2 may also be noted in patients with severe pulmonic 
or aortic valve stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, pulmo­
nary atresia, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, tricuspid valve atresia, 
or Eisenmenger syndrome with a VSD. In the presence of moderate 
to severe pulmonic stenosis, there is low pulmonary artery diastolic 
pressure. The pulmonary valve closure is therefore delayed and of 
decreased intensity and is occasionally inaudible.
The S2 may be widely split and/or fixed in association with right 
ventricular volume overload or delayed right ventricular conduction.
Third Heart Sound
The third heart sound (S3) (see Fig. 9.2), which is of very low frequency, 
occurs about a third of the way into diastole, at the time of the most 
rapid filling of the ventricles. It is most likely caused by sudden ten­
sion of the ventricles, enough to produce sound vibrations within the 
myocardial wall. Vibrations in the atrioventricular valve itself, as well as 
in the chordae, may also contribute to the sound. The amplitude of S3 
increases with an increased ventricular filling rate. When heard at the 
apex, S3 is considered left ventricular in origin, and when heard at the 
lower left sternal border, S3 is likely to be right ventricular in origin. An 
apical S3 of soft to moderate intensity is readily heard in most children 
and young adults. An S3 in association with tachycardia is termed a gal­
lop and may be caused by lesions associated with left or right ventricular 
diastolic overload or diminished ventricular compliance.
Fourth Heart Sound
The fourth heart sound (S4) (see Fig. 9.2) is also of low frequency and 
can be both left-­sided and right-­sided in origin. It occurs with atrial 
contraction against a high resistance and is therefore heard just before 
S1. It is more difficult to hear than S3, particularly in children, in whom 
the PR interval is usually shorter than that in the adult. The S4 is 
thought to be caused by a forceful atrial contraction against a poorly 
compliant left ventricle (e.g., as in diastolic overload). The sound is 
readily heard in adults with significant chronic hypertension or left 
ventricular cardiomyopathy and, except for its timing, sounds much 
like an S3. In a young baby with total anomalous pulmonary venous 
return, low pulmonary vascular resistance, and significantly increased 
right ventricular and pulmonary blood flow, a loud right ventricular S4 
(as well as S3) may be heard as part of a quadruple rhythm at the lower 
left sternal border. An intermittent S4 may be heard in children with 
complete atrioventricular block. Whereas an S3 may be heard in a nor­
mal adolescent and can be physiologic, the S4 only occurs in a pathologic 
condition.
Ejection Click
An audible ejection click (see Fig. 9.2) is abnormal and is related to 
either the hemodynamics associated with a dilated root of the aorta 
(aortic ejection click) or a dilated root of the pulmonary artery (pul­
monary ejection click) or the effects of a thickened and immobile 
semilunar valve. The sound is sharp and of very high frequency. The 
pulmonary ejection click is best heard at the upper left sternal border, 
whereas the aortic ejection click is usually best heard at the apex. It 
may also be heard at the upper right sternal border, but if so, it is 
always louder at the apex or the lower left sternal border. The click 
arises either from sudden tension of the semilunar valve or from sud­
den distention with lateral pressure at the root of the aorta or pul­
monary artery. The sound is present in aortic or pulmonary valve 
stenosis. In such cases, the rapid movement of the stenotic valve is 
suddenly checked. An aortic ejection click may be heard in the pres­
ence of a normal aortic valve (as in severe tetralogy of Fallot with a 
large aortic root); a pulmonary ejection click may be heard with a 
normal pulmonic valve (as in Eisenmenger syndrome with a large 
pulmonary root). The aortic ejection click, best heard at the apex, 
does not vary with respirations. However, the pulmonary ejection 
click, best heard at the upper left sternal border, is better heard on 
expiration than inspiration.
An ejection click or a sharp sound present at the upper left ster­
nal border, louder with expiration or heard only on expiration, is 
characteristic of pulmonary valve stenosis. The ejection click follows 
the period of isovolumic contraction and occurs as a consequence of 
restricted semilunar pulmonary valve excursion at the onset of ven­
tricular ejection. When the ejection sound occurs at the upper right 
sternal border or at the apex, a bicuspid or stenotic aortic valve disease 
is suggested. In contrast to ejection clicks, right-­sided cardiac murmurs 
are accentuated with inspiration. Left-­sided heart auscultatory abnor­
malities vary little with the respiratory cycle.
In the case of the aortic ejection click, the sound is usually well sep­
arated from S1. However, the pulmonary ejection click is usually closer 
to S1 than is an aortic click. In some moderate to severe cases, the pul­
monary ejection click occurs at the same time as S1. If one perceives a 
split S1, one is most likely hearing an ejection click as the causes of a 
true split S1 are very rare.
Opening Snap
The opening snap is present only in rheumatic mitral valve stenosis 
when the anteromedial leaflet is immobile; is heard early in diastole, 
usually above the apex; and is of medium frequency. Because the leaflets 
are fused, the downward movement of the opening valve is suddenly 
checked, resulting in the opening snap. This sound is often confused 
with an S3. The frequency is somewhat higher and the timing is earlier 
than those of an S3. The opening snap and the S3, although similar in 
timing, can never occur together in the same patient.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
154
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Non-­Ejection Click
Non-­ejection clicks are heard at the apex and occur one third to half 
of the way between S1 and S2. Thus, they are commonly called mid-­
systolic clicks. The sounds are of medium to high frequency. The 
sound is caused by the sudden tensing of the posterior mitral valve 
leaflet as it prolapses into the left atrium; in rare cases, there may be 
multiple mid-­systolic clicks. The clicks may be loud, but they may also 
be soft and easily missed.
CLASSIFICATION OF CARDIAC MURMURS
Heart murmurs are the consequence of turbulent blood flow. Turbu­
lence may arise as a result of
 • high flow through abnormal or normal valves
 • normal flow through narrow or stenotic valves or vessels
 • backward or regurgitant flow through incompetent leaky valves
 • flow through congenital or surgical communications
 • anemia with high flows and decreased blood viscosity
Not all cardiac murmurs indicate heart problems.
The clinician should be able to determine and describe the follow­
ing seven characteristics of heart murmurs:
	1.	 Timing: the relative position within the cardiac cycle relative to S1 
and S2
	2.	 Intensity or loudness: murmurs are graded as
 
• grade I: heard only with intense concentration
 
• grade II: faint but heard immediately
 
• grade III: easily heard, of intermediate intensity
 
• grade IV: easily heard and associated with a thrill (a palpable 
vibration on the chest wall)
 
• grade V: very loud, with a thrill present, and audible with only 
the edge of the stethoscope on the chest wall
 
• grade VI: audible with the stethoscope off the chest wall
	3.	 Location: on the chest wall with regard to
 
• area where the sound is loudest (point of maximal intensity)
 
• area over which the sound is audible (extent of radiation)
	4.	 Shape: to include the duration (the length of the murmur from 
beginning to end) and configuration (the dynamic changing nature 
of the murmur)
	5.	 Pitch: the frequency range of the murmur, generally described as 
low, medium, or high pitched
	6.	 Quality: aspect that relates to the presence of harmonics and over­
tones
	7.	 Physiologic effects: of different positions, manipulations, or maneuvers
PEDIATRIC MURMUR EVALUATION
After the neonatal period, an innocent murmur may be detected at 
some time in the majority of children before school age. The clinical 
diagnosis of a normal ejection or innocent murmur should only occur 
in the setting of an otherwise normal history, physical examination, 
and appearance (Table 9.5 and Fig. 9.6).
Thorough auscultation in the cooperative patient should include 
listening in the principal areas (tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and 
aortic) of the precordium with both the bell and diaphragm of the 
stethoscope and with the patient in the supine, sitting, and standing 
positions.
SYSTOLIC MURMURS
Systolic murmurs begin with or follow the S1 and end before the S2 
(Fig. 9.7).
Holosystolic murmurs, beginning abruptly with S1 and continuing at 
the same intensity to S2, are graphically shown as a rectangle. This 
murmur begins during the period of isovolumic contraction and 
thus occurs when there is a regurgitant atrioventricular valve (tri­
cuspid or mitral) or in association with a VSD.
TABLE 9.5  Common Innocent Heart Murmurs in Children
Type (Timing)
Description of Murmur
Age Group
Classic vibratory murmur (Still murmur) (systolic)
Maximal at MLSB or between LLSB and apex
Grade 2–3/6 in intensity
Low-­frequency vibratory, “twanging string,” groaning, squeaking, or 
musical
3–6 yr
Occasionally in infancy
Pulmonary ejection murmur (systolic)
Maximal at ULSB
Early to mid-­systolic
Grade 1–3/6 in intensity
Blowing in quality
8–14 yr
Pulmonary flow murmur of newborn (systolic)
Maximal at ULSB
Transmits well to the left and right chest, axilla, and back
Grade 1–2/6 in intensity
Premature and full-­term newborns
Usually disappears by 3–6 mo of age
Venous hum (continuous)
Maximal at right (or left) supraclavicular and infraclavicular areas
Grade 1–3/6 in intensity
Inaudible in the supine position
Intensity changes with rotation of the head and compression of the 
jugular vein
3–6 yr
Carotid bruit (systolic)
Right supraclavicular area and over the carotids
Grade 2–3/6 in intensity
Occasional thrill over a carotid
Any age
LLSB, lower left sternal border; MLSB, mid-­left sternal border; ULSB, upper left sternal border.
From Park MK. Park’s Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders; 2014:36, Table 2-­8.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
155
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
Ejection murmurs are crescendo-­decrescendo or diamond-­shaped 
murmurs that may arise from narrowing of the semilunar valves or 
outflow tracts. The rising-­and-­falling nature of the murmur reflects 
the periods of lower flow at the beginning and near the end of ven­
tricular systole.
Innocent murmurs are almost exclusively ejection systolic in nature 
(see Table 9.5). They are generally soft, are never associated with a 
palpable thrill, and are subject to considerable variation with posi­
tioning changes.
Early systolic murmurs start abruptly with S1 but taper and disappear 
before the S2 and are exclusively associated with small muscular 
VSDs.
Mid-­systolic to late systolic murmurs begin midway through systole 
and are often heard in association with the mid-­systolic clicks and 
insufficiency of mitral valve prolapse.
DIASTOLIC MURMURS
Diastole, the period between closure of the semilunar valves (S2) and 
subsequent closure of the atrioventricular valves (S1), is normally silent 
because of relatively low flow through large valve orifices. Regurgita­
tion of the semilunar valves, stenosis of the atrioventricular valves, or 
increased flow across the atrioventricular valves all cause turbulence 
and may produce diastolic heart murmurs (Fig. 9.8).
Early diastolic murmurs are decrescendo in nature and arise from 
either aortic or pulmonary valve insufficiency (regurgitation).
Mid-­diastolic murmurs are diamond shaped and occur because of either 
(1) increased flow across the normal tricuspid or mitral valve or (2) 
normal flow across an obstructed or stenotic tricuspid or mitral valve.
Late diastolic or crescendo murmurs are created by stenotic or nar­
rowed atrioventricular valves and occur during atrial contraction.
CONTINUOUS MURMURS
Flow through vessels, channels, or communications beyond the semi­
lunar valves is not confined to either systole or diastole. Thus, there may 
be turbulent flow throughout some or all of the cardiac cycle (Fig. 9.9). 
The resulting murmur that extends beyond the S2 has been classically 
termed “continuous.” The continuous murmur can be heard through 
part or all of diastole. Continuous murmurs are generally pathologic; 
the venous hum is an exception.
MURMURS IN CHILDREN WITH NORMAL HEARTS
“Innocent” murmurs occur in the absence of structural or physio­
logic cardiac disease. Innocent murmurs have been called functional, 
benign, innocuous, or physiologic but are perhaps best termed normal 
to accurately convey to parents the favorable impression and outcome 
that should accompany the diagnosis. After the neonatal period, a nor­
mal murmur may be detected in the majority of children at some time 
before school age.
S1
S1
S1
S1
S2
A2
P2
Carotid bruit
Venous hum
Pulmonary ejection murmur
of children and newborns
Vibratory systolic murmur
Fig. 9.6  Diagram of innocent heart murmurs in children. (From Park MK. Park’s Pediatric Cardiology for Prac­
titioners. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:37, Figure 2-­14.)
Holosystolic
Ejection
Early systolic
Late systolic
Systole
R
P
Q
S
T
Fig. 9.7  Four classes of systolic heart murmurs. The holosystolic or 
pansystolic murmur begins abruptly with the first heart sound (S1) and 
proceeds at the same intensity to the second heart sound (S2). The ejec­
tion systolic or crescendo-­decrescendo murmur begins with the onset 
of volume ejection from the heart. As the flow increases, the murmur 
varies both in intensity and frequency and subsequently tapers as the 
period of ejection ceases, before the S2. The early systolic murmur 
begins, as does the holosystolic murmur, abruptly with S1 but termi­
nates in mid-­systole with the cessation of shunt flow. The late systolic 
murmur begins well after S1, commencing in mid-­ to late systole in 
association with the development of valve insufficiency, and proceeds 
at this intensity to S2. (From Pelech AN. The cardiac murmur. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 1998;45:107–122.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
156
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
The normal murmurs of childhood are composed of five systolic 
and two continuous types but are never solely diastolic (see Table 9.5 
and Fig. 9.6). The intensity or loudness of the murmur is grade III or 
less and consequently is never associated with a palpable thrill. The 
majority of all murmurs, both innocent and organic, are accentuated 
by fever, anemia, or increased cardiac output.
Vibratory Still Murmur
The most common innocent murmur in children is the vibratory systolic 
murmur described by Sir George Still. The murmur is typically audible 
in children between ages 2 and 6 years but may be present as late as ado­
lescence or as early as infancy. The murmur is low to medium in pitch, 
confined to early systole, generally grade II (range I–III), and heard 
maximally at the lower left sternal edge and extending to the apex. The 
murmur is loudest when the patient is in the supine position and often 
changes in character, pitch, and intensity with upright positioning.
The most characteristic feature of the murmur is its vibratory, musi­
cal, harmonious quality described as a “twanging” sound, very like that 
made by strumming a piece of tense string. The quality of the murmur 
can thus never be described as “noisy” or “rough.” Quite characteris­
tically, the intensity of the murmur diminishes and the pitch changes 
with upright positioning; it seldom disappears entirely.
The origins of the murmur are obscure and have been ascribed to 
vibration of the pulmonary valves during systolic ejection, vibrations 
arising from the shift in blood mass in the dynamically contracting 
ventricle, physiologic narrowing of the left ventricular outflow tract, 
and the presence of ventricular false tendons or bridging bands. Pho­
nocardiographic recordings have shown the innocent murmur to arise 
from either the right ventricular or left ventricular outflow tracts.
Pulmonary Flow Murmur
An innocent pulmonary outflow tract murmur may be heard in chil­
dren, adolescents, and young adults. The murmur is a crescendo-­
decrescendo, loudest in early-­ to mid-­peaking ejection systolic murmur 
confined to the second and third interspaces at the left sternal border. It 
is of low intensity (grades II–III) and transmits to the pulmonary area. 
It is rough and dissonant without the vibratory musical quality of the 
Still murmur. The murmur is best heard in the supine position and is 
exaggerated by the presence of a pectus excavatum, a straight back, or 
kyphoscoliosis, which results in compression or approximation of the 
right ventricular outflow tract to the chest wall. This murmur may be 
heard in association with anemia or a thin body build. The murmur is 
augmented in full exhalation while the patient is supine, rarely result­
ing in the perception of a palpable thrill, and is diminished by upright 
positioning and held inspiration.
The murmur of an ASD is attributable to increased flow through the 
pulmonary outflow tract and may be indistinguishable from the inno­
cent pulmonary flow murmur. However, the hyperdynamic right ven­
tricular impulse, wide splitting of the pulmonary component of the S2, 
and presence of a mid-­diastolic flow rumble should enable distinction.
The murmur of pulmonary valve stenosis may be distinguished 
from the innocent pulmonary flow murmur by the frequent presence 
of a systolic thrill, higher pitch, longer duration, and/or presence of 
an ejection click. The presence of an ejection click signifies improper 
opening of a semilunar valve and is usually of pathologic origin. In pul­
monary stenosis, the S2 may be widely split and the P2, when audible, 
is of diminished intensity.
Peripheral Pulmonary Arterial Stenosis Murmur
A common murmur heard frequently in newborns and in infants 
younger than 1 year is the audible turbulence of peripheral branch 
pulmonary arterial stenosis, angulation, or narrowing. These ejection 
character murmurs are typically grade I or II, are low to moderate in 
pitch, begin in early to middle systole, and extend up to and occasion­
ally just after the S2. These murmurs are most often present in normal 
newborns but may be associated with viral lower respiratory tract infec­
tions and reactive airway disease in older infants. In the fetus, the pul­
monary trunk is a relatively dilated, domed structure because it receives 
the majority of combined cardiac output from the high-­pressure right 
ventricle. Right and left pulmonary artery branches arise from this 
major trunk as comparatively small lateral branches that receive little 
intrauterine flow because of high pulmonary artery resistance. When 
the lungs expand at birth, the relative disparity transiently persists. The 
branches also arise at comparatively sharp angles from the main pul­
monary trunk, accounting for turbulence and a recognized physiologic 
drop in pressure from the main trunk to the proximal branch pulmo­
nary arteries. In association with a respiratory tract infection, regional 
vascular reactivity and pulmonary blood flow redistribution may 
account for the reappearance of the murmur after the neonatal period.
Early
Mid
Late
Diastole
R
P
Q
S
T
S1
S2
Fig. 9.8  Diastolic murmurs. The early diastolic or decrescendo murmur 
occurs in association with closure of the semilunar valves (second heart 
sound) and tapers through part or all of diastole. The mid-­diastolic mur­
mur rises and falls in intensity with atrial volume entering the ventricle. 
The late systolic or crescendo diastolic murmur occurs late in diastole 
with atrial contraction, before systole, and ascends to the first heart 
sound. (From Pelech AN. The cardiac murmur. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1998;45:107–122.)
R
P
Q
S
T
S1
S2
Fig. 9.9  Continuous murmur. The continuous murmur begins in systole 
and proceeds up to and through the second heart sound, proceeding 
through part or all of diastole. (From Pelech AN. The cardiac murmur. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 1998;45:107–122.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
157
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
The murmurs are often best heard peripherally in the axillae and 
back with both regional and temporal variability. Because of the rapid 
respiratory rate of infants, similar sound frequency composition of 
breath sounds, and peripheral location of the murmurs, these murmurs 
are often overlooked. In infancy, they often may be evident in associa­
tion with a viral respiratory illness. Of importance is that the murmur 
of peripheral branch stenosis changes with heart rate, increasing in 
intensity with heart rate slowing as the stroke volume increases and, 
conversely, diminishing with tachycardia and reduction in stroke vol­
ume. Therefore, the murmur becomes louder with slowing of the heart 
rate and diminishes with tachycardia and increasing cardiac output.
The normal peripheral branch stenosis murmur may be indistin­
guishable from the peripheral murmur of significant stenosis of the 
branch pulmonary vessels seen in Williams or rubella syndrome or 
from accompanying hypoplasia or narrowing of the pulmonary arter­
ies. Murmurs of significant anatomic narrowing may be distinguished 
by their higher pitch and extension after the S2 in children after the first 
few months of life. The pulmonary flow murmur of an ASD may mimic 
this murmur but is not heard in this age group. Proximal pulmonary 
valve or right ventricular outflow obstruction may also closely resem­
ble this murmur, but these obstructions are often of louder intensity, 
possibly associated with an ejection click, and heard maximally lower 
along the left sternal border.
Supraclavicular or Brachiocephalic Systolic Murmur
A supraclavicular systolic crescendo-­decrescendo murmur may be 
heard in children and young adults. This systolic murmur is audible 
maximally above the clavicles and radiates to the neck but may be 
present to a lesser degree on the superior chest. The murmur is low to 
medium in pitch, of abrupt onset, brief, and maximal in the first half or 
two thirds of systole. High pitch or extension into diastole is unusual 
and suggests significant vascular obstruction.
The murmur is present in both supine and sitting positions but var­
ies with hyperextension of the shoulders. The shoulders can be hyper­
extended with the elbows brought behind the back until the shoulder 
girdle is taut. When this maneuver is done rapidly, the murmur dimin­
ishes or disappears altogether. Supraclavicular systolic murmurs are 
thought to originate from turbulence within the major brachiocephalic 
vessels as they arise from the aorta.
Aortic Systolic Murmur or “Athlete’s Murmur”
Innocent systolic flow murmurs may arise from the outflow tract in 
older children and young adults. The murmurs are ejection in char­
acter, confined to systole, and audible maximally in the aortic area. 
In children, these murmurs may arise secondarily to extreme anxiety, 
anemia, hyperthyroidism, fever, or any condition of increased systemic 
cardiac output.
In trained athletes, slower heart rates with increased stroke vol­
ume may give rise to short crescendo-­decrescendo murmurs of low to 
medium pitch. Physical examination may suggest a relatively displaced 
thrusting apex and a physiologic S3.
These murmurs must be distinguished from the systolic murmur of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy obstructions of the left ventricular out­
flow tract. The presence of a family history for hypertrophic cardiomy­
opathy or a family history of unexplained death in a young individual, 
particularly if associated with activity, is suggestive of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. A systolic murmur that gets louder with performance 
of the Valsalva maneuver is considered almost diagnostic of hypertro­
phic cardiomyopathy with systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve. 
A reduction in venous return results in closer apposition of the septum 
and mitral valve and dynamic narrowing of the left ventricular out­
flow tract. In contrast, rapid squatting improves venous return; the left 
ventricular chamber size is enlarged, the mitral valve and septum are 
farther apart, and the murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy gets 
softer. It is often difficult to be certain of the cause of this type of aortic 
murmur, and further investigations may be indicated.
Normal Continuous Murmurs
Venous Hum
The most common type of continuous murmur heard in children is the 
innocent cervical venous hum, which is most audible on the low ante­
rior part of the neck just lateral to the sternocleidomastoid muscle but 
often extends to the infraclavicular area of the anterior chest wall. The 
murmur is generally louder on the right than on the left, is louder when 
the patient is sitting than when lying down, and is accentuated in dias­
tole. Intensity varies from faint to grade III. Patients are occasionally 
aware of a loud hum. The murmur is quite variable in character, always 
low pitched, and often described as rumbling, roaring, or whirring.
The venous hum is best accentuated or elicited with the patient in 
a sitting position and looking away from the examiner. The murmur 
often resolves or changes in character with lying down and may be 
eliminated or diminished by gentle compression of the jugular vein 
or turning the head toward the side of the murmur. The murmur is 
thought to arise from turbulence at the confluence of flow as the inter­
nal jugular and subclavian veins enter the thoracic inlet or perhaps 
from angulation of the internal jugular vein as it courses over the trans­
verse process of the atlas.
Mammary Arterial Souffle
The mammary arterial souffle occurs most frequently late in preg­
nancy and in lactating women but may occur in rare cases in adoles­
cence. The term souffle refers to a murmur with a blowing quality on 
auscultation that is typically caused by a vascular structure. The mur­
mur arises in systole but may extend well into diastole, being audible 
maximally on the anterior chest wall over the breast. There is usually 
a distinct gap between the S1 and the origin of the murmur; this gap 
is thought to relate to the delayed arrival of cardiac stroke volume at 
the peripheral vasculature. The murmur is generally high pitched and 
has an unusual superficial character but may vary considerably from 
day to day. Firm pressure with the stethoscope or digit pressure on the 
chest wall occasionally abolishes the murmur. The murmur is thought 
to be arterial in origin, arising from the plethoric vessels of the chest 
wall. The murmur must be distinguished from the continuous high-­
pitched murmur of an arteriovenous fistula or a PDA. Characteris­
tically, the mammary arterial souffle varies significantly from day to 
day, is present in a most distinctive patient population, and resolves 
with termination of lactation.
MURMURS CAUSED BY COMMON LESIONS WITH 
LEFT-­TO-­RIGHT SHUNT
Atrial Septal Defects
The most common form of ASD (Fig. 9.10) is the ostium secundum 
defect in the floor of the fossa ovalis. Blood flow through an ASD in the 
low-­pressure atria is inaudible. The auscultatory findings in ASD are 
related to the consequences of increased blood volume that enters the 
right side of the heart. The right ventricular volume overload is associated 
with right ventricular overactivity and a right ventricular parasternal tap.
The right atrium and ventricle receive the blood returning from 
the body plus the blood shunted from left to right through the ASD. 
This causes a prolongation of right-­sided heart emptying. The P2 of the 
second heart sound is therefore widely split and fixed (no respiratory 
variation).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
158
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Two types of murmur may be audible:
	1.	 The typical pulmonary flow murmur is ejection systolic in char­
acter, generally of low intensity (grade II or III), and of low pitch. 
The crescendo-­decrescendo murmur begins shortly after the S1 and 
ends well before the S2.
	2.	 In patients with a large atrial shunt, there is typically a well-­localized, 
low-­pitched mid-­diastolic flow rumble in the tricuspid area because 
of increased flow across the tricuspid valve.
ASDs may lead to pulmonary hypertension in the second and third 
decades of life. Treatment is surgical or by device closure during car­
diac catheterization.
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
In this condition, the connection between the aorta and pulmonary 
artery that exists prenatally remains open after birth (Fig. 9.11).
The amount of shunt flow is dependent not only on the size of the 
ductus communication but also on the differential resistances of the 
systemic and pulmonary circulations. In some children, the PDA may 
produce significant left-­sided heart volume overload and signs of high-­
output congestive heart failure.
The peripheral pulses associated with significant diastolic runoff 
to the pulmonary vascular area are bounding. Palpation may reveal 
a thrill in systole at the upper left sternal edge when the murmur is 
grade IV or greater; an abnormal left ventricular impulse; and, if the 
left-­to-­right shunt is large, a hyperdynamic, diffuse, and displaced api­
cal impulse. The majority of patients have an asymptomatic murmur.
Premature infants often have persistence of ductal patency after 
birth. Initially, in the presence of neonatal lung disease and elevated pul­
monary vascular resistance, the shunt volume is not large. After the lung 
disease improves, the presence of a PDA becomes apparent through the 
detection of a cardiac murmur and bounding pulses. Preterm infants 
with a PDA may show signs of heart failure, pulmonary edema, a hyper­
dynamic precordium, and difficulty in weaning from the ventilator. 
Treatment in preterm infants may include intravenous indomethacin, 
ibuprofen, acetaminophen, and fluid restriction; if these measures are 
unsuccessful, surgical ligation or device closure is indicated.
Beyond the neonatal period, the PDA causes a continuous rough 
murmur, best heard in the pulmonary area. The murmur is generally 
Atrial
septal
defect
Inspiration
Expiration
S1
A2 P2
S1
A2 P2
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.10  Atrial septal defects. The most common type of defect, the 
secundum atrial septal defect, is shown. Characteristically, in associa­
tion with a large left-­to-­right shunt, wide and fixed splitting of the sec­
ond heart sound occurs. The murmur is that of increased flow through 
the right ventricular outflow tract. The shunt flow through the defect, 
which occurs at low pressure, is inaudible.
Patent
ductus
arteriosus
Systole
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.11  The patent ductus arteriosus consists of residual patency of 
a fetal communication between the two great arteries. Because the 
shunt occurs outside the heart, the murmur is continuous and high 
pitched, provided that the defect is restrictive and the pulmonary artery 
pressures are low.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
159
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
high pitched, peaks in late systole, and continues well through the S2. If 
the PDA is large, a mid-­diastolic flow rumble may be heard at the apex 
because of relative mitral valve stenosis. Treatment is surgical ligation 
or device closure during cardiac catheterization.
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS
These common developmental communications between the two ven­
tricles (Fig. 9.12) may be classified as
 • perimembranous
 • muscular
 • atrioventricular or inlet
 • subarterial or outlet (supra cristal)
The acoustic findings depend on five factors:
	1.	 Size
	2.	 Location
	3.	 Shunt or defect flow
	4.	 Pulmonary hypertension
	5.	 Associated anomalies
All of these factors need to be addressed in the clinical description 
of a VSD.
The VSD (Fig. 9.13) causes a left-­to-­right shunt or, in rare cases, a 
right-­to-­left shunt, depending on the resistance to the flow of blood 
leaving the ventricles. The turbulence and thus the intensity of the 
murmur are directly proportional to the flow and pressure difference 
between the ventricles.
Size
A moderate-­sized VSD that is restrictive (i.e., a pressure difference 
exists between the ventricles) causes a harsh blowing holosystolic mur­
mur, which is often very loud and frequently associated with a palpable 
thrill.
The very restrictive or small VSD creates a high-­pitched sys­
tolic murmur and causes little or no physiologic disturbance. Small 
muscular defects may close in mid-­systole, which then abruptly stops 
shunt flow and the murmur before S2.
In an unrestrictive or large VSD, no pressure difference exists 
between the two ventricles. This results in less turbulence and therefore 
a reduced intensity of the murmur.
Location
The perimembranous defect is best heard at the left sternal edge in the 
third left intercostal space. Muscular defects are heard variably from 
the sternal edge to the apex. Outlet or subarterial defects are best heard 
higher along the sternum.
Shunt Flow
If the volume of flow through the VSD (shunt flow) is large (i.e., more 
than 2–3 times normal ventricular outflow), a low-­pitched, mid-­
diastolic flow rumble may be heard in the mitral area. The extra volume 
of blood returning from the pulmonary circulation to the left side of 
the heart creates this murmur of “relative” (not true anatomic) mitral 
valve stenosis.
Perimembranous
defect
Inlet or
atrioventricular
defect
Muscular
defects
Subarterial
outlet or
supracristal
defect
Fig. 9.12  Anatomic types of ventricular septal defects. The four types 
of defects of the ventricular septum are shown. The most common 
type is the muscular defect, which commonly occurs in the anterior 
trabecular area of the septum. The perimembranous (often called mem­
branous) defect occurs in the regions of the pars membranacea, or the 
embryonic bulboventricular foramina. The subarterial outlet, or supra­
cristal defect, extends to the fibrous ring of the semilunar valves. The 
inlet or atrioventricular septal defect is that of the atrioventricular canal 
or embryonic atrioventricularis communis.
Holosystolic
Ventricular
septal
defect
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.13  Ventricular septal defects. A ventricular septal defect is a 
communication between the high-­pressure left ventricle and the lower-­
pressure right ventricle. The shunt flow begins with the onset of ven­
tricular contraction before the period of ejection (isovolumic contraction) 
and consequently gives rise to a holosystolic murmur that obscures the 
first and often the second heart sounds. The murmur is high pitched 
if the defect is restrictive and the right-­sided heart pressures are low; 
however, the murmur may be low pitched or even inaudible if the defect 
is large or if the pulmonary artery pressures are high, as occurs in the 
newborn.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
160
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Pulmonary Hypertension
High pressure in the pulmonary artery limits left-­to-­right shunt flow 
and murmur intensity. The pulmonary closure sound is louder and is 
either narrowly split or single.
Associated Anomalies
Frequently there are anomalies associated with a VSD, such as right-­ or 
left-­sided heart outflow obstruction or aortic insufficiency. This may 
affect the character of the murmur.
The VSD murmur begins very early with the onset of left ventricular 
contraction, which may precede right ventricular contraction because 
the left ventricle is activated earlier. The murmur commences during 
the period of isovolumic contraction and, if it is loud (grade III or 
greater), often obscures the S1. Blood is ejected from the left ventricle 
to the right ventricle throughout systole, giving rise to a classical full-­
length, or “holosystolic,” murmur. On occasion, VSD murmurs may 
not be full length. This may occur characteristically in a small muscular 
VSD that coapts or closes in mid-­systole.
Analysis of the S2 in a VSD is important and, in conjunction with 
precordial palpation, enables estimation of the pulmonary artery pres­
sure. The larger the defect, the higher the pulmonary artery pressure 
and the earlier and louder the P2. Thus, the physiologic split of S2 may 
become very narrow, or the S2 may even become single, a finding of 
great concern. In large defects, a balance exists between delayed P2, 
caused by large pulmonary blood flow, and early P2, caused by high 
pulmonary artery pressure. The wider the split of S2, the less the con­
cern is, because pulmonary vascular resistance is then likely to be low.
The intensity or loudness of a murmur relates to the combination of 
both flow and gradient across the defect. Pitch or frequency relates to 
gradient alone. Thus, very small defects with small left-­to-­right shunt 
flow may have a soft, high-­pitched murmur. In moderate-­sized defects, 
the murmur is loud, often associated with a palpable thrill. In large 
defects with no restriction between the right and left ventricles, the 
murmur is low pitched and less intense as the pulmonary artery and 
right-­sided heart pressures equate with the left-­sided heart pressure.
In many children, the VSD spontaneously closes and the murmur 
becomes softer and softer until it disappears with defect closure. In 
patients who develop increased pulmonary vascular resistance and a 
reduction in shunt flow and who are at risk for progressing to Eisen­
menger syndrome (irreversible pulmonary vascular disease and cyano­
sis with right-­to-­left ventricular level shunt), the murmur also becomes 
quieter. Thus, a diminishing VSD murmur may be evolving into either a 
good or bad outcome. The treatment of a large VSD currently includes 
management of heart failure and, most frequently, surgery.
COMPLETE ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS
There is great variation in the anatomy of atrioventricular septal defects 
(AVSDs). AVSDs (Fig. 9.14) occur in complete, partial, and interme­
diate forms. In the complete AVSD, the intracardiac defect extends 
between both the atria and ventricles. Either the atrial or ventricular 
extent of the defect may be the primary level of shunt flow; conse­
quently, the defect may manifest primarily as either an ASD or a VSD. 
Often the defects are large and unrestrictive. In addition, a common 
accompaniment of AVSD is a cleft in the left-­sided atrioventricular 
valve, which may cause varying degrees of valve insufficiency. Approx­
imately half of the children born with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) 
have congenital heart disease, the most common abnormality of which 
is complete AVSD. Maturation of the pulmonary arteries and small 
muscular arteries is delayed in children with Down syndrome, and 
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance early in life is common. There­
fore, the lesion may be missed early in life because signs of congestive 
heart failure may not occur. It is recommended that all children with 
Down syndrome undergo echocardiographic evaluation. In patients 
with complete AVSDs, the electrocardiogram demonstrates an abnor­
mally counterclockwise superior vector due to displacement of the AV 
node. Intermediate or partial AVSDs are less frequently associated with 
Down syndrome.
In the partial form of AVSD, absence of the lower part of the inter­
atrial septum, the ostium primum, is the major component of the 
abnormality. In such patients, the manifestation and examination are 
similar to those described for a secundum type of ASD. Often, mitral 
regurgitation is present and is apparent as an apical holosystolic mur­
mur that obscures S1. If the amount of mitral valve insufficiency is 
large, a mid-­diastolic flow rumble of increased filling may be heard.
The manifestation and consequently the clinical signs in patients 
with AVSD vary considerably, depending on the patient’s age, pulmo­
nary vascular resistance, size and level of the defects, amount of valve 
insufficiency, and ventricular function. Patients with an AVSD often 
manifest the signs of congestive heart failure early in infancy. Surgical 
repair provides definitive treatment.
Holosystolic
Atrioventricular
septal
malformation
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.14  Complete atrioventricular septal malformation. The atrioven­
tricular septal malformations vary markedly from a large atrial compo­
nent with a restrictive ventricular communication to a large unrestrictive 
inlet ventricular septal defect. Consequently, their clinical manifesta­
tions also vary from that of an atrial septal defect to that of an unrestric­
tive ventricular septal defect.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
161
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
MURMURS CAUSED BY COMMON LESIONS WITH 
RIGHT-­TO-­LEFT SHUNT AND CYANOSIS
Tetralogy of Fallot
The tetralogy (Fig. 9.15) has four anatomic features:
	1.	 VSD
	2.	 Pulmonary stenosis
	3.	 Dextroposition or rightward position of the aorta
	4.	 Right ventricular hypertrophy
The functional significance of this anomaly is related to the degree of 
right ventricular outflow tract obstruction. There is a harsh ejection sys­
tolic murmur, heard best in the pulmonary area but also widely trans­
mitted through the chest. The right ventricular outflow obstruction is 
most frequently a combination of muscular, annular, and valvular nar­
rowing. Consequently, the P2 is soft, delayed, and often inaudible. The 
VSD is typically large and unrestrictive. The prominent systolic murmur 
in tetralogy of Fallot is therefore not caused by the septal defect.
Patients with tetralogy of Fallot may present with moderate to severe 
degrees of right ventricular outflow obstruction, right-­to-­left ventricular 
level shunting, and varying degrees of cyanosis. Alternatively, the outflow 
obstruction may be mild, providing a predominant left-­to-­right shunt 
and causing the “acyanotic” or “pink” form of tetralogy of Fallot. In these 
patients, the degree of outflow obstruction becomes progressive; bidirec­
tional flow develops and, finally, a dominant right-­to-­left shunt emerges.
One aspect of tetralogy physiology is the variable degree of desat­
uration that may occur as a consequence of the reactive nature of 
the right ventricular outflow obstruction. The sudden development 
of severe reactive obstruction in response to temperature, fever, ill­
ness, dehydration, or intense crying may precipitate a hypercyanotic 
or tetralogy (“tet”) spell. Either increased infundibular reactivity or 
decreased systemic vascular resistance is responsible for the dimin­
ished pulmonary blood flow. This life-­threatening event manifests as 
profound cyanosis, tachypnea, and dyspnea, progressing to acidosis, 
unconsciousness, and death. During a spell, the outflow tract murmur 
disappears with the diminution in pulmonary blood flow.
Tetralogy of Fallot is a consequence of developmental anterior dis­
placement of the conal or outlet septum and failure to adjoin with the 
muscular trabecular interventricular septum. Because conal tissue is 
needed for closure of the membranous ventricular septum, the ante­
rior displacement and hypoplasia of the conus results in a VSD, which 
is characteristically unrestrictive. The aorta extends more to the right, 
which results in overriding of the aorta.
In cases in which there is a predominant left-­to-­right shunt, the 
murmur is a long, loud ejection systolic murmur and may overwhelm 
and obscure the S2. The murmur extends up the left sternal border 
(pulmonary area) and throughout both lung fields. The right ventricle 
is at systemic pressure, and the pitch of the murmur is quite high. There 
is a right ventricular parasternal impulse and often a palpable thrill in 
the pulmonary outflow region.
In cyanotic tetralogy of Fallot, the loudness or intensity of the mur­
mur diminishes as the pulmonary blood flow decreases. The systolic 
murmur remains high pitched, harsh, and ejection in shape. The S1 
remains loud or normal; the S2 is single.
In the most severe form of tetralogy, pulmonary atresia with VSD, 
there is no pulmonary outflow murmur at all. Definitive corrective 
treatment of tetralogy of Fallot is surgical.
TRICUSPID VALVE ATRESIA
In tricuspid valve atresia (Fig. 9.16), the tricuspid valve does not 
develop and in its place there may be an imperforate membrane or 
a thick muscle wedge. The right ventricle is usually very small; the left 
ventricle compensates and is large. A dynamic diffuse left ventricular car­
diac impulse is palpable. All systemic venous blood returning to the right 
atrium must pass across at the atrial septal level to enter the left atrium and 
then the left ventricle. Pulmonary blood flow occurs most often as a con­
sequence of a VSD or, in rare cases, is dependent on the ductus arteriosus. 
The ECG reveals an abnormally superior left axis. Examination reveals a 
VSD murmur. The softer and shorter the murmur, the less the pulmonary 
blood flow is, so that, just as in tetralogy of Fallot, the softer the murmur, 
the more severe the cyanosis is. If there is enough pulmonary blood flow, 
both P2 and A2 may be heard. Palliative surgery is required.
PULMONARY ATRESIA WITH INTACT 
VENTRICULAR SEPTUM
There are two forms of pulmonary valve atresia. The first is pulmo­
nary atresia with VSD and generally a long fibrous or muscular out­
flow atresia, which is the most severe malformation on the spectrum 
of tetralogy of Fallot. The second form occurs in association with an 
Right 
ventricular
outflow 
obstruction
Nonrestrictive
VSD with
overriding
of the aorta
Ejection systolic
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.15  Tetralogy of Fallot. The four anatomic malformations seen in 
association with tetralogy of Fallot include an unrestrictive perimembra­
nous ventricular septal defect (VSD), overriding of the aorta, right ven­
tricular hypertrophy, and an obstructive right ventricular outflow tract. 
The cardiac murmur in tetralogy, a harsh loud ejection systolic murmur, 
arises from the turbulence generated in the right-­sided heart outflow. 
Because the VSD is unrestrictive and the right-­ and left-­sided heart pres­
sures are equal, the VSD generates no sound. The pulmonary closure 
sound is often soft or inaudible.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
162
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
intact interventricular septum (Fig. 9.17), wherein right-­sided heart 
hypoplasia is usually then present.
The cardiac impulse in a hypoplastic right ventricle with pulmonary 
atresia may be right ventricular even though the dominant ventricle is 
the left. In contrast to tricuspid valve atresia, a VSD is not part of this 
lesion. The source of the pulmonary blood flow in the neonate is a duc­
tus arteriosus with left-­to-­right shunt. A murmur from this ductus may 
be audible. There is a single S2 (aortic closure). On occasion, there is tri­
cuspid valve regurgitation, which may be confused with a VSD murmur. 
The murmur is high pitched, because the right ventricular pressures are 
very high. The ECG helps differentiate tricuspid valve and pulmonary 
atresia. In both disorders, left ventricular hypertrophy is present, but in 
pulmonary atresia, there is a normal inferior vector. Echocardiography 
confirms the diagnosis. There is usually profound cyanosis.
Intravenous prostaglandin therapy is required to ensure ductal 
patency and pulmonary blood flow in the neonatal period. Surgical 
repair is usually palliative.
TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES
In transposition of the great arteries (Fig. 9.18), the aorta arises from 
the morphologic right ventricle, and the pulmonary artery arises from 
the morphologic left ventricle. In transposition of the great arteries, 
desaturated systemic venous blood returns to the right atrium, passes 
to the right ventricle, and is returned to the aorta and thus to the sys­
temic circulation. Any oxygenation occurring in this setting is the 
result of mixing of blood with the pulmonary circulation at the ductal, 
atrial, or ventricular level.
Transposition of the great arteries with an intact ventricular sep­
tum manifests in the neonatal period with profound cyanosis in an 
infant whose saturations do not improve with oxygen administration 
the hyperoxia test. There is a pronounced right ventricular impulse, 
and the A2 is loud because it is anterior. There may be a faint, soft short 
ejection murmur that is audible along the left sternal border as a result 
of increased pulmonary blood flow. However, there are often no mur­
murs. Heart failure is not expected. The P2 is often not heard.
If there is a VSD, the patient may not present in the neonatal period. 
The minimal cyanosis may be difficult to detect. Such infants usually 
become ill at 2–3 weeks of age as a result of congestive heart failure 
rather than hypoxia. The examination findings are very different, 
because both ventricles are very hyperdynamic. The heart is large; there 
is often a palpable thrill and a loud systolic murmur.
Treatment consists of corrective surgical switching of the great 
vessels.
HYPOPLASTIC LEFT HEART SYNDROME
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (Fig. 9.19) consists of varying degrees 
of left-­sided heart (mitral valve, left ventricle, aortic valve, or arch) 
Tricuspid
valve atresia
Right
ventricular
hypoplasia
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Holosystolic
Atrial
septal
defect
Ventricular
septal
defect
Fig. 9.16  Tricuspid valve atresia. In this condition, the murmur most 
often detected is a holosystolic murmur of a communicating ventricular 
septal defect or an ejection systolic murmur related to an obstructing 
pulmonary outflow.
Systole
Continuous
Atrial septal
defect
Hypertensive
hypoplastic
right ventricle
R
P
Q
S
T
Fig. 9.17  Pulmonary atresia with intact septum. Characteristically, the 
defect manifests in the cyanotic neonate. Most often, a continuous 
murmur of a patent ductus arteriosus is audible. Less often, a high-­
pitched murmur of tricuspid valve insufficiency may be heard.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
163
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
hypoplasia or atresia such that the left ventricle cannot support the sys­
temic circulation. In the first day or two after birth, the neonate may 
not be recognized as being ill if the ductus arteriosus remains open 
and the right ventricular output sustains the systemic output. When 
the ductus begins to close, perfusion deteriorates, the pulses are dimin­
ished, acidosis develops, and death ensues.
The affected infant is often tachypneic, gray, and poorly perfused. 
There may be considerable pulmonary blood flow and a dynamic 
right ventricle impulse. An ejection systolic murmur may be audible 
in the pulmonary area. The heart function may be very poor, and the 
precordial and auscultatory examination findings may be quiet. A 
significantly restrictive ASD may cause profound pulmonary venous 
congestion and poor oxygenation.
After intravenous prostaglandin E1 has been given, causing open­
ing of the ductus arteriosus, a reasonable systemic output and palpable 
pulses should return.
Treatment includes the staged Norwood palliative repair to single-­
ventricle Fontan operation or heart transplantation.
MURMURS CAUSED BY COMMON LESIONS 
WITH SIMPLE OBSTRUCTION
In areas of obstruction, the gradient or pressure difference across an 
obstruction relates to the severity of the narrowing, the flow across 
the narrowing, and the pressure able to be generated (i.e., the cardiac 
function).
PULMONARY VALVE STENOSIS
The hemodynamic abnormality in pulmonary valve stenosis (Fig. 
9.20) is attributable to increased pressure within a right ventricle that 
is attempting to eject through a narrowed or an obstructed valve. The 
more severe the stenosis, the higher the intraventricular pressure is 
until cardiac failure occurs.
This condition is characterized by an ejection systolic murmur, 
heard best in the pulmonary area. The murmur is diamond-­shaped. 
With increasing valvular obstruction, the murmur becomes louder and 
higher pitched and peaks later in systole. The P2 is very helpful because 
the more severe the pulmonary valve stenosis, the more delayed and 
less intense the P2 is.
An ejection click, caused by abrupt arrest of leaflet excursion in 
early systole, frequently precedes the ejection systolic murmur. The 
more severe the pulmonary valve stenosis, the earlier and softer the 
pulmonary ejection click is. In other forms of right ventricular outflow 
obstruction, such as supravalvular stenosis and subvalvular stenosis, or 
in the setting of a dysplastic or malformed pulmonary valve, an ejec­
tion click is not audible.
In newborns with very severe critical pulmonic stenosis, cyano­
sis, and low cardiac output, the examination findings may be quite 
Mitral valve
closed or
atretic
Left 
ventricular
cavity is 
small
Aorta is
reduced 
in size
Blood flow to
the body is
supplied by the
patent ductus
arteriosus
Systole
P
R
Q
S
Continuous
Fig. 9.19  Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. In this condition, the systemic 
circulation is supplied from the right ventricle via the ductus arteriosus. 
The continuous murmur of ductal flow that may be heard is generally 
low pitched as a result of equal pulmonary and aortic pressures.
R
P
Q
S
T
Pulmonary
artery
Systole
Aorta
Right ventricle
Left
ventricle
Fig. 9.18  Transposition of the great arteries. The aorta in this condition 
arises anteriorly, giving rise to a loud, single second heart sound. Many 
profoundly cyanotic full-­term newborns with no audible murmur have 
transposition of the great arteries.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
164
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
different. There may be no pulmonary ejection click, and the murmur 
may be very short, soft, or both.
Palpation in pulmonic valve stenosis may reveal a palpable thrill in 
the pulmonary area and an abnormal right ventricular impulse (except 
in mild cases).
Treatment is transcatheter balloon valve dilatation.
AORTIC VALVE STENOSIS
The hemodynamic impact of aortic valve stenosis (Fig. 9.21) is 
increased pressure in the left ventricle. The more severe the ste­
nosis, the higher the left ventricular pressure is until heart failure 
ensues.
The apex beat is of a thrusting character and is not displaced in the 
absence of left-­sided heart failure. Palpation, except in very mild cases, 
reveals a suprasternal notch thrill and often a carotid systolic thrill. If 
the murmur is grade IV or greater, a precordial thrill is also palpable at 
the upper right sternal border (aortic area).
The murmur of aortic stenosis is a rough, harsh, diamond-­shaped 
ejection systolic murmur. It is heard best in the aortic area but often 
extends into the neck and throughout the precordium.
A soft, short ejection murmur that peaks in systole indicates a mild 
degree of valve obstruction, whereas a loud, long, and late-­peaking 
murmur, often associated with a palpable thrill, reflects more severe 
stenosis.
An ejection click often precedes the murmur and is heard best at 
the apex. The click intensity is inversely proportional to the severity of 
the valve narrowing. A loud aortic valve ejection click is often present 
in patients with a two-­leaflet or bicuspid aortic valve even if there is no 
valve stenosis.
The splitting of the S2 is normal. The paradoxical split, occurring 
when there is a large delay of A2, is quite rare in children and young 
adults; it is seen in older people with calcific aortic valve stenosis and a 
failing left ventricle.
In newborns with severe or critical aortic stenosis and low cardiac 
output, the examination findings may be very different. There is often 
no aortic ejection click, and, strikingly, the murmur may be short, soft, 
or both. Significant heart failure and poor perfusion are present in such 
neonates.
Two other major types of aortic stenosis exist: subvalvular and 
supravalvular. Neither has an aortic ejection click. In supravalvular 
aortic stenosis (the major cardiac lesion associated with Williams 
syndrome), the murmur is usually in the aortic area, whereas in 
Obstructive
pulmonary
valve
Ejection systolic
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.20  Pulmonary valve stenosis. Pulmonary valve stenosis gives 
rise to a rough ejection systolic murmur that is most prominent in the 
pulmonary area and radiates equally to both lung fields. The presence 
of an ejection click distinguishes valve obstruction from subvalvular or 
supravalvular stenosis.
Obstructive
aortic valve
Ejection systolic
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.21  Aortic valve stenosis. The ejection systolic murmur from aor­
tic valve stenosis is audible both at the apex and in the aortic area. The 
aortic area extends up to the carotid arteries. There is often a palpable 
thrill in the suprasternal notch. The pitch and peaking of the murmur 
allow an estimate of the severity of stenosis. Note that a quiet and low-­
pitched murmur may suggest poor ventricular function and low output.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
165
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
subvalvular aortic stenosis, the murmur position may extend to the 
left sternal border or the apex.
The bicuspid aortic valve is the most common of all congenital 
malformations of the heart, found in almost 2% of the general pop­
ulation. The normal aortic valve has three leaflets of equal size. The 
bicuspid valve has two functional leaflets, one generally larger than the 
other. The bicuspid aortic valve is often only mildly stenotic or is often 
unobstructed. The anomaly is recognized from the presence of an aor­
tic ejection click. The ejection click is often mischaracterized as a split 
S1, which is a very rare occurrence in children. Asymmetric stresses on 
the valve leaflets predispose to calcification, dysfunction, and deterio­
ration after many years. The valve is also at risk for the development of 
infective endocarditis.
Treatment of severe aortic valve stenosis may include surgical or 
balloon valvotomy and often eventual valve replacement.
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA
Coarctation occurs in association with congenital cardiac anomalies 
or in isolation. There are fundamentally two forms of coarctation (Fig. 
9.22). The more common form has been termed juxtaductal or adult 
coarctation and is typically a discrete area of aortic narrowing or 
indentation of ductal tissue in relationship to the ductus arteriosus or 
ligamentum. The second type of coarctation has been termed infantile 
coarctation and includes varying degrees of transverse and isthmic 
aortic arch hypoplasia.
The hemodynamic abnormality caused by a coarctation of the aorta 
is a high systolic pressure proximal to the area of narrowing, in the 
ascending aorta, the brachiocephalic vessels, and the left ventricle.
The diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta is made from recognition 
of systemic hypertension in the right arm and decreased arterial pul­
sation in the femoral arteries in comparison with that in the brachial 
arteries. The femoral pulses may be absent, or they may be diminished 
and delayed. In some cases, the left brachial pulse may be diminished 
as a result of involvement of the left subclavian artery in the site of 
narrowing. In rare cases, the right subclavian artery may arise aber­
rantly below the level of the coarctation, causing the pulse in this arm 
to be diminished. Therefore, brachial pulses must be felt on both sides 
and compared with the femoral pulses. The blood pressure must be 
obtained in both arms as well as in one leg. There is seldom any sig­
nificant or consistent alteration in the heart sounds unless there is 
associated aortic valve disease. Up to 40% of patients with juxtaductal 
coarctation of the aorta have an associated bicuspid aortic valve, usu­
ally without stenosis. In these cases, there is an aortic ejection click. 
More complicated heart lesions, often unrestrictive VSDs or AVSDs, 
are often seen in association with isthmic arch hypoplasia.
The murmur of coarctation is of the ejection or continuous type, is 
rarely louder than grade III, starts well after S1, and may peak late in 
systole or extend into diastole. The point of maximal cardiac activity is 
variable and is most often palpable in the fifth or sixth intercostal space, 
extending out to the axillary line. The murmur of coarctation extends 
to and is often loudest in the interscapular area posteriorly.
As with aortic stenosis and obstruction of the left heart outflow, the 
newborn with coarctation may present with signs of low output and 
heart failure. Prostaglandins have proved useful in this circumstance, 
alleviating the obstruction by dilating reactive muscle in the aortic 
wall, which may have extended from the ductus or with opening of the 
ductus itself, enabling right-­to-­left ductal flow to the lower body and 
relieving associated pulmonary hypertension.
Treatment in the neonate is surgical. However, after infancy, aortic 
coarctation angioplasty with balloon or stent placement may be con­
sidered, as may surgery.
MITRAL VALVE STENOSIS
Congenital mitral valve stenosis (Fig. 9.23) is uncommon. When it 
occurs, it is usually in association with additional left-­sided heart 
obstructive abnormalities, particularly coarctation of the aorta, which 
is termed the Shone complex. The most common type of significant 
mitral stenosis is caused by a single or “parachute” papillary muscle. 
In its most severe form, it is part of the hypoplastic left heart syndrome, 
in which the valve is small, very stenotic, or atretic. In affected patients, 
cyanosis, heart failure, and poor perfusion are evident within the first 
few days after birth.
The leaflets in congenital stenosis are very immobile, and there is 
seldom the accentuation of the S1 or an opening snap, which is charac­
teristic of acquired or rheumatic mitral valve stenosis.
The murmur of mitral valve stenosis arises from the increased 
velocity of blood flow across the relatively immobile mitral leaflets 
during diastolic filling of the left ventricle. This causes a characteristic 
low-­pitched mid-­diastolic flow rumble best heard in the mitral area.
Rheumatic mitral valve stenosis is common in many areas of 
the world but is uncommon in North America. As a consequence of 
mitral obstruction, the left atrial and pulmonary venous pressures are 
elevated. Often there is a reflex or secondary elevation of pulmonary 
Narrowing
of the 
aortic arch
Continuous
Systole
P
R
Q
T
S
Fig. 9.22  Coarctation of the aorta. The murmur of coarctation is often 
audible both anteriorly and posteriorly between the scapulae. It is a con­
tinuous murmur extending well into diastole.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
166
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
artery pressures caused by constriction and thickening of small mus­
cular pulmonary arteries. The features of pulmonary hypertension, 
including a prominent right ventricular tap, single loud or palpable S2, 
and a high-­pitched pulmonary insufficiency, may be apparent.
Excursion of the thickened leaflets often causes an early diastolic 
high-­pitched opening snap before the onset of the murmur. In severe 
stenosis, strong atrial contraction late in diastole may create a late dia­
stolic crescendo murmur. A loud S1 is often heard in this condition.
MURMURS CAUSED BY ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVE 
AND SEMILUNAR VALVE INSUFFICIENCY
Tricuspid Valve Regurgitation
Tricuspid valve regurgitation (insufficiency) (Fig. 9.24) is uncommon 
in childhood in the absence of additional abnormalities. It may be a 
consequence of pulmonary artery hypertension, in which the high-­
pressure right ventricle contributes to a high-­pitched holosystolic mur­
mur at the lower left or lower right sternal border (tricuspid area).
Less often, tricuspid valve insufficiency may occur in association 
with a displaced and malformed tricuspid valve (Ebstein anomaly), in 
which case the pulmonary arterial and right ventricular pressures are 
not elevated, and the holosystolic murmur is low pitched. The features 
of right-­sided cardiac murmurs vary much more with the respiratory 
cycle than do left-­sided heart murmurs. There may be signs of right-­
sided heart failure: an enlarged pulsatile liver and, in the older child, a 
prominent V wave pulsation in the neck veins.
Mitral Valve Insufficiency
Mitral valve insufficiency (Fig. 9.25) is associated with a diffuse and 
dynamic apical impulse. If the volume of regurgitant flow is great, a 
bifid or double apical impulse of a palpable S3 may be apparent.
The insufficiency jet of blood from the powerful left ventricle to 
the thin-­walled left atrium causes a high-­pitched blowing holosystolic 
murmur that has an abrupt onset. This murmur is heard best with the 
diaphragm of the stethoscope placed anteriorly in the mitral area. The 
systolic murmur radiates to the axillae.
The S1 is usually of normal to increased intensity, but if the valve 
abnormality is rheumatic in origin, it may be sufficiently deformed 
that S1 is quite soft. If the mitral regurgitation is quite significant, an S3 
filling sound is heard, often associated with a mid-­diastolic flow rum­
ble of “relative” mitral valve stenosis. Mitral valve insufficiency may be 
seen as a congenital lesion, in response to dilated annulus secondary to 
heart failure, during acute rheumatic fever, or as part of the mitral valve 
prolapse spectrum.
Mitral Valve Prolapse
This common condition of adolescents and young adults manifests as 
laxity of the mitral valve and results in slippage or displacement of one 
or both valve leaflets backward into the left atrium during systole (see 
Fig. 9.25 and Fig. 9.26). Mitral valve prolapse may be isolated or syn­
dromic (Table 9.6). Isolated mitral valve prolapse may be an autosomal 
S
R
P
Q
T
Obstruction to
mitral valve
inflow
Systole
Fig. 9.23  Mitral valve stenosis. The murmur of mitral valve stenosis 
occurs during the period of passive and active filling of the ventricle as 
turbulence occurs across the obstructive mitral valve. Pulmonary hyper­
tension often arises as a consequence of the downstream obstruction.
Holosystolic
R
P
Q
T
S
Tricuspid valve
leakage to
enlarged right
atrium
Systole
Fig. 9.24  Tricuspid valve insufficiency. The holosystolic murmur of tri­
cuspid valve insufficiency is low pitched in the absence of any pulmo­
nary outflow obstruction, which makes tricuspid valve insufficiency very 
challenging to hear.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
167
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
dominant disorder with variable penetrance; an X-­linked mitral valve 
prolapse disorder is less common due to pathologic variants in FLNA.
The sudden tensing of the mitral valve often causes a mid-­systolic 
click or sometimes multiple clicks that can be heard best in the mitral 
area. The click is frequently followed by a late high-­pitched systolic 
murmur of mitral valve insufficiency. The timing of the click or clicks 
and the intensity of the murmur often vary with body position. When 
the patient is sitting up (and even more so during standing), the mur­
mur gets louder or may be heard even when no murmur was heard 
when the patient was lying down. This is because the left ventricular 
architecture changes in the upright position. In rare cases, the posi­
tion change may result in a late systolic murmur becoming full length, 
although with late accentuation. The ECG often shows unusually ante­
rior and superior T waves with prominent U waves, which suggests 
papillary muscle dysfunction.
Mitral valve prolapse does not usually progress in childhood, but it 
may be associated with supraventricular tachycardia, chest pain, and 
possibly endocarditis or cerebrovascular embolism. Ventricular tachy­
cardia and fibrillation may occur in adults, but sudden cardiac death 
is very unusual during childhood and adolescence. Thickening of the 
valve, in addition to prolapse, increases the risk of these complications.
Pulmonary Valve Insufficiency
Pulmonary valve insufficiency (Fig. 9.27) rarely if ever occurs in isola­
tion. Most often, congenital regurgitation of the pulmonic valve occurs 
in association with a pulmonary outflow obstruction such as in the 
absent pulmonary valve syndrome.
When the pulmonary arterial pressure is low, valve insufficiency is 
recognized by a very low-­ to medium-­pitched early diastolic murmur 
that starts with P2. This is heard best in the pulmonary area and extends 
for a short distance down the left sternal edge.
The more common types of pulmonary regurgitation are acquired, 
commonly after surgery for severe pulmonary valve stenosis, as occurs 
with tetralogy of Fallot, when a pulmonary outflow patch may be 
placed and the valve leaflets are deficient or absent. Because no P2 
exists, the murmur often appears to start significantly after S2. Because 
these patients often have surgically acquired right bundle branch block, 
the pulmonary valve closure would be well separated from aortic valve 
closure if the sound could be heard. The diastolic decrescendo murmur 
begins at that time.
Pulmonary hypertension, particularly when associated with a high 
pulmonary vascular resistance, is a common cause of secondary pul­
monary insufficiency. Often, a pulmonary ejection click may be present 
because of the dilated pulmonary root. The S2 is narrowly split or single 
because the high pulmonary artery diastolic pressure closes the valve 
early. A diastolic decrescendo murmur then begins with pulmonary 
valve closure and is high in frequency because the pulmonary artery 
pressure is high, the so-­called Graham-­Steele murmur.
Aortic Valve Insufficiency
Congenital insufficiency of the aortic valve (Fig. 9.28) is rare and is 
usually mild and may not be audible. The valve may or may not be 
bicuspid. There is usually an aortic ejection click that is well separated 
from S1, does not vary with respiration, and is usually best heard at the 
apex. The S2 split is normal, although the A2 may be loud and may have 
a “tambour” quality.
After closure of the aortic valve (A2), regurgitation of leakage at this 
site creates the high-­pitched, early diastolic decrescendo murmur of 
aortic insufficiency. This murmur is heard best at the third left or right 
intercostal space while the patient is sitting. The pulse pressure is nor­
mal if the leak is mild.
The most common form of aortic insufficiency is acquired, most 
often as a consequence of severe rheumatic carditis, and can be pres­
ent in both acute rheumatic fever and chronic rheumatic heart disease. 
In acute insufficiency, there is usually no aortic ejection click. The left 
ventricular impulse is abnormal and hyperdynamic, and a wide pulse 
pressure is present.
A long, low-­frequency musical diastolic rumble beginning one 
third of the time into diastole may occur, especially in the left lateral 
decubitus position in patients with significant valve insufficiency. This 
is called the Austin Flint murmur. It is believed to be related to regur­
gitant aortic flow passing across the anterior mitral valve causing flut­
tering of the leaflet in conjunction with mitral valve inflow.
MISCELLANEOUS CARDIAC ANOMALIES
Pericardial Disease
Many infectious and noninfectious diseases may cause inflammation 
of the pericardial sac and surrounding structures. The presence of 
fluid in the pericardial sac may compromise cardiac filling and result 
in life-­threatening impairment of cardiac output, “pericardial tam­
ponade.” The auscultatory findings in these cases often include fric­
tion rubs.
These variable sounds are high-­pitched, superficial, and scratching 
noises. They occur in synchrony with cardiac movement and can be 
heard during the early period after myocardial infarction and often fre­
quently are heard after cardiac surgery.
R
P
Q
T
Systole
Floppy and 
prolapsing mitral
valve leaflets        
S
Mid-systolic clicks
Fig. 9.25  Mitral valve prolapse. The auscultatory examination findings 
can be very distinctive, with one or more sharp clicks being heard 
throughout systole. A late systolic high-­pitched murmur may arise if 
mitral valve insufficiency occurs.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
D
B
A
C
C
C
A
AO
AO
P
A
P
D
I
V
L
D
LV
Septum
Septum
Normal: A
A
P
AC form: P
A
Coaptation
Fig. 9.26  Two-­dimensional parasternal long-­axis images of posteriorly coapting leaflets (anterior leaflet [AL]; 
posterior leaflet [PL]) in a normal individual (A) vs increased coaptation height and an elongated posterior leaflet 
in an individual with abnormal anterior coaptation (AAC) features (B) and in a patient with bileaflet mitral valve 
prolapse (MVP) into the left atrium (LA; C). Schematics (D) showing the projections of anterior (A) and posterior 
(P) leaflets onto the mitral annular diameter (D). C indicates the coaptation height relative to the annulus and is 
calculated as P/D or C/LVID, where LVID is left ventricular internal diameter. AO, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right 
ventricle. (From Delling FN, Vasan RS. Epidemiology and pathophysiology of mitral valve prolapse: new insights 
into disease progression, genetics, and molecular basis. Circulation. 2014;129[21]:2158–2170 [Fig. 4, p. 2165].)
TABLE 9.6  Genetic Anomalies Associated with Mitral Valve Prolapse in Humans
Gene or Chromosome
Defect Localization/Mechanism
Rare Causal Genetic Defects
Syndromic MVP
Trisomies 18, 13, 15
Chr 18, 13, 15
–
Marfan syndrome
FBN1-­TGFβR2-­TGFβ2
ECM/TGFβ pathway
Loeys-­Dietz
TGFβR1-­TGFβR2
TGFβ pathway
Juvenile polyposis syndrome
SMAD4-­BMPR1A
TGFβ pathway
Aneurysm-­osteoarthritis syndrome
SMAD3
TGFβ pathway
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Collagen types I, III, V, and XI and tenascin
ECM
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Collagen type I
ECM
Williams-­Beuren syndrome
Elastin
ECM
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
MRP6 (ABCC6)
ECM
BDCS or FTH syndromes
SH3PXD2B
Podosomes/cell migration
Larsen-­like syndrome
B3GAT3
ECM/glycosaminoglycans
Syndrome with sinus node dysfunction, arrhythmias, LVNC
HCN4
Ionic channel/heart development
Nonsyndromic MVP
Filamin A-­MVD
FLNA
Mechanotransduction
Myxomatous disease
MMVP1
Chr 16p
–
MMVP2
DCHS1
Cell migration and polarity
MMVP3
Chr 13
–
BDCS, Borrone dermato-­cardio-­skeletal; Chr, chromosome; ECM, extracellular matrix; FTH, Frank-­Ter Haar; GWAS, genome-­wide association study; 
LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MVD, mitral valve disease; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; TGF, transforming growth factor.
Modified from Le Tourneau T, Merot J, Rimbert A, et al. Genetics of syndromic and non-­syndromic mitral valve prolapse. Heart. 2018;104(12):978–
984 (Table 1, p. 980).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
169
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
After the neonatal period, pressures in the pulmonary circulation are 
normally low (approximately 25 mm Hg systolic, or about one fourth 
of the pressure in the systemic circulation or aorta). Many diseases 
have profound effects on the pulmonary circulation and can elevate 
pressures within the pulmonary arteries. These include diseases of the 
lung parenchyma, pulmonary vasculature, heart, or liver; collagen vas­
cular diseases; and obstruction of the upper airways.
One consistent physical finding detected in pulmonary hyperten­
sion is an active right ventricular parasternal tap with a distinctive, 
sharp, palpable P2. The P2 is of increased intensity, and there is a single 
or narrowly split S2. There may be no audible murmur; a high-­pitched 
murmur of pulmonary valve insufficiency or a high-­pitched systolic 
murmur of tricuspid valve insufficiency may be present.
Recognition of pulmonary hypertension warrants a diligent search 
for the underlying cause. If the reason for the elevated pulmonary 
artery pressure remains unclear, the disorder is referred to as idio­
pathic or primary pulmonary hypertension. If an etiology can be 
found, the disorder is termed secondary pulmonary hypertension.
APPROACH TO CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Congenital heart disease may produce an asymptomatic murmur, heart 
failure, cyanosis, cyanosis with heart failure, or severe cardiogenic shock 
(Fig. 9.29). Malformations associated with profound and fixed cyanosis 
without heart failure are usually associated with right-­sided obstructive 
lesions and a right-­to-­left shunt (e.g., pulmonary atresia, tetralogy of 
Fallot). Transposition of the great arteries with intact ventricular sep­
tum also manifests with profound and fixed hypoxia, with mild tachy­
pnea, and with no heart failure. Malformations associated with cyanosis 
and heart failure have a large mixing lesion (single ventricle, truncus 
arteriosus, transposition plus a VSD), in which pulmonary oxygenated 
venous return mixes with desaturated systemic venous return before 
ejection to the systemic arterial circulation. In addition, obstructed total 
anomalous pulmonary veins may produce severe cyanosis, pulmonary 
venous engorgement, and pulmonary hypertension. Lesions associated 
with left-­sided obstruction (critical aortic stenosis, interrupted aortic 
arch, hypoplastic left heart syndrome) produce significant cardiogenic 
shock, poor perfusion, and profound lactic acidosis.
The chest radiograph may provide helpful clues to the cause of 
the lesion, depending on the paucity (pulmonary atresia) or plethora 
(obstructed total anomalous pulmonary venous return) of the pul­
monary vascular markings; the left-­ or right-­sided (tetralogy of Fallot, 
truncus arteriosus) position of the aorta; the configuration of the heart 
(boot-­shaped, as in tetralogy of Fallot; egg-­shaped, as in transposition 
of the great arteries; or massive enlargement, as in Ebstein anomaly); or 
the side of the chest (risk of heart disease is higher with dextrocardia, 
especially if the stomach bubble is on the left side of the abdomen or 
if the liver is midline) (Fig. 9.30). The chest radiograph is of some help 
Systole
R
P
Q
T
Regurgitant or
backward flow
through the
pulmonary valve
S
Fig. 9.27  Pulmonary valve insufficiency. A low-­pitched early diastolic 
murmur is heard just after the second heart sound. The murmur charac­
teristically tapers into diastole.
R
P
Q
T
Systole
Regurgitant or
backward flow
through the
aortic valve
S
Fig. 9.28  Aortic valve insufficiency. In contrast to the low-­pressure 
murmur of pulmonary valve insufficiency (in the absence of pulmonary 
hypertension), the murmur of aortic valve insufficiency is high pitched 
and audible from the aortic area extending to the apex. The peripheral 
pulses and the intensity and length of the murmur provide clinical quan­
tification of the magnitude of regurgitant flow.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
170
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
MURMUR
CYANOSIS
Transposition
of the great
arteries
Pulmonic
atresia
Tetralogy
of Fallot
Truncus
arteriosus
Total
anomalous
pulmonary
venous return
Tricuspid
atresia
Persistent
fetal
circulation
(pulmonary
hypertension)*
ADEQUATE
PERFUSION
Patent
ductus
arteriosus
Ventricular
septal
defect
Anomalous
coronary
artery
Arteriovenous
malformation
Single
ventricle
AV–canal
POOR
PERFUSION
Hypoplastic
left heart
Interrupted
aortic arch
Neonatal
juxtaductal
coarctation
Critical
aortic
stenosis
Myocarditis
Cardiomyopathy
HEART
FAILURE
ASYMPTOMATIC
Peripheral
pulmonic
stenosis
Patent
ductus
arteriosus
Ventral
septal
defect (small)
Atrial
septal
defect
ACQUIRED
ASPHYXIA
Tricuspid
insufficiency
Mitral
insufficiency
DEGENERATIVE
Marfan
syndrome
Mitral
valve
prolapse
Cardiomyopathy
INFLAMMATORY
INFECTIOUS
Bacterial
endocarditis
Rheumatic
fever
Systemic
lupus
erythematosus
Rheumatoid
arthritis
Pulmonary
thromboembolism
Anemia
*Murmur represents tricuspid insufficiency (usually no murmur in persistent fetal circulation).
CONGENITAL
POSTINFECTIOUS
Fig. 9.29  Algorithmic approach to the child with a heart murmur. AV, atrioventricular.
in distinguishing heart disease from congenital pneumonia, respiratory 
distress syndrome, pneumothorax, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
The ECG in infancy is of help in discriminating atrial and ventric­
ular enlargement or hypertrophy and very helpful when there is an 
abnormal superior vector (complete atrioventricular canal, tricuspid 
atresia).
Two-­dimensional real-­time color Doppler echocardiography is most 
useful in identifying the anatomy of congenital heart lesions. The echocar­
diogram enables assessment of the four chambers, the interconnecting 
valves, the great arteries, the pulmonary venous return, and the anatomic 
relationships between these structures. Furthermore, color Doppler 
flow studies can determine the presence, direction, and magnitude of 
B
A
C
Fig. 9.30  Physiology of congenital heart disease delineated by chest radiography. A, Mild cardiomegaly with 
an upturned cardiac apex, a concave main pulmonary artery segment, and symmetric, severely diminished 
pulmonary blood flow in a 4-­year-­old with tetralogy of Fallot/pulmonary atresia. B, Moderate cardiomegaly and 
symmetric, increased pulmonary blood flow in a 3-­month-­old with a large atrial septal defect and ventricular 
septal defect. C, Moderate cardiomegaly with interstitial edema in an 8-­day-­old with critical aortic stenosis. 
(From Frost JL, Krishnamurthy R, Sena L. Cardiac imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric 
Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:68, Fig. 3.9.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
171
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
Fig. 9.31  Subcutaneous nodules. (Modified from Shulman ST, Jaggi 
P. Nonsuppurative poststreptococcal sequelae: rheumatic fever and 
glomerulonephritis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, 
Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2466, Fig. 198.3.)
Fig. 9.32  Rash of erythema marginatum in an adolescent boy with acute 
rheumatic fever showing its characteristic serpiginous and erythem­
atous margins. (From Alsaeid K, Uziel Y, Weiss PF. Reactive arthritis. 
In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric 
Rheumatology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Fig. 46.10.)
right-­to-­left or left-­to-­right shunts. Echocardiography has replaced car­
diac catheterization for all but the most complex congenital heart lesions.
ACUTE RHEUMATIC FEVER AND RHEUMATIC 
HEART DISEASE
Rheumatic fever is a postinfectious, immunologically mediated 
inflammatory disease of the heart, joints, brain, and skin that is caused 
by group A streptococcus. Migratory polyarthritis is the most com­
mon presentation followed by carditis; chorea, subcutaneous nodules 
(usually with mitral regurgitation) (Fig. 9.31), and erythema margin­
atum (Fig. 9.32) are much less common. Valvulitis, as manifested by 
specific and new heart murmurs, is often part of the initial clinical 
presentation. There are three specific heart murmurs: mitral regur­
gitation, aortic regurgitation (usually with mitral regurgitation), and 
the rare Carey-­Coombs murmur, a mid-­diastolic rumble at the apex. 
Pericarditis, usually associated with valvulitis, may produce a friction 
rub. Rheumatic cardiac disease may present with pancarditis (valvuli­
tis, pericarditis, and myocardial involvement). Valvulitis (endocardi­
tis) is the most common cardiac lesion; pericarditis or myocarditis in 
the absence of valvulitis should suggest another disorder. Recurrent 
episodes of rheumatic fever create the greatest risk for chronic valve 
abnormalities.
After the acute rheumatic fever has run its course, any remaining 
murmurs become part of chronic rheumatic heart disease. If the patient 
has continued permanent reliable penicillin prophylaxis, the severity of 
the mitral regurgitation often disappears; this happens less commonly 
with aortic regurgitation. The development of mitral valve stenosis is 
part of the natural history of severe repeated episodes of acute rheu­
matic fever. Pure aortic stenosis does not develop, although in the 
presence of long-­standing rheumatic heart disease with severe aortic 
regurgitation, some aortic stenosis may be present. In some very severe 
cases, tricuspid valve regurgitation has been documented, but it is rare.
The diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever is suggested, although not 
definitively confirmed, by application of the revised Jones criteria, last 
edited in 2015 (Table 9.7). In addition, evidence of a group A strepto­
coccal pharyngitis must be present, which may include a positive throat 
culture, positive streptococcal antigen or antistreptococcal antibody, 
or history of prior episodes of rheumatic fever. In cases where carditis 
may be subclinical (no audible murmur), the diagnosis is supported 
by echocardiographic evidence of subclinical carditis (Table 9.8). The 
differential diagnosis is limited but in the presence of pericarditis or 
carditis and arthritis may include juvenile idiopathic arthritis and sys­
temic lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 44).
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
An acute or subacute infection of the cardiac valves produces infective 
endocarditis. Infection may involve a native, previously normal heart 
valve; a valve or structure that is altered as the result of congenital heart 
disease or prior insult; or a prosthetic device (e.g., valve, conduit, patch, 
graft, shunt, or pacemaker).
Endocarditis may affect congenital heart lesions (most commonly, 
tetralogy of Fallot, VSD, aortic stenosis, PDA, transposition of the great 
arteries), valves affected by rheumatic heart disease, and mitral valve 
prolapse. Endocarditis may develop in congenital heart anomalies in 
the unoperated and the postoperative states. Furthermore, up to 30% 
of cases of infective endocarditis occur on previously normal native 
valves.
Bacterial endocarditis is the result of a bacteremia, which in a nor­
mal host is usually transient, asymptomatic, and without sequelae. The 
presence of a damaged valve, a jet stream–injured endocardium, or a 
foreign body (e.g., central catheter, graft, shunt, or patch) creates a nidus 
of infection that permits the bacteria to bind, proliferate, and remain 
sequestered from normal host defense mechanisms. Transient and pre­
disposing episodes of bacteremia occur during dental procedures that 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
172
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 9.8  Echocardiographic Findings in Rheumatic Valvulitis
Pathologic Mitral Regurgitation (All Four Met)
Pathologic Aortic Regurgitation (All Four Met)
	1.	Seen in at least two views
	2.	Jet length ≥2 cm in at least one view
	3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
	4.	Pan-­systolic jet in at least one envelope
	1.	Seen in at least two views
	2.	Jet length ≥1 cm in at least one view
	3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
	4.	Pan-­diastolic jet in at least one envelope
From Shulman ST. Group A streptococcus. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme III JW, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
TABLE 9.7  Guidelines for the Diagnosis of Initial or Recurrent Attack of Rheumatic Fever (Jones 
Criteria, Updated 2015)
Major Manifestations
Minor Manifestations
Supporting Evidence of Antecedent 
Group A Streptococcal Infection
Carditis
Polyarthritis
Erythema marginatum
Subcutaneous nodules
Chorea
Clinical Features
Arthralgia
Fever
Laboratory Features
Elevated acute-­phase reactants:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
C-­reactive protein
Prolonged P-­R interval
Positive throat culture or rapid streptococcal antigen 
test
Elevated or increasing streptococcal antibody titer
	1.	 Initial attack: two major manifestations, or one major and two minor manifestations, plus evidence of recent GAS infection. Recurrent attack: 
two major, or one major and two minor, or three minor manifestations (the latter only in the moderate/high-­risk population), plus evidence of 
recent GAS infection (see text).
	2.	 Low-­risk population is defined as ARF incidence <2 per 100,000 school-­age children per year, or all-­age RHD prevalence of <1 per 1,000 popu­
lation. Moderate/high-­risk population is defined as ARF incidence >2 per 100,000 school-­age children per year, or all-­age RHD prevalence of 
>1 per 1,000 population.
	3.	 Carditis is now defined as clinical and/or subclinical (echocardiographic valvulitis).
	4.	 Arthritis (major) refers only to polyarthritis in low-­risk populations, but also to monoarthritis or polyarthralgia in moderate/high-­risk populations.
	5.	 Minor criteria for moderate/high-­risk populations only include monoarthralgia (polyarthralgia for low-­risk populations), fever of >38°C (>38.5°C in 
low-­risk populations), ESR >30 mm/hr (>60 mm/hr in low-­risk populations).
ARF, acute rheumatic fever; GAS, group A streptococci; RHD, rheumatic heart disease.
From Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echo­
cardiography: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131(20):1806–1818.
induce bleeding (even dental cleaning); tonsillectomy or adenoidec­
tomy; intestinal (e.g., endoscopy, gall bladder), urinary (e.g., catheter­
ization, dilatation), prostatic (e.g., cystoscopy), or respiratory surgery; 
esophageal manipulation (e.g., sclerotherapy, dilatation), incision and 
drainage of infected tissue; and gynecologic procedures (e.g., vaginal 
hysterectomy, vaginal delivery).
Bacterial vegetations grow and produce cardiovascular, 
embolic, or immune complex–mediated signs and symptoms 
(Table 9.9). Responsible bacteria are noted in Table 9.10; Staph­
ylococcus aureus, α-­hemolytic oral mucosa–derived streptococci, 
and enterococci are the dominant pathogens in native normal and 
unoperated anomalous valves. Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. 
aureus are common pathogens in the postoperative patient and in 
patients with prosthetic devices. Fungal endocarditis is rare and is 
typically associated with species of Candida. Risk factors include 
indwelling catheters and the use of parenteral nutrition. Risk fac­
tors for culture-­negative endocarditis and diagnostic strategies are 
noted in Table 9.11.
The definitive diagnosis of infective endocarditis includes recov­
ery of a microorganism from culture or histologic study of a heart, 
an embolized vegetation, or an intracardiac abscess (Tables 9.12 
and 9.13). Vegetations may be demonstrated by the sensitive tech­
nique of transesophageal echocardiography but are usually seen on 
transthoracic echocardiography in children. In the absence of direct 
definitive evidence, the following are important diagnostic factors: 
persistently positive blood cultures with a pathogen compatible with 
the diagnosis; echocardiographic evidence of an intracardiac mass, 
vegetations, perivalvular abscess, or new partial dehiscence of a pros­
thetic valve; and a new valvular murmur (regurgitation or worsening 
or changing of a pre-­existing murmur). Blood cultures are helpful if 
two or more drawn 12 hours apart are positive or if a majority (e.g., 
three or four) of separate cultures drawn in 1 hour are positive. More 
than 85% of first blood cultures are positive; the yield approaches 
95% with obtaining a second blood culture. Sufficient blood must 
be inoculated into the media to detect the low-­grade bacteremia of 
infective endocarditis; excessive blood inoculation may inhibit bacte­
rial growth by continued activity of leukocytes unless the technique 
involves centrifugation lysis. The cultures should be incubated for 
more than the routine 72 hours (often 1–2 weeks), and the laboratory 
should be notified of the possible diagnosis so that laboratory per­
sonnel can enrich the media to encourage the growth of fastidious 
nutrient-­dependent organisms.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
173
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
TABLE 9.9  Frequency of Findings in 
Pediatric Infective Endocarditis
Symptom
Frequency (%)
Malaise
50–75
Anorexia/weight loss
25–50
Heart failure
25–50
Arthralgia
17–50
Chest pain
0–25
Neurologic symptoms (focal neurologic deficit, 
aseptic meningitis)
0–25
Gastrointestinal symptoms
0–50
Sign
Frequency (%)
Fever
75–100
Splenomegaly
50–75
Petechiae
21–50
Embolic phenomenon
25–50
New or changed murmur
21–80
Clubbing
0–10
Osler nodes
0–10
Roth spots
0–10
Janeway lesions
0–10
Splinter hemorrhages
0–10
Conjunctival hemorrhages
0–10
Abnormal Laboratory Finding
Frequency (%)
Positive blood culture
75–100
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
75–100
Anemia
75–90
Presence of rheumatoid factor
25–50
Hematuria
25–50
Low serum complement
5–40
From Levasseur S, Saiman L. Endocarditis and other intravascular 
infections. In: Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and 
Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018:264, Table 37.4.
TABLE 9.10  Microbiologic Agents in 
Pediatric Infective Endocarditis
Common: Native Valve or Other Cardiac Lesions
Viridans group streptococci (Streptococcus mutans, Streptococcus sanguinis, 
Streptococcus mitis)
Staphylococcus aureus
Group D streptococci (Streptococcus gallolyticus)
Enterococcus faecalis
Uncommon: Native Valve or Other Cardiac Lesions
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Abiotrophia defectiva (nutritionally variant streptococcus)
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)*
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Brucella*
Chlamydia psittaci*
Chlamydia trachomatis*
Chlamydia pneumoniae*
Legionella*
Bartonella*
Tropheryma whipplei* (Whipple disease)
HACEK group†
Streptobacillus moniliformis*
Atypical mycobacterium
Pasteurella multocida*
Campylobacter fetus
Culture negative (6% of cases)
Prosthetic Valve
Staphylococcus epidermidis
S. aureus
Viridans group streptococci
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Diphtheroids
Legionella species*
HACEK group†
Fungi‡
*These fastidious bacteria plus some fungi may produce culture-­
negative endocarditis. Detection may require special media, incuba­
tion for more than 7 days, multiplex polymerase chain reaction on 
blood or valve for 16S rRNA (bacteria) or 18S rRNA (fungi), or serologic 
tests.
†The HACEK group includes Haemophilus Aggregatibacter (formerly 
Actinobacillus), Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, and Kingella species.
‡Candida species, Aspergillus species, Pseudallescheria boydii, Histo­
plasma capsulatum.
From Bernstein D. Infective endocarditis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton 
BF, St. Geme III JW, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
Additional criteria for diagnosing infective endocarditis include 
fever, predisposing heart lesions and procedures (many patients have 
undergone no identifiable procedure), vascular phenomena (embo­
lism, Janeway lesions, petechiae, septic pulmonary infarcts, intracranial 
hemorrhage), immune lesions (glomerulonephritis, Roth spots, Osler 
nodes) (Fig. 9.33), a suggestive but not definitive echocardiogram, and 
microbiologic criteria (positive blood culture but not as defined earlier; 
serologic evidence of active infection).
To prevent infective endocarditis, high-­risk patients, pro­
cedures, and factors that predispose to bacteremia need to be 
identified (Table 9.14). Patients needing infective endocarditis 
prophylaxis include those with intracardiac foreign bodies (pros­
thetic valve, grafts), prior episodes of infective endocarditis, a heart 
transplant with abnormal valve function, and certain congenital 
heart abnormalities including the following: (1) cyanotic congeni­
tal heart disease that has not been fully repaired, including children 
who have had surgical shunts and conduits; (2) a congenital heart 
defect that has been repaired with prosthetic material or a device 
for the first 6 months after the repair procedure; and (3) repaired 
congenital heart disease with residual defects, such as persisting 
leaks or abnormal flow at or adjacent to a prosthetic patch or pros­
thetic device.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 9.11  Causes of Culture-­Negative Endocarditis
Organism
Epidemiology and Exposures
Diagnostic Approaches
Aspergillus and other 
noncandidal fungi
Prosthetic valve
Lysis-­centrifugation technique; also culture and histopathologic examination 
of any emboli
Bartonella spp.
Bartonella henselae: exposure to cats or cat fleas
Bartonella quintana: louse infestation; homelessness, 
alcohol abuse
Most common cause of culture-­negative IE in United States; serologic testing 
(may cross-­react with Chlamydia spp.); PCR assay of valve or emboli is best 
test; lysis-­centrifugation technique may be useful
Brucella spp.
Ingestion of unpasteurized milk or dairy products; 
livestock contact
Blood cultures ultimately become positive in 80% of cases with extended incu­
bation time of 4–6 wk; lysis-­centrifugation technique may expedite growth; 
serologic tests are available
Chlamydia psittaci
Bird exposure
Serologic tests available but exhibit cross-­reactivity with Bartonella; monoclo­
nal antibody direct stains on tissue may be useful; PCR assay now available
Coxiella burnetii
(Q fever)
Global distribution; zoonosis, wide range of mammals
Serologic tests (high titers of antibody to both phase I and phase II antigens); 
also PCR assay on blood or valve tissue
HACEK spp.
Periodontal disease or preceding dental work
Although traditionally a cause of culture-­negative IE, HACEK species are now 
routinely isolated from most liquid broth continuous monitoring blood culture 
systems without prolonged incubation times
Legionella spp.
Contaminated water distribution systems; prosthetic 
valves
Serology available; periodic subcultures onto buffered charcoal yeast extract 
medium; lysis-­centrifugation technique; PCR assay available
Abiotrophia and Granuli­
catella spp.
Slow and indolent course
Supplemented culture media or growth as satellite colonies around Staphy­
lococcus aureus streak; antimicrobial susceptibility testing often requires 
processing specialized microbiology laboratory
Tropheryma whipplei 
(Whipple disease)
Typical signs and symptoms include diarrhea, weight 
loss, arthralgias, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy, 
central nervous system involvement; IE may be pres­
ent without systemic symptoms
Histologic examination of valve with periodic acid–Schiff stain; valve cultures 
may be done using fibroblast cell lines; PCR assay on vegetation material
HACEK, Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter (formerly Actinobacillus), Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, Kingella; IE, infective endocarditis; PCR, polymerase 
chain reaction.
From Holland TL, Bayer AS, Fowler Jr VG. Endocarditis and intravascular infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and 
Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1088, Table 80.6.
TABLE 9.12  Definitions of Major and Minor Criteria Used in the Duke Schema for the 
Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis
Major Criteria
	1.	Positive blood culture for IE
 • Typical microorganism consistent with IE from two separate blood 
cultures:
 • Viridans streptococci
 • Streptococcus gallolyticus
 • HACEK group
 • Staphylococcus aureus
 • Community-­acquired enterococci (without a primary focus)
 • Microorganism consistent with IE from persistently positive blood 
cultures if:
 • At least two positive blood cultures sampled more than 12 hr apart
 • All three or a majority of more than four blood cultures
 • Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or IgG antibody titer 
>1:800
	2.	Evidence of endocardial involvement by positive echocardiogram for IE, 
defined as:
 • Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting structures, in the 
path of regurgitant jets, or on implanted material
 • Abscess
 • New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve
 • New valvular regurgitation (worsening or changing of pre-­existing 
murmur not sufficient)
HACEK, Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter (formerly Actinobacillus), Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, Kingella; IE, infective endocarditis; IgG, immunoglobulin G.
Modified from Li JS. Sexton DJ, Mick N, et al. Proposed modifications to the Duke criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis. 
2000;30:633–638.
From Levasseue S, Saiman L. Endocarditis and other intravascular infections. In: Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of 
Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:266, Box 37.2.
Minor Criteria
	1.	Predisposing heart condition or intravenous drug abuse
	2.	Fever: temperature >38°C
	3.	Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, 
mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages, 
Janeway lesions
	4.	Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots, 
rheumatoid factor
	5.	Microbiologic evidence: positive blood culture but does not meet major 
criteria or serologic evidence of active infection with organism consistent 
with IE
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
175
CHAPTER 9  Murmurs
TABLE 9.13  Modified Duke Clinical Criteria for Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis*
Definite Infective Endocarditis
Pathologic Criteria
 • Microorganisms demonstrated by culture or histology in a vegetation, embolized vegetation, or intracardiac abscess
 • Pathologic lesions (vegetation or intracardiac abscess) with active endocarditis confirmed by histology
Clinical Criteria
 • Two major criteria
 • One major and three minor criteria
 • Five minor criteria
Possible Infective Endocarditis
 • One major criterion and one minor criterion
 • Three minor criteria
Rejected
 • Firm alternative diagnosis for manifestations of endocarditis
 • Resolution of endocarditis manifestations with antibiotic therapy ≤4 days
 • No pathologic evidence of infective endocarditis at surgery or autopsy with antibiotic therapy for ≤4 days
 • Does not fulfill criteria above
*Any one of the findings listed is taken as evidence.
Modified from Li JS, Sexton DJ, Mick N, et al. Proposed modifications to the Duke criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2000;30:633–638.
Fig. 9.33  Osler node in infective endocarditis. (From Fowler JR VG, Bayer AS, Baddor LM. Infective endocarditis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. 
Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:420, Fig. 67.2.)
TABLE 9.14  2007 Statement of the American Heart Association (AHA): Cardiac Conditions 
Associated with the Highest Risk of an Adverse Outcome from Infective Endocarditis for Which 
Prophylaxis with Dental Procedures Is Reasonable
Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)*
Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits
Completely repaired CHD with prosthetic material or device, whether placed by surgery or catheter intervention, during the 1–6 mo after the procedure†
Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which inhibits endothelialization)
Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac valvulopathy
*Except for the conditions listed here, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended by the AHA for any other form of CHD.
†Prophylaxis is reasonable because endothelialization of prosthetic material occurs within 6 mo after the procedure.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis. Guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2007;116:1736–1754.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
176
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Murmurs (audible blood flow turbulence) may be caused by cardiac or 
noncardiac lesions and may be congenital or acquired. Murmurs in the 
asymptomatic neonate are often transient, as a result of the changing 
hemodynamics of the transitional circulation between fetal and neona­
tal life. Most murmurs at all ages are not caused by cardiac disease and 
are not associated with symptoms or increased risk for disease.
Red flags in the neonatal period include cyanosis or heart failure with 
or without the presence of other congenital anomalies or syndromes such 
as trisomy 21. Such syndromes often manifest with multiple congenital 
anomalies, including those involving the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, 
and central nervous systems. In the neonatal period, things not to miss 
include ductus-­dependent lesions, in which systemic blood flow (as in 
interrupted aortic arch, hypoplastic left heart syndrome) or pulmonary 
blood flow (as in pulmonary atresia) is through the PDA. Sudden dete­
rioration, cyanosis, or heart failure with increasing metabolic acidosis 
and a reduction in the murmur suggests closure of the ductus arteriosus. 
Another condition not to miss is the murmur associated with an arterio­
venous malformation, such as the cerebral vein of Galen malformation, 
which manifests with heart failure and a cranial bruit. Finally, obstructed 
total anomalous venous return may be confused with persistent fetal 
circulation or pulmonary infections, and it may be difficult to establish 
the diagnosis. Total anomalous venous return is associated with fixed, 
profound cyanosis (Pao2 <35 mm Hg), severe pulmonary venous con­
gestion, and a small heart radiographically.
Acquired murmurs or symptomatic murmurs that change in quality 
should suggest acute or recurrent rheumatic fever or infective endocardi­
tis. Systemic symptoms and peripheral signs associated with these disor­
ders are suggestive of the diagnosis. Arthritis (associated with rheumatic 
fever or endocarditis-­induced immune complexes), fever, anemia, leuko­
cytosis, cutaneous manifestations (erythema marginatum and subcutane­
ous nodules in rheumatic fever; Osler nodes, Janeway lesions, petechiae, 
and splinter hemorrhages in infective endocarditis), and evidence of prior 
infection (streptococcal antibodies) or current infection (positive blood 
cultures or PCR) help identify the nature of the acquired heart disease. 
Finally, heart murmurs in a normal heart may be caused by hemodynamic 
factors, such as severe anemia or thyrotoxicosis.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
176.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Introduction
Boneva RS, Botto LD, Moore CA, et al. Mortality associated with congenital 
heart defects in the United States: trends and racial disparities, 1979–1997. 
Circulation. 2001;103:2376–2381.
Day INM, Wilson DI. Genetics and cardiovascular risk. BMJ. 2001;323:1409–
1412.
Goldmuntz E. The epidemiology and genetics of congenital heart disease. Clin 
Perinatol. 2001;28:1–10.
Karl TR. Neonatal cardiac surgery: anatomic, physiologic, and technical con­
siderations. Clin Perinatol. 2001;28:159–185.
Origins of Heart Sounds
Glover DD, Murrah RL, Olsen CO, et al. Mechanical correlates of the third 
heart sound. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:450–457.
Nitta M, Ihenacho D, Hultgren HN. Prevalence and characteristics of the 
aortic ejection sound in adults. Am J Cardiol. 1988;61:142–145.
Shaver JA, O’Toole JD. The second heart sound: newer concepts, part I: normal 
and wide physiological splitting. Mod Concepts Cardiovasc Dis. 1977;46:7–17.
Cardiovascular Assessment
Gessner IH. Evaluation of the infant and child with a heart murmur. In: 
Gessner IH, Victoria BE, eds. Pediatric Cardiology: A Problem Oriented 
Approach. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993.
McNamara DG. Value and limitations of auscultation in the management of 
congenital heart disease. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:93–113.
Pelech AN. The cardiac murmur. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1998;45:107–122.
Poskitt EME. Failure to thrive in congenital heart disease. Arch Dis Child. 
1993;68:158–160.
Murmurs in Children with Normal Hearts
Begic Z, Dinarevic SM, Pesto S, et al. Evaluation of diagnostic methods 
in the differentiation of heart murmurs in children. Acta Inform Med. 
2016;24(2):94–98.
Etchells E, Bell C, Robb K. Does this patient have an abnormal systolic mur­
mur? JAMA. 1997;277:564–571.
Rosenthal A. Office maneuvers for evaluating children’s heart murmurs. Con­
sultant. 1986;26:147–160.
Stein PD, Sabbah HN. Aortic origin of innocent murmurs. Am J Cardiol. 
1977;39:665–671.
Vibratory Still Murmur
Doshi AR. Innocent heart murmur. Cureus. 2018;10(12):e3689.
Perry LW, Ruckman RN, Shapiro SR, et al. Left ventricular false tendons in 
children: prevalence as detected by 2-­dimensional echocardiography and 
clinical significance. Am J Cardiol. 1983;52:1264.
Peripheral Pulmonary Arterial Stenosis
Danilowicz DA, Rudolph AM, Hoffman JI, et al. Physiologic pressure 
differences between the main and branch pulmonary arteries in infants. 
Circulation. 1972;45:410.
Venous Hum
Cutforth R, Wiseman J, Sutherland RD. The genesis of the cervical venous 
hum. Am Heart J. 1970;80:488.
Potain SC. Des mouvements et des bruits qui se passent dans les veines jugu­
laires. Bull Mem Soc Med Hop Paris. 1867;4:3.
Mammary Arterial Souffle
Tabatznik B, Randall TW, Hersch C. The mammary souffle of pregnancy and 
lactation. Circulation. 1960;22:1069.
Congenital Heart Disease
Brickner ME, Hillis LD, Lange RA. Congenital heart disease in adults. N Engl J 
Med. 2000;342:256–263.
Driscoll DJ. Left-­to-­right shunt lesions. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:355–368.
Fedderly RT. Left ventricular outflow obstruction. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1999;46:369–384.
Grifka RG. Cyanotic congenital heart disease with increased pulmonary blood 
flow. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:405–425.
Karl TR. Neonatal cardiac surgery: anatomic, physiologic, and technical con­
siderations. Clin Perinatol. 2001;28:159–185.
Ovaert C, McCrindle BW, Nykanen D, et al. Balloon angioplasty of native 
coarctation: clinical outcomes and predictors of success. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;35:988–996.
Pihkala J, Nykanen D, Freedom RM, et al. Interventional cardiac catheteriza­
tion. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:441–464.
Thangaratinam S, Brown K, Zamora J, et al. Pulse oximetry screening for criti­
cal congenital heart defects in asymptomatic newborn babies: a systematic 
review and meta-­analysis. Lancet. 2012;379:2459–2464.
Waldman JD, Wernly JA. Cyanotic congenital heart disease with decreased 
pulmonary blood flow in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:385–
404.
Acute Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease
Babu AN, Kymes SM, Carpenter Fryer SM. Eponyms and the diagnosis of aor­
tic regurgitation: what says the evidence? Ann Intern Med. 2003;138:736–
742.
Dass C, Kanmanthareddy A. Rheumatic heart disease. In: StatPearls [Internet]. 
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021.
Figueroa FE, Fernandez MS, Valdes P, et al. Prospective comparison of clinical 
and echocardiographic diagnosis of rheumatic carditis: long term follow up 
of patients with subclinical disease. Heart. 2001;85:407–410.
Gerwitz MH. The Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever: 
updated but not abandoned. J Pediatr. 2018;198:7–8.
Gerwitz MH, Baltimore RS, et al. Revision of the Jones Criteria for the diag­
nosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2015;131:1806–1818.
Hecht M. What is erythema marginatum? Healthline. 2018. https://www.
healthline.com/health/erythema-­marginatum.
Majmundar VD, Nagalli S. Erythema marginatum. In: StatPearls [Internet]. 
­Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021.
Sika-­Paotonu D. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. In: 
Streptococcus pyogenes: Basic Biology to Clinical Manifestations [Internet]. 
Oklahoma City (OK): University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center; 
2016–2017 Mar 10 [updated 2017 Apr 3].
Stollerman GH. Rheumatic fever in the 21st century. Clin Infect Dis. 
2001;33:806–814.
Veasy LG. Time to take soundings in acute rheumatic fever. Lancet. 
2001;357:1994–1995.
Infective Endocarditis
Awadallah SM, Kavey REW, Byrum CJ, et al. The changing pattern of infective 
endocarditis in childhood. Am J Cardiol. 1991;68:90–94.
Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al. Infective endocarditis in child­
hood: 2015 update. Circulation. 2015;132(15):1487–1515.
Bayer AS, Ward JI, Ginzton LE, et al. Evaluation of new clinical criteria for the 
diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Am J Med. 1994;96:211–218.
Bouza E, Menasalvas A, Munoz P, et al. Infective endocarditis: a ­prospective 
study at the end of the twentieth century. Medicine (Baltimore). 
2001;80:298–307.
Brook MM. Pediatric bacterial endocarditis: treatment and prophylaxis. Pedi­
atr Clin North Am. 1999;46:275–287.
Carpenter JL. Perivalvular extension of infection in patients with infectious 
endocarditis. Rev Infect Dis. 1991;13:127–138.
Di Filippo S, Delahaye F, Semiond B, et al. Current patterns of infective endo­
carditis in congenital heart disease. Heart. 2006;92:1490–1495.
Dixon G, Christov G. Infective endocarditis in children: an update. Curr Opin 
Infect Dis. 2017;30:257–267.
Ferrieri P, Gewitz MH, Gerber MA, et al. Unique features of infective endocar­
ditis in childhood. Circulation. 2002;107(17):211502126.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
176.e2
Gupta S, Sakhuja A, McGrath E, et al. Trends, microbiology, and outcomes of 
infective endocarditis in children during 2000–2010 in the United States. 
Cong Heart Dis. 2017;12:196–201.
Hansen D, Schmiegelow K, Jacobsen JR. Bacterial endocarditis in children: trends 
in its diagnosis, course, and prognosis. Pediatr Cardiol. 1992;13:198–203.
Lin YT, Hsieh KS, Chen YS, et al. Infective endocarditis in children without 
underlying heart disease. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2013;46:121–128.
Mylonakis E, Calerwood SB. Infective endocarditis in adults. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:1318–1330.
Saiman L, Prince A, Gersony WM. Pediatric infective endocarditis in the 
modern era. J Pediatr. 1993;122:847–853.
Shamszad P, Khan MS, Rossano JW, et al. Early surgical therapy of infective 
endocarditis in children: a 15-­year experience. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;146:506–511.
Thanavaro KL, Nixon JV. Endocarditis 2014: an update. Heart & Lung. 
2014;43:334–337.
Tolan RW, Kleiman MB, Frank M, et al. Operative intervention in active 
endocarditis in children: report of a series of cases and review. Clin Infect 
Dis. 1992;14:852–862.
Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocar­
ditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association. A guideline 
from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, 
and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation. 
2007;116:1736–1754.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
