1067
Short stature (usually defined as height >2 standard deviations [SD] 
below the mean for age) and growth failure (a subnormal height veloc­
ity that leads to decline in growth percentiles, usually height velocity 
>1.5 SD below the mean for age) are symptoms, not diseases. Of the 
two, short stature is more likely to be noticed, but growth failure is more 
likely to be pathologic.
Short stature may represent a normal variant or it may be a sig­
nal of serious physical or emotional illness. Because linear growth is a 
crucial component of childhood, growth is in many ways an index of 
childhood well-­being. Illnesses, even those not involving aberrations 
of growth-­regulating hormones, often interfere with growth. There­
fore, the measurement and charting of heights sequentially on stan­
dardized growth charts constitute a central part of a child’s medical 
evaluation, and the finding of short stature, particularly if associated 
with a subnormal height velocity, deserves close attention and appro­
priate evaluation.
DEFINITION
Short stature is defined as height more than 2 SD below the mean for 
age, which is at the 2.3 percentile (Fig. 56.1A, B). On growth charts 
(and in clinical practice) it is more common to define short stature as 
height below the 3rd percentile for age, which is −1.88 SD. Implicit 
in this definition is the understanding that height is a normally dis­
tributed characteristic; therefore, a proportion of normal individuals 
have heights more than 2 SD above or below the mean. Since height 
is strongly heritable (i.e., a large proportion of the observed variation 
between individuals is hereditary), stature that is inappropriately low 
for the child’s genetic endowment may also be a cause for concern.
Growth failure is defined as a subnormal rate of growth, a height 
velocity that is below the norm for that age. Since sustained height 
velocity below the 25th percentile is insufficient to maintain a child’s 
position on the growth chart, growth failure is sometimes defined as 
height velocity below the 25th percentile for age. Other authorities pre­
fer to use >1.5 SD below the average height velocity for that age as the 
cut-­off (see Chapter 12).
Short stature should be distinguished from “failure to thrive.” The 
latter term refers primarily to poor weight gain in infants and young 
children (although linear growth may be secondarily affected), whereas 
short stature refers primarily to subnormal linear growth in childhood 
and adolescence (see Chapter 12).
Normal Growth
Height is highly heritable, but the genetic program underlying this 
regulation is not fully understood. The growth of individual organs as 
well as the growth of the skeleton as a whole is regulated by negative 
feedback mechanisms that slow and eventually stop growth as organs 
and the organism reach their final size. This gradual deceleration of 
growth with age does not appear to be driven primarily by changes in 
the endocrine system, since levels of growth hormone (GH) and the 
insulin-­like growth factors remain elevated even as growth slows in 
the latter part of puberty. The final height and growth pattern of any 
given individual are affected by subtle variations in many genes, while 
more significant variants in individual-­specific genes cause the various 
genetic forms of short stature and skeletal dysplasias (Fig. 56.2).
FETAL GROWTH AND BIRTH SIZE
A human being experiences the most rapid linear growth in the prena­
tal period (growing from near-­zero to about 50 cm in length in just 9 
months). While genetic factors play a major role in postnatal growth, 
fetal growth and birth size mainly reflect maternal and placental fac­
tors, including maternal or uterine size, parity, multiparity, nutrition, 
and placental function. Many congenital disorders such as Turner syn­
drome and congenital GH deficiency that markedly stunt postnatal 
growth have only minimal effects on prenatal growth and birth size. 
Birth size is generally a poor predictor of the eventual growth pattern 
in most children. An exception is the neonate who is small for gesta­
tional age as a result of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) (Table 
56.1). While most infants with IUGR (caused by nutritional problems 
or poor placental function) show catch-­up growth (a period of rapid 
growth that occurs spontaneously after relief from the adverse intra­
uterine condition that had suppressed the rate of growth), 10–20% 
remain shorter than expected beyond infancy and early childhood, 
making IUGR one of the causes of childhood short stature.
Postnatal Growth Patterns
Infancy is also a period of relatively rapid growth (faster than at any 
other time in postnatal life). Growth then gradually slows as the infant 
gets older, declining to its lowest point just before puberty, before accel­
erating again during the pubertal growth spurt and finally ending with 
the completion of linear growth about 5 years after the onset of puberty 
(Table 56.2 and Fig. 56.3).
Since birth length is mostly determined by maternal and placental 
factors, size at birth may not reflect the infant’s genetic growth poten­
tial. It is during the first 2 years of life that infants gradually transition 
from their birth size to their own genetically determined height poten­
tial. Therefore, it is normal for infants to shift linear growth percentiles 
during this period; 65% of infants will exhibit such shifts, moving up 
or down on the growth chart. By 24 months, these shifts are complete, 
and most children have entered a specific “growth channel” or linear 
growth percentile in relation to peers and any significant deviation 
from this channel should evince concern.
After a period of slow but steady growth during childhood, many 
children experience a further “prepubertal dip” in height velocity, 
reaching a nadir just before onset of puberty. Height velocity then 
Short Stature
Omar Ali
56
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1068
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
A
B
Fig. 56.1  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) growth charts for ages 2–20. A, Males, stature 
for age. B, Females, stature for age.
Intracellular regulation
• Noonan syndrome (PTPN11, etc.)
• SHOX deﬁciency (SHOX)
• Seckel syndrome (PCNT, etc.)
• 3-M syndrome (CUL7, etc.)
Extracellular matrix regulation
• Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
  (COL9A1, etc.)
• Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia
  (ACAN, etc.)
• Acromicric dysplasia (FBN1, etc.)
Paracrine regulation
• Achondroplasia (FGFR3, etc.)
• Acromesomelic dysplasia (NPR2)
• Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
  (PTH1R, etc.)
Endocrine regulation
• GH deﬁciency (GH1, etc.)
• Laron syndrome (GHR)
• IGF-1 deﬁciency (IGF1)
• ALS deﬁciency (IGFALS)
Fig. 56.2  Molecular mechanisms of short stature. Short stature is caused by multiple molecular defects, 
including intracellular signaling, extracellular matrix, and paracrine and endocrine regulation. Ovoid shapes 
represent growth plate chondrocytes. Arrows indicate mechanisms regulating chondrocytes. Examples of 
clinical syndrome and the genetic cause under different molecular mechanisms are shown in each box. GH, 
growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor. (From Jee YH, Andrade AC, Baron J, et al., Genetics of short 
stature. Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am. 2017;46[2]:259–281, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1069
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
accelerates once again as puberty advances. This acceleration of growth 
during puberty reaches a peak known as the “pubertal growth spurt.” 
The timing of the pubertal growth spurt differs between females and 
males. Females generally begin pubertal development at 10 to 11 years 
of age and their pubertal growth spurt starts coincidentally with breast 
development and peaks before menarche. For females with an average 
tempo of puberty, peak growth velocity (8–9 cm per year) is reached at 
11–12 years of age. After menarche (which generally occurs 2–2.5 years 
after onset of puberty), the growth rate declines and growth finally 
stops about 2 years after menarche, with girls gaining an average of 7 
cm in height after menarche.
In males, testicular enlargement is generally the first sign of puberty 
and occurs at approximately 11.5 years on average (range, 9–14.3 
years). In males with an average tempo of pubertal development, peak 
growth velocity occurs about 2 years after onset of puberty (so it is later 
than girls in absolute terms, as well as in terms of stage of puberty) at 
approximately 13–14 years, with an average rate of 10.3 cm (4 inches) 
per year. It is worth noting that prepubertal males and females grow at 
very similar rates; the ultimate taller stature of males relative to females 
is mostly the result of a longer period of growth and a higher peak growth 
velocity during puberty.
These are the average timings of puberty and pubertal growth, but 
it should be kept in mind that there are large variations in the timing 
of puberty—and therefore in growth rates—among individuals of the 
same age during the period of adolescence.
Because of these characteristic patterns of growth during childhood 
and adolescence, the rate of growth (centimeters per year or inches per 
year) is a key variable in evaluating a short child. Growth rates may 
vary somewhat with season and can be affected by transient illness, but 
a child should maintain a relatively set growth channel on the linear 
growth percentile charts after 2–3 years of age. A persistently slow rate 
of growth in relation to age-­appropriate norms is alarming and is likely 
to reflect an underlying medical disorder.
MEASURING A CHILD
Stature is evaluated as supine length until 2 years of age and as 
standing height thereafter (Fig. 56.4). For measurement of supine 
length, an infant lies on an inflexible ruled horizontal surface, at 
one end of which one person holds the infant’s head in contact with 
a fixed board; a second person extends the infant’s leg as much as 
possible and brings a movable plate in contact with the infant’s heel. 
Recumbent measurements average 1 cm (0.4 inch) more than stand­
ing height.
After 2 years of age, children are measured standing and barefoot 
with a device such as a Harpenden stadiometer; a vertical metal bar is 
affixed to an upright board or wall, and height is measured at the top 
of the head by a sliding perpendicular plate or block. Measurements of 
length using pen marks on the examining table at the head and foot of 
infants are often grossly inaccurate, as are height measurements using a 
flexible metal rod atop a standard weight scale.
With the use of optimal techniques, the variation in measurement 
among observers is <0.3 cm (0.1 inch). It is then possible to determine 
changes in height over 3-­ to 4-­month intervals to estimate the annu­
alized growth rate. However, because of normal seasonal variations in 
growth rates, a longer interval between measurements (6–12 months) 
is more reliable in the calculation of height velocity.
Measurements are then plotted on standard growth charts; it is rec­
ommended that World Health Organization (WHO) growth charts be 
used for infants from birth to 2 years of age and Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) growth charts for children from ages 
2 to 18 years (see Fig. 56.1). These CDC and WHO growth charts are 
available at http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/ and https://www.who.
int/childgrowth/standards/en/.
For children with specific disorders, such as Turner syndrome, 
there are disorder-­specific standardized growth curves for many of 
these disorders. Children with known disorders should be plotted 
on these curves to avoid unintentional evaluation for growth failure, 
as they may appear to be abnormally short on the standard growth 
charts. Calculated growth rates (centimeters per year or inches per 
year) should be evaluated in relation to age-­related norms with 
growth velocity charts for North American children for children 
over 2 years of age (see Fig. 56.3).
TABLE 56.1  Factors Often Associated with 
Intrauterine Growth Restriction
FETAL
Chromosomal and genetic disorders
Chronic fetal infections (cytomegalic inclusion disease, congenital rubella, 
syphilis)
Congenital anomalies—syndrome complexes
Irradiation
Multiple gestation
Pancreatic hypoplasia
Insulin deficiency (production or action of insulin)
Insulin-­like growth factor type 1 deficiency
PLACENTAL
Decreased placental weight, cellularity, or both
Decrease in surface area
Villous placentitis (bacterial, viral, parasitic)
Infarction
Tumor (chorioangioma, hydatidiform mole)
Placental separation
Twin transfusion syndrome
MATERNAL/PATERNAL
Toxemia
Hypertension or renal disease, or both
Hypoxemia (high altitude, cyanotic cardiac or pulmonary disease)
Malnutrition (micronutrient or macronutrient deficiencies)
Chronic illness
Sickle cell anemia
Drugs (narcotics, alcohol, cigarettes, cocaine, antimetabolites)
IGF2 gene variant (paternal)
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Table 
117.4.
TABLE 56.2  Growth Velocity at Various 
Ages
Age Interval
Average Height Velocity
Prenatal
66 cm/yr
0–1 yr
25 cm/yr
1–2 yr
12 cm/yr
2–3 yr
8 cm/yr
3–5 yr
7 cm/yr
5 yr–onset of puberty
5–6 cm/yr
Pubertal growth spurt
Girls 8–12 cm
Boys 10–14 cm
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1070
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
BODY PROPORTIONS
The cephalo-­caudal ratios change with age until adult height is attained 
(Fig. 56.5). Thus, apart from linear height, it is also useful to assess the 
upper-­to-­lower segment ratio (U/L) (Fig. 56.6) and the arm span. The 
U/L is determined by measuring the lower segment (vertical distance 
between the top of the symphysis pubis and the floor, with the child 
standing) and the upper segment (height minus lower segment). Arm 
span is the distance between the outstretched middle fingertips with 
the child standing against a flat board or wall. The U/L and arm span 
are used to determine whether the child is normally proportioned or 
not (in Europe it is more common to assess sitting height vs standing 
height for the same purpose).
The U/L gradually declines with age throughout childhood (see 
Fig. 56.6). Since infants have relatively short legs, the U/L is high (an 
average of 1.7) at birth. It then declines throughout childhood as the 
legs increase in length relative to the upper body, decreasing to a mean 
of 0.9 by late puberty (in males; in females the ratio may be closer to 
0.95). The arm span as compared to the height is another measure of 
body proportions and is normally shorter than the height in younger 
children and increases to become slightly longer than the height by 
late puberty (about 5 cm more than height in boys, 1.2 cm more than 
height in girls). Deviations from the norm in the U/L and the arm 
span may point to syndromic conditions such as skeletal dysplasias, 
Turner syndrome, or longstanding hypothyroidism (increased U/L, 
i.e., relatively short extremities) and radiation-­induced spinal damage 
or genetic disorders like Klinefelter or Marfan syndrome and homo­
cystinuria (low U/L, due to a relatively short trunk or unusually long 
extremities).
Weight should also be considered in relation to a child’s stature. 
Undernutrition is generally caused by nonendocrine factors (poor 
nutritional intake, malabsorption, systemic illness) and typically leads 
to a decrease in weight before a decrease in linear growth. Obesity in 
childhood is usually exogenous; exogenous obesity is generally asso­
ciated with an accelerated growth rate. In contrast, endocrine disor­
ders that cause poor growth and short stature are often associated with 
weight gain and obesity (Cushing syndrome, hypothyroidism, and, in 
some instances, GH deficiency). Therefore, the obese child who has a 
slow growth velocity is more likely to have an endocrine cause of short 
stature, while the undernourished child with short stature likely has 
short stature secondary to poor weight gain and is unlikely to have an 
endocrine disorder.
Familial and Genetic Factors
Both parental height and parental pattern of growth are key determi­
nants of a child’s growth pattern. This strong familial influence on height 
is not detectable at birth but is manifested by 2–3 years of age. Final 
adult height is strongly heritable with heritability estimates ranging 
Centiles for boys
maturing
at average time
97
97
90
75
25 50
10
3
97
90
75
25
50
10
3
50
3
97 and 3 centiles at peak
height velocity for
Early (+2SD) maturers
Late (–2SD) maturers
Centiles for girls
maturing
at average time
97
50
3
97 and 3 centiles at peak
height velocity for
Early (+2SD) maturers
Late (–2SD) maturers
Boys
Height velocity
Age, years
Age, years
Girls
Height velocity
1
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
cm/yr
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
cm/yr
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Fig. 56.3  A, Height velocity for American males. Lines with early velocity refer to the 50th centile for boys 2 
standard deviations (SD) early in growth tempo; lines with late or gradual velocity refer to the 50th centile for 
boys 2 SD late in growth tempo. ^ and v, 97th and 3rd centiles for peak velocities of early and late maturers, 
respectively. B, Height velocity for American females. Lines with early velocity refer to the 50th centile for 
girls 2 SD early in growth tempo; lines with late or gradual velocity refer to the 50th centile for girls 2 SD late 
in growth tempo. ^ and v, 97th and 3rd centiles for peak velocities of early and late maturers, respectively. 
(Redrawn from Tanner J, Davies P. Clinical longitudinal standards for height and height velocity in North Amer­
ican children. J Pediatr. 1985;107:317–329.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1071
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
from 0.8 to 0.95 (i.e., 80–95% of the observed variation is explained by 
hereditary rather than environmental factors). The midparental height 
(MPH) is used as a measure of the child’s genetic growth potential and 
is an average of the height of both parents after correcting for gender. 
Because the average adult male is taller than the average adult female 
by 13 cm (5 inches), 13 cm is added to the mother’s height in the case 
of a male child, while 13 cm is subtracted from the father’s height in the 
case of a female child; the parental heights, after correction for gender, 
are then averaged to obtain the MPH.
MPH is determined in the following manner: 
Males: [father's height in cm + (mother's height in cm + 13 cm) ]/2
Females: [(father's height in cm − 13 cm) + mother's height in cm] /2
The MPH is a good index of the child’s genetic height potential but 
tends to become less accurate if one parent is unusually tall or short; 
that is, the offspring of an exceptionally tall parent or exceptionally 
short parent will be closer to the average height than is predicted by the 
MPH because of the phenomenon of regression to the mean.
In addition to the influence on final adult height, parents’ patterns 
of growth are also often repeated in their children. In particular, many 
males who were “late bloomers” with delayed onset of puberty and 
delayed but normal growth spurts have sons with a similar growth 
pattern.
Ethnic Factors and Secular Trend
The average height of various populations across the globe is not 
the same; Northern European populations are taller than many (but 
not all) other ethnic groups and it therefore seems to make sense to 
use population-­specific standards of growth because a child from 
a generally short ethnic group may be labeled as “short stature” by 
Northern European standards, but may be normal for their own 
ethnic group. Two additional observations need to be kept in mind 
though:
	1.	 Migrants from countries where the average height is lower tend to 
have children who are taller than their parents when they move to 
a country with a higher standard of living. This indicates that at 
least some of the observed height difference may be environmental 
(most likely related to nutrition and childhood disease burden) and 
that this height difference may shrink or disappear in subsequent 
generations.
	2.	 The Northern European populations were themselves much shorter 
in the 18th and 19th centuries and average heights have steadily 
increased as living standards improved (reflecting improvements in 
nutrition and other public health measures). This “secular trend” 
A
B
Fig. 56.4  A, Technique for measuring length. B, Technique for measur­
ing erect height. (From Wilson JD, Foster DW, eds. Williams Textbook 
of Endocrinology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:1106–1107.)
Newborn
2 years
6 years
12 years
25 years
Fig. 56.5  Approximate changes in body proportions from birth through 
adulthood. (Modified from Leifer G. Introduction to Maternity & Pediat­
ric Nursing. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011:347–385, Fig. 15-­2.)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age, years
+250
+150
Mean
-150
-250
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
US/LS
Fig. 56.6  Normal upper-­to-­lower segment ratios (US/LS) for White chil­
dren. (From McKusick V. Hereditable Disorders of Connective Tissue. 
4th ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1972.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1072
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
in height slows down and plateaus over time (most likely because 
a “genetic ceiling” is reached) but is much more marked in popula­
tions that have recently seen an improvement in living standards.
Practitioners should make allowances for ethnic differences in 
height when evaluating children from different ethnic backgrounds but 
should not automatically assume such differences as the sole explana­
tion for short stature in children from historically shorter populations. 
Growth velocity in particular should not be abnormal even in histori­
cally shorter populations, and a subnormal growth velocity should trigger 
an evaluation in the same way as it would in children from a Northern 
European background.
GENERAL WELL-­BEING
Because growth is a barometer of a child’s health and general well-­
being, freedom from serious illness is necessary for a child to achieve 
their genetic growth potential. Chronic illnesses that are not primarily 
problems of stature often interfere with growth secondarily, and short 
stature may be the presenting feature of such conditions as inflamma­
tory bowel disease, celiac disease, and renal disease.
Psychological Factors
Under normal circumstances, emotional and psychological factors do 
not have a great effect on growth. However, in certain cases, emotional 
deprivation can lead to very significant growth failure (sometimes 
labeled “deprivation dwarfism” or “psychosocial dwarfism”) via mech­
anisms that are still poorly understood.
Endocrine Regulation of Growth
Growth hormone (GH) is produced by the anterior pituitary under 
the control of growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) from the 
hypothalamus and is essential for normal growth in childhood and 
adolescence (though it appears to play a relatively small role in prena­
tal growth). GH is secreted in brief pulses and peak secretion occurs 
during sleep, so random serum levels have little utility in the evaluation 
of GH deficiency except in the immediate newborn period (when ran­
dom GH levels are usually elevated and a level below 7 ng/mL is very 
likely to reflect GH deficiency).
GH exerts its growth-­promoting effect mainly through stimulating 
the production of insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1) (primarily in the 
liver, but also in some target tissues), though there is also some direct 
actions of GH on bone. Most circulating IGF-­1 is bound to IGF-­binding 
proteins, with the largest proportion being bound in a ternary com­
plex with IGF-­binding protein-­3 (IGFBP3) and a protein named the 
acid-­labile-­subunit (ALS). Because IGF-­1 levels in the blood are stable 
through the day and reflect the integrated effect of GH secretion, mea­
surement of IGF-­1 is often used as a surrogate measure of GH secretion.
Thyroid hormone also has a relatively limited role in prenatal 
growth but is essential for normal postnatal linear growth, both via 
direct actions on the epiphyseal growth plate and via a permissive effect 
on GH secretion. Hypothyroidism can therefore lead to very profound 
growth failure and an evaluation of thyroid hormone status is essential 
in the investigation of growth failure.
Glucocorticoids do not play any significant role in normal growth 
but are powerful inhibitors of growth when present in excess. Persistent 
exposure to excess corticosteroids (whether endogenous or exogenous) 
can lead to very severe growth failure (along with significant weight 
gain). Deficiency of glucocorticoids generally does not adversely affect 
growth if the child is otherwise healthy.
Sex steroids mediate the pubertal growth spurt (see Chapter 
55). This involves direct effects of sex steroids on bone growth as 
well as steroid-­induced amplification of GH secretion. Most of the 
bone-­maturing action of sex steroids is mediated by estrogen in both 
sexes; while testosterone has some direct effect on bone strength and 
thickness, most of the effects of testosterone on linear growth and 
the maturation of growth plates in males also occur via the action of 
estrogen produced by the peripheral conversion of testosterone. Con­
sequently, even in males, bone maturation can be affected by genetic 
defects in the production or action of estrogen, as well as by pharma­
cologic inhibition of this pathway (e.g., by using aromatase inhibitors 
that block the conversion of testosterone to estrogen). Sexual precocity 
(true precocious puberty, exogenous exposure, or congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia) tends to accelerate linear growth transiently as a result 
of premature or excessive production of sex steroids (see Chapter 55). 
But, if left untreated, these conditions eventually advance osseous mat­
uration, leading to premature epiphyseal fusion and short final adult 
height. Absence of sex steroids (hypogonadism), in the absence of 
other abnormalities, blunts the pubertal growth spurt but tends not 
to limit final height as bone maturation and epiphyseal fusion are also 
delayed by the lack of estrogen in these patients.
BONE AGE
Osseous maturation follows a very predictable pattern during the 
growth and development of the child and an X-­ray of the nondominant 
hand can be used to assess bone age (i.e., the degree of maturation of 
the bones compared to age-­matched standards). Bone age is usually 
estimated by comparing the child’s radiologic findings with a standard 
set of radiologic images, or by using various scoring algorithms. These 
readings are subject to observer bias and error (other methods that use 
artificial intelligence to automatically assess bone age may bypass this 
issue) but are still useful as long as this inherent subjectivity is kept 
in mind. Bone age is very closely correlated with pubertal maturation, 
and an assessment of bone age can be especially useful in cases of pre­
cocious puberty, delayed puberty, and constitutional growth delay. 
Except in cases of precocious puberty, bone age is rarely useful in the 
evaluation of short stature in a child younger than 5 years of age.
Causes of Short Stature
Understanding the factors that influence childhood growth leads 
directly to an understanding of the causes of short stature and to the 
differential diagnosis of short stature for an individual child (Tables 
56.3, 56.4, 56.5, 56.6, and 56.7). While a very large number of con­
ditions can potentially lead to short stature and growth failure, the 
vast majority of children with short stature either are normal variants 
(familial short stature, constitutional delay of growth and puberty) or 
have no discernible cause (idiopathic short stature). It is also important 
to remember that the child with growth failure is far more likely to have 
an underlying pathology than a child who happens to be short but has 
a normal growth velocity.
Normal Variants
The two most frequent causes of short stature in children are familial 
short stature and constitutional delay of growth and puberty. These 
are considered normal variants and their recognition can help avoid 
expensive and unnecessary testing and interventions.
Familial Short Stature
The term familial short stature is usually reserved for familial forms 
of mild to moderate short stature that do not have a specific identifi­
able genetic defect; since hundreds of genes play a role in growth, this 
height potential reflects the influence of multiple loci of small effect or 
a few loci of relatively moderate effect. Genetic disorders that result in 
severe short stature, or that are associated with other abnormal physical 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1073
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
findings (syndromes), or that are caused by known genetic defects (see 
Table 56.7), are conventionally treated separately from familial short 
stature. In familial short stature the child’s height is in keeping with 
their genetic endowment, and the child is otherwise healthy. Typically, 
one or both parents (and often other family members) are about 1.5 to 
2 SD below the mean in height. This relatively short genetic potential 
is reflected in short MPH, and if the child continues to grow along the 
current percentile, the child would fall within 9 cm of this MPH (this 
is approximately 2 SD of the MPH); by age 2 the child is usually noted 
to be small in relation to peers. Although the growth channel is low, it 
should parallel the normal growth curve from that point onward. Con­
tinued deviation away from the normal growth curve (indicating a sub­
normal growth velocity) is not typical and should raise concerns about 
a disorder other than familial short stature. Stature that is extremely low 
(2.5–3 or more SD below the mean) raises concerns even if the parents 
are short, since this degree of short stature may reflect a specific genetic 
cause of short stature (e.g., a mild defect in GH secretion or action, or a 
form of hypochondroplasia) in the parents as well as the child.
The review of systems is generally negative in the otherwise healthy 
child, as are the physical examination findings (aside from short stature). 
The height-­to-­weight ratio, body proportions, muscularity, and pubertal 
development are normal for age. Abnormalities found on review of systems 
or physical examination should prompt consideration of other diagnoses.
Laboratory studies are not mandatory but if done are all normal. 
The bone age is also normal. Prediction of adult height can be made on 
the basis of bone age but the accuracy is variable; the predicted height 
is within 9 cm of the MPH.
TABLE 56.3  Classification of Growth 
Disorders
	I.	 PROPORTIONAL SHORT STATURE
	 A. GENETIC CAUSES
Single-­gene disorders (GHRH-­receptor, GH gene, SHOX, etc.)
Syndromic short stature (Prader-­Willi syndrome, Russell-­Silver 
syndrome, etc.)
Polygenic (familial) short stature
Chromosomal abnormalities
Turner syndrome
Down syndrome
	 B.	SECONDARY GROWTH DISORDERS
	
A.	Malnutrition
	
B.	Chronic disease
Cardiac disorders
Left-­to-­right shunts
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary disorders
Cystic fibrosis
Gastrointestinal disorders
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Malabsorption
Chronic diarrhea
Hematologic disorders
Chronic anemia (including sickle cell disease, thalassemias)
Renal disorders
Chronic renal failure
Renal tubular acidosis
Immunologic disorders
Congenital immunodeficiency
HIV
	
C.	Intrauterine growth restriction
	
D.	Endocrine disorders
Hypothyroidism
Growth hormone deficiency
IGF-­1 deficiency or resistance
Cushing syndrome
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Vitamin D–deficient or –resistant rickets
	 C.	IDIOPATHIC SHORT STATURE (ISS)
	 D.	CONSTITUTIONAL DELAY OF GROWTH AND PUBERTY
	II.	DISPROPORTIONATE SHORT STATURE (skeletal dysplasias) (see 
Table 56.4)
GH, growth hormone; GHRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; 
IGF-­1, insulin-­like growth factor 1.
TABLE 56.4  Nosology and Classification of 
Genetic Skeletal Disorders: 2019 Revision
	 1.	 FGFR3 chondrodysplasia group
	 2.	 Type 2 collagen group
	 3.	 Type 11 collagen group
	 4.	 Sulphation disorders group
	 5.	 Perlecan group
	 6.	 Aggrecan group
	 7.	 Filamin group and related disorders
	 8.	 TRPV4 group
	 9.	 Ciliopathies with major skeletal involvement
	10.	 Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and pseudoachondroplasia group
	11.	 Metaphyseal dysplasias
	12.	 Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias (SMDs)
	13.	 Spondylo-­epi-­(meta)-­physeal dysplasias (SEMDs)
	14.	 Severe spondylodysplastic dysplasias
	15.	 Acromelic dysplasias
	16.	 Acromesomelic dysplasias
	17.	 Mesomelic and rhizo-­mesomelic dysplasias
	18.	 Bent bone dysplasia group
	19.	 Primordial dwarfism and slender bones group
	20.	 Dysplasias with multiple joint dislocations
	21.	 Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) group
	22.	 Neonatal osteosclerotic dysplasias
	23.	 Osteopetrosis and related disorders
	24.	 Other sclerosing bone disorders
	25.	 Osteogenesis imperfecta and decreased bone density group
	26.	 Abnormal mineralization group
	27.	 Lysosomal storage diseases with skeletal involvement (dysostosis 
multiplex group)
	28.	 Osteolysis group
	29.	 Disorganized development of skeletal components group
	30.	 Overgrowth (tall stature) syndromes with skeletal involvement
	31.	 Genetic inflammatory/rheumatoid-­like osteoarthropathies
	32.	 Cleidocranial dysplasia and related disorders
	33.	 Craniosynostosis syndromes
	34.	 Dysostoses with predominant craniofacial involvement
	35.	 Dysostoses with predominant vertebral with and without costal involvement
	36.	 Patellar dysostoses
	37.	 Brachydactylies (without extraskeletal manifestations)
	38.	 Brachydactylies (with extraskeletal manifestations)
	39.	 Limb hypoplasia–reduction defects group
	40.	 Ectrodactyly with and without other manifestations
	41.	 Polydactyly-­syndactyly-­triphalangism group
	42.	 Defects in joint formation and synostoses
From Mortier GR, et al. Nosology and classification of genetic skeletal 
disorders: 2019 revision. Am J Med Genet. 2019;179A:2393–2419.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1074
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
TABLE 56.5  Genetic Defects of the GH-­IGF Axis Resulting in Somatotroph Dysfunction and 
GH Deficiency
Factor
Gene Function
Affected Cell 
Types
Clinical Phenotype
Mode of 
Inheritance
Gene Variants in Factors Resulting in Growth Hormone and Associated Hormone Deficiencies
Hesx1
 • Paired-­like homeobox gene
 • Early marker for pituitary primordium 
and Rathke pouch
 • Requires Lhx3 for maintenance and 
PROP1 for repression
Somatotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, 
gonadotrophs 
(posterior pituitary 
may also be 
affected)
 • Isolated GH deficiency or multiple 
hormone deficiency (including diabetes 
insipidus)
 • Puberty may be delayed
 • Associated with septo-­optic dysplasia
 • Abnormal MRI findings: pituitary hypoplasia, 
ectopic posterior pituitary, midline forebrain 
abnormalities
AD, AR
Lhx3 (Lim 3, P-­LIM)
 • Member of LIM-­homeodomain family 
of gene regulatory proteins
 • Required for survival and proliferation 
of Rathke pouch
 • Activates α-­GSU promoter
 • Acts with Pit1 to activate TSH-­β gene 
promoter
Somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, 
gonadotrophs, 
possibly 
corticotrophs
 • Patients may present with rigid cervical 
spine causing limited neck rotation
 • Hypoplastic anterior/intermediate pituitary 
lobe
AR
Lhx4
 • A LIM protein with close resemblance 
to Lhx3
 • Important for proliferation and 
differentiation of cell lineages
 • May have overlapping function with 
PROP1 and POU1F1
Somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, 
gonadotrophs, 
corticotrophs
 • Combined pituitary hormone deficiencies 
with predominant GH deficiency
 • Severe anterior pituitary hypoplasia, ectopic 
neurohypophysis
AD
SIX6
 • Member of the SIX/sine oculis family 
of homeobox genes
 • Expressed early in hypothalamus, later 
in Rathke pouch, neural retina, and 
optic chiasma
Somatotrophs, 
gonadotrophs
 • Bilateral anophthalmia
 • Pituitary hypoplasia
 • Associated with deletion at chromosome 
14q22-­23
Unknown
FGF8, FGFR1, PROKR2
 • Ventral diencephalon
Somatotrophs, 
gonadotrophs
 • Septo-­optic dysplasia
AD
PITX2 (RIEG1)
 • Bicoid-­related homeobox gene 
expressed early in Rathke pouch
 • Important in maintaining expression of 
Hesx1 and PROP1
Somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, reduced 
expression of 
gonadotrophs
 • Associated with Rieger syndrome:
 • Anterior-­chamber eye anomalies
 • Dental hypoplasia
 • Protuberant umbilicus
 • Intellectual disability
 • Pituitary dysfunction
AD
PROP1 (Prophet of Pit1)  • Paired-­like homeodomain transcription 
factor required for PIT1 expression
 • Coexpressed with Hesx1
Somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, 
gonadotrophs, 
corticotrophs 
(delayed)
 • Combined pituitary deficiencies 
(GH, TSH, PRL, and late-­onset ACTH 
reported)
 • Gonadotropin insufficiency or normal 
puberty with later onset of deficiency
 • Several gene variants noted in 
nonconsanguineous families
AR
POU1F1 (PIT1)
 • Member of the POU transcription 
factor family
 • Important for activation of GH1, PRL, 
and TSH-­β genes
Somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, 
thyrotrophs
 • Combined pituitary deficiencies (GH, TSH, 
PRL, and late-­onset ACTH reported); TSH 
secretion may initially be normal
 • Pituitary hypoplasia
AD, AR
Otx2
 • Bicoid-­type homeodomain gene 
required for forebrain and eye 
development
 • Antagonizes FGF8 and SHH expression
 • May have importance in activation of 
Hesx1
Somatotrophs, 
thyrotrophs, 
corticotrophs, 
and probably 
gonadotrophs
 • Severe ocular malformation including 
anophthalmia
 • Combined pituitary hormone deficiencies 
with LH/FSH deficiency
 • Anterior pituitary hypoplasia with ectopic 
posterior pituitary
Unknown
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1075
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
Constitutional Delay of Growth and Puberty
Constitutional delay of growth and puberty is a growth pattern that is 
also considered a variant of normal. These children appear to have a 
slowed maturational pattern and their bone age is delayed relative to 
their peers. As part of this slowed maturation, they also enter puberty 
later than their peers. This variant occurs in both sexes but is more 
common in males and is recognized predominantly in them for this 
reason, as well as for cultural reasons (greater attention being paid to 
short stature in adolescent males than females).
These children often begin to show moderate short stature (height 
−1.5 to −2.5 SD) during early to middle childhood but are otherwise 
healthy. They have delayed onset of puberty and therefore a delayed 
growth spurt. One or both parents (or other family members) may 
have a history of delayed puberty and a late adolescent growth spurt, 
with eventual cessation of growth during late adolescence or even into 
the third decade of life. The affected parent usually is of normal adult 
stature. Otherwise, the history and review of systems are negative. The 
physical examination findings are normal except for delayed onset of 
puberty in children of an appropriate age.
Laboratory tests are not mandatory but are normal if performed, 
with the important exception of a delayed bone age (bone age < 
chronologic age). It is important to note that IGF-­1 levels normally 
increase with onset of puberty and should be compared with standards 
for the child’s pubertal stage and bone age rather than the chronologic 
age. The delayed bone age suggests that the child has more “room to 
grow” than the average age-­matched child and that the child is likely to 
reach an adult height taller than that suggested by the current height 
percentile. Some children have mixed familial short stature and con­
stitutional delay in growth and development; they tend to have both 
delayed puberty and a short-­predicted adult height.
Chronic illness may mimic constitutional delay in growth and 
development and should be considered in the differential diagnosis. It 
is sometimes difficult to distinguish children with constitutional delay 
in growth and development from the more unusual condition of cen­
tral (hypothalamic/pituitary) hypogonadism; a positive family history 
of delayed but normal puberty and growth, a normal sense of smell (to 
exclude Kallmann syndrome), and normal neurologic findings favor 
constitutional delay. Evaluation for permanent central hypogonadism 
is indicated if puberty fails to begin by age 13 in females or 14 in males, 
particularly if there is no family history of constitutional growth delay.
Females with delayed puberty are more likely to have an under­
lying pathologic cause, so the threshold for investigation is lower in 
TABLE 56.5  Genetic Defects of the GH-­IGF Axis Resulting in Somatotroph Dysfunction and 
GH Deficiency—cont’d
Factor
Gene Function
Affected Cell 
Types
Clinical Phenotype
Mode of 
Inheritance
SOX2
 • Member of SOXB1 subfamily as 
SOX1 and SOX3 expressed early in 
development
Somatotrophs, 
gonado­trophs (and, 
in animal models, 
thyrotrophs)
 • Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
 • Anterior pituitary hypoplasia
 • Bilateral anophthalmia/microphthalmia
 • Midbrain defects, including corpus callosum 
and hippocampus
 • Sensorineural defects
 • Esophageal atresia and learning difficulty
De novo
SOX3
 • Member of SOX (SRY-­related HMG 
box)
 • Developmental factor expressed 
in developing infundibulum and 
hypothalamus
Somatotrophs, 
additional anterior 
pituitary cell types
 • Duplications of Xq26-­27 in affected males 
(female carriers unaffected)
 • Variable intellectual disability
 • Hypopituitarism with abnormal MRI
 • Anterior pituitary hypoplasia
 • Infundibular hypoplasia
 • Ectopic/undescended posterior pituitary
 • Abnormal corpus callosum
 • Murine studies suggest SOX3 dosage 
critical for normal pituitary development
X-­linked
Isolated Growth Hormone Deficiency
GLI2
 • Member of the GLI gene family; 
transcription factors that mediate 
SHH signaling
Somatotrophs
 • Heterozygous loss-­of-­function gene variants 
in patients with holoprosencephaly
 • Penetrance variable
 • Pituitary dysfunction accompanied by 
variable craniofacial abnormalities
Unknown
GHRHr
 • Encodes GHRH receptor
Somatotrophs
 • Short stature
 • Anterior pituitary hypoplasia
AR
GH1
 • Encodes GH peptide
 • Several gene variants shown to affect 
GH secretion or function
Somatotrophs
 • Short stature
 • Abnormal facies
 • Presentation includes bioinactive GH
AR, AD, or X-­linked
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; 
GHRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; α-­GSU, glycoprotein α subunit; HMG, high-­mobility group; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; LH, luteinizing 
hormone; PRL, prolactin; SHH, Sonic hedgehog; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone (thyrotropin).
From Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:962–963, Table 25.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1076
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
females. On the other hand, benign constitutional delay is common 
in males and in the presence of a positive family history further eval­
uation may be delayed even beyond the age of 14. The possibility of 
central hypogonadism becomes stronger the longer the onset of 
puberty is delayed, but it should be noted that cases of spontaneous 
development of normal puberty can occur up to and even beyond the 
age of 18.
In most cases only reassurance and an explanation of the growth 
pattern is required, but if the parents and the child are eager to has­
ten pubertal development (usually because of involvement in sports 
or because of bullying and other psychosocial considerations), then 
a short course of low-­dose sex steroids can accelerate the onset of 
puberty. Such intervention does not change the final height but hastens 
the child’s progression to that height. Treatment options are discussed 
in detail later in this chapter.
Idiopathic Short Stature
Idiopathic short stature (ISS) is a clinical description rather than a 
disease. ISS is generally considered a normal variant of growth (since 
pathologic causes are excluded, by definition). The exact definition var­
ies from country to country; in the United States, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) used a definition of height >2.25 SD below the 
age mean (which is the 1st percentile for height) in children in whom 
no specific cause of short stature has been identified after a thorough 
evaluation. This corresponds to an adult height <160 cm (5 feet 3 
inches) for males and <150 cm (4 feet 11 inches) for females.
In many cases these children have familial short stature and their 
height is not inappropriate for parental height. But in most definitions 
they are included in the category of ISS because the purpose of the defi­
nition was to identify children who may not have any pathology, but 
whose short stature per se constitutes a possible reason to treat them 
with GH. This notion remains controversial because there is no univer­
sal agreement about the psychosocial or economic impact of ISS. Those 
who support treatment of these children argue that such a degree of 
short stature may have adverse psychological, social, and economic 
consequences and deserves to be treated even if no underlying pathol­
ogy is identified. Opponents argue that there is no convincing evidence 
that short stature of this degree itself leads to any significant handi­
caps that would justify prolonged invasive therapy with an extremely 
expensive medication that may itself have future adverse health conse­
quences. Third-­party payers often regard such treatment as cosmetic 
TABLE 56.6  Clinical Features of Growth 
Hormone Insensitivity
Parameter
Clinical Finding
Growth and Development
Birthweight
Near normal
Birth length
May be slightly decreased
Postnatal growth
Severe growth failure
Bone age
Delayed, but may be advanced relative to 
height age
Genitalia
Micropenis in childhood; normal for body size 
in adults
Puberty
Delayed 3–7 yr
Sexual function and fertility
Normal
Craniofacies
Hair
Sparse before age 7 yr
Forehead
Prominent; frontal bossing
Skull
Normal head circumference; craniofacial 
disproportion due to small facies
Facies
Small
Nasal bridge
Hypoplastic
Orbits
Shallow
Definition
Delayed eruption
Sclerae
Blue
Voice
High pitched
Musculoskeletal/Metabolic/Miscellaneous
Blood glucose
Hypoglycemia in infants and children; fasting 
symptoms in some adults
Waking and motor milestones
Delayed
Hips
Dysplasia; avascular necrosis of femoral head
Elbow
Limited extensibility
Skin
Thin, prematurely aged
Bone mineral density
Osteopenia
From Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams 
Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:973, 
Table 25.4.
TABLE 56.7  Genetics of Syndromic Short Stature
Genes
Function
Disorder
Key Clinical Features
FGD1
Guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor
Aarskog-­Scott 
(faciogenital dysplasia)
IUGR, hypertelorism, ptosis, everted lower lip vermilion, joint 
hyperextension, finger abnormalities, shawl scrotum
PRKAR1A
cAMP-­dependent regulatory 
subunit of protein kinase A
Acrodysostosis, type 1
IUGR, skeletal dysplasia, severe brachydactyly, facial dysostosis, nasal 
hypoplasia, advanced bone age, obesity, hormone resistance
PDE4D
cAMP-­specific 3′,5′-­cyclic 
phosphodiesterase 4D
Acrodysostosis, type 2
IUGR (variable), skeletal dysplasia, accelerated bone age progression, 
variable hormone resistance
GNAS
G-­protein α subunit
Albright hereditary 
osteodystrophy
IUGR, obesity, round-­shaped face, subcutaneous ossifications, 
brachymetacarpal bone (fourth and fifth)
RPS6KA3
Serine/threonine kinase in RAS-­
MAPK pathway
Coffin-­Lowry syndrome
No IUGR, microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, skeletal abnormalities, 
intellectual disability, hypotonia, X-­linked disorder
HRAS
Signal transduction with GTPase 
activity in RAS-­MAPK pathway
Costello 
(faciocutaneoskeletal 
syndrome)
No IUGR, delayed development, intellectual disability, distinctive facial 
features, loose folds of extra skin (especially, hands and feet), flexible 
joints
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1077
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
Genes
Function
Disorder
Key Clinical Features
PTPN11, RAF1, 
BRAF
Protein-­tyrosine phosphatase/
RAS-­MAPK regulation
Multiple lentigines 
syndrome (LEOPARD 
syndrome)
No IUGR, lentigines, hypertrophic myopathy, electrocardiographic 
conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonic stenosis, 
abnormalities of genitalia, sensorineural deafness
NF1
RAS signal transduction
Neurofibromatosis type 1
No IUGR, café-­au-­lait spot, malignancy (pheochromocytoma and 
gastrointestinal stromal tumor), Lisch nodules, osteoporosis
PTPN11, BRAF, SOS1, 
KRAS, RAF1, NRAS, 
RASA2, SHOC2, CBL, 
RIT1 (activating)
Protein-­tyrosine phosphatase/
RAS-­MAPK regulation
Noonan syndrome or 
Noonan-­like syndrome
No IUGR, distinctive facial appearance, a broad or webbed neck, 
congenital heart defects, coagulopathy, skeletal malformations, 
developmental delay
ROR2, WNT5A, DVL1
Cell surface receptor, secreted 
signaling protein
Robinow syndrome 
(acral dysostosis with 
facial and genital 
abnormalities)
IUGR (variable); short-­limb dwarfism; costovertebral segmentation defects; 
abnormalities of head, face, and external genitalia; chest deformities; 
rib fusions; scoliosis; brachydactyly; aplasia/hypoplasia of the phalanges 
and metacarpal/metatarsal bones
LARP7
Transcriptional regulator of 
polymerase II genes
Alazami syndrome
IUGR (variable), facial dysmorphism (triangular face), intellectual disability, 
tendon or skeletal abnormalities
SOX9
Chondrocyte differentiation 
factor
Campomelic dysplasia
IUGR, born with bowing of the long bones, short legs, dislocated hips, 
ambiguous genitalia, distinctive facial features
BRF1
RNA polymerase III transcription 
initiation factor
Cerebello-­facio-­dental 
syndrome
IUGR, facial dysmorphism, hypoplastic cerebellum, markedly delayed 
bone age
SOX11
Transcriptional regulation of 
GDF5
Coffin-­Siris syndrome
IUGR (variable), intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, hearing or 
vision impairment, severe scoliosis
MLL2 (KMT2D), 
KDM6A
Histone methyltransferase/
histone demethylase
Kabuki syndrome
IUGR (variable), facial features that resemble the make-­up worn by 
actors of Kabuki (long eye openings slanting upward, arched eyebrows, 
prominent ears, and corners of the mouth turning downward), mild to 
moderate intellectual disability; problems involving heart, skeleton, 
teeth, and immune system
ANKRD11
Transcription regulator
KBG syndrome
IUGR (variable), facial dysmorphism, hearing loss, congenital heart defect, 
skeletal anomalies, global developmental delay, seizures, intellectual 
disability
SHOX
Transcription factor
Leri-­Weill dyschondrosteo­
sis, mesomelic dysplasia 
(Langer type)
No IUGR, skeletal dysplasia, Madelung deformity
CREBBP, EP300
Transcriptional coactivator
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
IUGR (variable), facial dysmorphism, moderate to severe intellectual 
disability, broad thumbs and first toes
BLM
DNA repair enzyme
Bloom syndrome
IUGR (as case report); increased risk of cancer; sun-­sensitive skin changes 
on face, hands, and/or arms; a high-­pitched voice; distinctive facial 
features, including a long, narrow face, small lower jaw, large nose, and 
prominent ears
ERCC6, ERCC8
DNA repair
Cockayne syndrome
IUGR (variable), microcephaly, photosensitivity progeroid appearance, 
progressive pigmentary retinopathy, sensorineural deafness
FANCA, FANCC, FANCG
DNA repair
Fanconi anemia
IUGR, absence of thumb, hyperpigmentation, early-­onset bone marrow 
failure, predisposition to cancers
LIG4
DNA repair
LIG 4 syndrome
No IUGR, distinctive facial features, microcephaly, pancytopenia, various 
skin abnormalities, immune deficiency
NSMCE2
DNA repair
Microcephalic primordial 
dwarfism–insulin 
resistance syndrome
No IUGR reported, microcephaly, insulin resistance
NBN (NBS1)
DNA repair
Nijmegen breakage 
syndrome
No IUGR, microcephaly, distinctive facial features, immunodeficiency, and 
cancer predisposition
SMARCAL1
DNA repair
Schimke immunoosseous 
dysplasia
IUGR, kidney disease, immune deficiency, stroke, bone marrow failure, 
kidney failure
ATR, ATRIP, CENPJ, 
CEP152, CEP63, 
DNA2, PCNT, PLK4, 
RBBP8, XRCC4
DNA repair, centrosome 
maintenance, DNA stability
Seckel syndrome
IUGR, microcephaly, beaklike protrusion of nose, facial dysmorphism
TABLE 56.7  Genetics of Syndromic Short Stature—cont’d
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1078
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Genes
Function
Disorder
Key Clinical Features
CUL7, OBSL1, CCDC8
Microtubule stabilization and 
genome stability
3-­M syndrome
IUGR, facial dysmorphism (triangular face), relatively large head 
circumference, prominent fleshy heels
ALMS1
Microtubule organization
Alström syndrome
No IUGR, vision and hearing abnormalities, childhood obesity, diabetes 
mellitus, heart disease, and slowly progressive kidney dysfunction
SMARCB1, SMARCE1, 
SMARCA4, ARID1A, 
ARID1B
Chromatin remodeling
Coffin-­Siris syndrome
IUGR (variable), intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, hearing or 
vision impairment, severe scoliosis
NIPBL (50%), SMC1A, 
HDAC8, RAD21, 
SMC3
Cohesin pathway (sister 
chromatid cohesion)
Cornelia de Lange 
syndrome
IUGR, dysmorphic facial features (facial hirsutism), microcephaly, limb 
reduction defects, cardiac defect, and intellectual disability
SRCAP
Chromatin remodeling
Floating-­Harbor syndrome
IUGR (variable), facial dysmorphism, abnormal thumb, delayed bone age, 
early puberty, delay in expressive language
LMNA
Nuclear stability
Hutchinson-­Gilford 
progeria
No IUGR, failure to thrive, distinctive facial features (aged-­looking skin), 
alopecia, loss of subcutaneous fat, joint abnormalities
RNU4ATAC
Minor intron splicing
MOPD I
IUGR, microcephaly, dysmorphic face, skin and skeletal abnormalities, 
developmental delay
PCNT
Mitotic spindle/chromosome 
segregation
MOPD II
IUGR, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, near-­normal intelligence, cancer 
susceptibility
TRIM37
Peroxisomal protein, possibly 
ubiquitin-­dependent 
degradation
Mulibrey nanism
IUGR, dysmorphic craniofacial features, heart disease (constrictive 
pericardium), hepatomegaly, Wilms tumor
CRIPT
Interaction with cytoskeleton
Primordial dwarfism
IUGR (not established), facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, ophthalmologic 
abnormalities, intellectual disabilities, skeletal abnormalities, 
pigmentation abnormalities
POC1A
Centriole assembly/ciliogenesis
SOFT syndrome
IUGR, disproportionate short stature, onychodysplasia, facial dysmorphism, 
hypotrichosis
DHCR7
Steroid biosynthesis
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz 
syndrome
IUGR; distinctive facial features; microcephaly; intellectual disability or 
learning problems; behavioral problems; malformations of heart, lungs, 
kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and genitalia
COL2A1
Extracellular matrix, collagen
Achondrogenesis (type II), 
hypochondrogenesis, 
Kniest dysplasia, 
spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia congenita, 
Stickler syndrome type 1
IUGR, skeletal abnormalities, problems with vision and hearing
FBN1
Extracellular matrix, fibrillin 1
Acromicric dysplasia, 
geleophysic dysplasia 2
No IUGR; short hands and feet; thickened skin and joint contractures; 
limited range of motion in fingers, toes, wrists, and elbows; cardiac issue
COL11A1
Extracellular matrix, collagen 11
Fibrochondrogenesis
IUGR (variable), skeletal dysplasia, broad long bone metaphyses, pear-­
shaped vertebral bodies, flat midface with a small nose and anteverted 
nares, significant shortening of all limb segments
COL10A1
Extracellular matrix, collagen 10
Metaphyseal dysplasia, 
Schmid type
No IUGR, coxa vara, relatively short limbs, bow legs, waddling gait
MATN3, COL9A1, 
COL9A2, COL9A3
Extracellular matrix, cartilage 
oligomeric matrix protein, 
collagen, matrilin-­3
Multiple epiphyseal 
dysplasia
No IUGR, skeletal dysplasia, joint pain, joint deformity, waddling gait
COMP
Extracellular matrix, cartilage 
oligomeric matrix protein
Multiple epiphyseal 
dysplasia, 
pseudoachondroplasia
No IUGR, short arms and legs, a waddling walk, early-­onset joint pain 
(osteoarthritis), limited range of motion at elbows and hips
HSPG2
Extracellular matrix, perlecan
Schwartz-­Jampel 
syndrome
IUGR (not established), permanent myotonia (prolonged failure of muscle 
relaxation), skeletal dysplasia, kyphoscoliosis, bowing of diaphyses and 
irregular epiphyses
ACAN
Extracellular matrix, aggrecan
Spondyloepimetaphyseal 
dysplasia, aggrecan/
Kimberly type
IUGR, macrocephaly, severe midface hypoplasia, short neck, barrel chest, 
brachydactyly, advanced bone age
FGFR3 (activating)
Fibroblast growth factor receptor
Achondroplasia, 
hypochondroplasia
IUGR, short upper arms and thighs, limited range of motion at elbows, 
relative macrocephaly with a prominent forehead, trident hand
TABLE 56.7  Genetics of Syndromic Short Stature—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1079
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
and may not approve requests for therapy. It should be noted that in 
most cases there are no consistent adverse effects of short stature on 
quality of life in children at or just below the 1st percentile; however, 
some studies do indicate that practical and psychosocial difficulties 
increase in those with extreme degrees of short stature.
ISS is a diagnosis of exclusion; history, physical examination, labo­
ratory studies, and imaging studies do not reveal any specific cause of 
short stature in an otherwise normal child. How much investigation 
is needed before a child can be labeled as having ISS remains a matter 
of controversy and clinical practice can vary significantly within and 
between different countries. Treatment with GH was approved by the 
FDA in 2003 but remains controversial and may not be approved by 
third-­party payers. Treatment is more likely to be beneficial in those 
with more extreme degrees of short stature. A predicted adult height 
<136 cm (about 4 feet 6 inches) in females and less than 149 cm (about 
4 feet 11 inches) in males is very likely to be associated with quality-­of-­
life issues and deserves treatment even in the absence of any underly­
ing cause.
Small for Gestational Age
Children who are born small for gestational age (SGA) usually catch up 
with their peers by 2–3 years of age, but 10–20% of children born SGA 
will fail to catch up and will continue to be below the 3rd percentile. 
This is more likely in children who are born premature as well as SGA 
and in those most severely affected at birth. The mechanism underlying 
this failure of catch-­up growth is not well understood. Children with 
IUGR also have an increased future risk of metabolic disorders like 
type 2 diabetes. Children who were SGA typically have normal propor­
tions and no other physical findings; in some cases, the IUGR is just 
one component of a genetic syndrome (see Tables 56.3, 56.6, and 56.7) 
and other features of the syndrome are present.
Children who were born SGA with poor postnatal growth typ­
ically have normal or even elevated GH levels but lower average 
values of IGF-­1 and IGFBP3 (though most are still in the normal 
range), indicating some degree of GH resistance in at least some of 
these children. GH treatment increases final height by about 1 SD 
on average (about 6 cm) if started early in life and continued for 
at least 7 years. In the United States, treatment is approved by the 
FDA for children who were born SGA and whose height remains >2 
SD below the mean at age 2. In Europe, treatment is approved for 
children whose height is >2.5 SD below the mean by age 4. These 
children can be mildly GH resistant and may therefore require GH 
doses at the higher end of the dose range. Since individual response 
varies, GH treatment can be started at the usual dose (30–50 μg/kg/
day) and then increased if needed based on growth response and 
IGF-­1 levels.
Genes
Function
Disorder
Key Clinical Features
IHH
Secreted signaling molecule, 
Indian hedgehog
Acrocapitofemoral 
dysplasia, brachydactyly, 
type A1
No IUGR, brachydactyly
NPR2 (inactivating)
CNP receptor
Acromesomelic dysplasia, 
Maroteaux type
IUGR (variable), short limbs and hand/foot malformations
BMPR1B, GDF5
BMP receptor/interacting protein 
(ligand)
Brachydactyly, type A1 
and A2
No IUGR, brachydactyly
PTHLH
Secreted signaling molecules 
(PTH-­related protein)
Brachydactyly, type E2
No IUGR, shortening of fingers mainly in metacarpals and metatarsals
IGF2
Secreted signaling molecule 
(insulin-­like growth factor 2)
IGF-­2 deficiency
IUGR, Silver-Russell–like facies
PTH1R
PTH and PTHrP receptor
Metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia 
(Jansen type), 
Eiken dysplasia, 
chondrodysplasia 
(Blomstrand type)
No IUGR, skeletal dysplasia, micrognathia, failure of tooth eruption, low-­
set/posteriorly rotated ears, proptosis
IGFALS
Acid-­labile subunit
ALS deficiency
IUGR (variable), low IGF-­1 and IGF-­BP3
GH1, GHRHR, SOX3, 
BTK
GH production
GH deficiency
No IUGR, GH deficiency
IGF1
IGF-­1
IGF-­1 deficiency
IUGR, microcephaly, intellectual disability, low IGF-­1 level
IGF1R
Insulin-­like growth factor 
receptor
IGF-­1 insensitivity
IUGR, normal to high IGF-­1 level
STAT5B
Growth hormone signaling
Immune deficiency and GH 
resistance
No IUGR, elevated random GH but low IGF-­1 or IGFBP3, immunodeficiency
GHR
Growth hormone receptor
Laron syndrome
IUGR, elevated GH and low IGF-­1
ALS, acid labile subunit; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CNP, C-­type natriuretic peptide; GH, growth 
hormone; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GWA, genome-­wide association; IGF-­1, insulin-­like growth factor 1; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; 
MAPK, mitogen-­activated protein kinase; MOPD, microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PTHrP, PTH-­related 
protein; RAF, rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma; RAS, rat sarcoma.
Modified from Jee YH, Andrade AC, Baron J, et al. Genetics of short stature. Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am 2017;46(2):259–281 (Table 1, pp. 
262–269).
TABLE 56.7  Genetics of Syndromic Short Stature—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1080
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Growth Hormone Deficiency
GH is essential for postnatal growth, and children who lack it are 
extremely stunted. GH deficiency may be congenital or acquired. The 
congenital form may be associated with other pituitary hormone defi­
ciencies (multiple pituitary hormone deficiency, MPHD) and may be 
associated with midline craniofacial defects (absence of the septum 
pellucidum and optic nerve hypoplasia [septo-­optic dysplasia], cleft 
palate, holoprosencephaly, single central incisor). Genetic testing has 
revealed underlying genetic variants in transcription factors involved 
in the development of the anterior pituitary in many (but not all) of 
these cases (see Table 56.5). Isolated congenital GH deficiency is rela­
tively rare (i.e., it is more common to see congenital GH deficiency as a 
component of multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies). Some of these 
isolated cases are related to genetic abnormalities in the growth hor­
mone–releasing hormone receptor (GHRHR variants) and others to 
variants in the GH gene itself. Variants in the GH receptor or in down­
stream signaling molecules lead to various rare forms of GH resistance. 
Variants in the IGF-­1 gene, in the ALS protein (a component of the 
IGF-­IGFBP3-­ALS ternary complex), and in the IGF-­1 receptor can 
also lead to growth failure on rare occasions. But most cases of GH 
deficiency discovered during the evaluation of short stature are not 
due to known genetic variants in the GH-­IGF axis and are regarded 
as idiopathic.
GH deficiency may also be acquired secondary to birth injury, 
head trauma, midline tumors (most commonly craniopharyngioma), 
histiocytic infiltrative disorders, and cranial irradiation. Most such 
cases are associated with deficiencies of other pituitary hormones, but 
isolated GH deficiency may also occur after such insults. Injury to the 
anterior pituitary during childhood most often affects GH secretion, 
followed by gonadotropins, thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH), and 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in that order (in adults, gonad­
otropins may be affected more than GH). It is therefore possible to see 
isolated GH deficiency after a cranial injury, while it is very unusual to 
see central hypothyroidism or adrenal insufficiency in the absence of 
GH deficiency.
Growth Hormone Deficiency Presenting in the Neonatal 
Period
Isolated congenital GH deficiency that presents in the newborn period 
is uncommon. If GH deficiency presents in the newborn period, it usu­
ally does so in the setting of MPHD. It may be associated with mid­
line defects (central incisor, septo-­optic dysplasia, holoprosencephaly, 
cleft palate). Affected infants are often normal in birth size, although 
statistical analysis suggests that, as a group, they are somewhat small. 
These newborns have an increased incidence of hypoglycemia and 
may also have jaundice with a hepatitis-­type picture and conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia (there are cases that have been mistaken for bil­
iary atresia). Males frequently have micropenis; cryptorchidism may 
be seen in cases with concomitant gonadotropin deficiency. Hypogly­
cemia may be worsened by associated ACTH deficiency, which may 
also lead to hypotension and hypothermia. Associated central hypo­
thyroidism may also cause hypothermia, poor growth, poor feeding, 
and prolonged jaundice.
Laboratory testing reveals a low random GH level (this is the only 
stage in life at which a random GH level is useful; levels <7 ng/mL in 
the first week of life are considered abnormal), as well as low levels 
of IGF-­1 (not very useful because the normal range overlaps with the 
deficient range) and low IGFBP3. Associated central hypothyroidism, 
if present, is suggested by a low thyroxine (T4) and an inappropriately 
normal (or even slightly elevated) TSH level; one would have 
expected the TSH level to be markedly elevated in a baby with low 
T4, but instead it is either normal or just minimally elevated. A low 
cortisol level (especially in the face of hypoglycemia or other stressful 
situations) and low or low-­normal ACTH level may hint at central 
ACTH deficiency; an ACTH stimulation test may be required to con­
firm the diagnosis. Gonadotropin levels may be affected and, if so, 
will remain low instead of rising in the first 2–3 months of life as they 
normally do in infants. GH stimulation testing is not required for the 
diagnosis of GH deficiency in the newborn period. Genetic testing 
may show pathogenic variation in one of several genes involved in 
the normal development of the pituitary and the GH-­producing cells 
of the pituitary (POUF1, PROP1, HESX1, LXH3, LHX4, and SOX3) 
(see Table 56.5). Treatment with GH (and with other pituitary hor­
mones that are frequently deficient in these neonates) will permit 
normal growth and development and prevents hypoglycemia and 
other complications.
Growth Hormone Deficiency in Childhood
Most children who are diagnosed with GH deficiency in childhood 
demonstrate no manifestations in the neonatal period. A very small 
proportion has specific genetic defects in GH secretion or action that 
did not present (or were not obvious) in the newborn period; these 
children will usually exhibit very profound growth failure by the sec­
ond or third year of life. They typically look younger than their actual 
age and are classically described as chubby or cherubic; their heights 
are depressed more than their weights. They may have high-­pitched 
voices, delayed dentition, and poor musculature. On testing, they are 
found to have very low IGF-­1 and IGFBP3 levels; GH stimulation 
testing reveals peak GH levels that are almost always lower than 5 ng/
mL. Bone age is typically delayed and an MRI of the brain may show 
a hypoplastic pituitary gland, an empty sella, or an abnormal pituitary 
bright spot. Genetic testing may show defects in the GHRHR gene or 
the GH gene (see Table 56.5). Defects in other genes involved in regu­
lating GH secretion may be seen, but all are extremely rare. These chil­
dren typically respond very dramatically to GH replacement therapy 
and will grow very poorly in the absence of such therapy
Much more common is the phenomenon of the child who presents 
with short stature in childhood but does not have any known genetic 
or acquired cause of GH deficiency. These children are diagnosed as 
GH deficient based on a combination of auxologic and laboratory 
criteria and are candidates for GH therapy. But unlike children with 
neonatally apparent GH deficiency or children with obvious causes of 
acquired GH deficiency (tumors, trauma, radiation), these children 
are frequently not GH deficient when retested after puberty. This idio­
pathic growth hormone deficiency may be due to multiple genetic 
loci of small effect or a few loci of moderate effect, but the exact cause 
usually remains unknown. Poor linear growth usually becomes evi­
dent by age 3 years, but many cases are not brought to the attention of 
physicians until later in childhood. Diagnosis and treatment of chil­
dren with idiopathic GH deficiency is based on consensus guidelines 
and expert opinion and may vary from country to country. In most 
cases, children are investigated for idiopathic GH deficiency if they 
are below the normal range for height (>2 SD below the mean, or <3rd 
percentile) or are extremely short for their genetic target height (pro­
jected adult height more than 9 cm below the MPH). A subnormal 
growth velocity (growth velocity <25th percentile or >1.5 SD below 
the mean) is seen and no other obvious cause of short stature can be 
found.
No single test can be regarded as the gold standard for making this 
diagnosis. Most children will have an IGF-­1 level that is low for age 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1081
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
(and in older children, for pubertal stage and bone age), but occasion­
ally a child who meets all other criteria for GH deficiency will have a 
normal IGF-­1 level, while in other cases the IGF-­1 level may be low 
because of malnutrition or chronic disease in a child who is not GH 
deficient. IGFBP3 level is also frequently used as a measure of GH 
secretion but is less sensitive than the IGF-­1 level and may not be help­
ful in most cases. Bone age is almost always delayed. If the diagnosis 
is suspected as a result of auxologic findings (short stature, subnormal 
growth velocity), a delayed bone age, and low IGF-­1 and/or IGFBP3 
levels, then most authorities recommend performing two GH stimu­
lation tests. In these tests, GH secretion is provoked by one of several 
pharmacologic agents and multiple GH levels are drawn over the next 
2–3 hours. Glucagon, arginine, L-­dopa, and clonidine are the most 
commonly used agents in children; insulin-­induced hypoglycemia is 
considered by many to be the gold standard test in adults but is asso­
ciated with the risk of life-­threatening hypoglycemia and is not recom­
mended in children. If all levels remain below an arbitrary cut-­off (10 
ng/mL in the United States), then the child is considered GH deficient. 
It should be noted that provocative testing is known to have both false-­
positive and false-­negative results and should only be interpreted in 
the context of all available auxologic, laboratory, and imaging infor­
mation. Because of these issues, some authorities recommend using 
auxologic criteria and growth factor levels to make the diagnosis of GH 
deficiency without performing any provocative tests of GH secretion.
Any child diagnosed as having GH deficiency should have cranial 
imaging performed to rule out intracranial pathology before treatment 
is started. Once imaging (usually an MRI of the brain with fine cuts 
through the pituitary region) has been performed, treatment can be 
started with GH. The usual starting dose ranges from 30 to 50 μg/kg/
day and this can then be increased in case of poor response. Doses of 
70 μg/kg/day or higher may be needed in some cases. IGF-­1 levels can 
be used to assess biochemical response and to see if there is room to 
increase GH dose any further. Some authorities have recommended 
IGF-­based dosing (adjusting the GH dose to keep the IGF-­1 level in 
the high-­normal range), but very high doses of GH may be required 
in some children to achieve such levels and because of safety concerns 
this method has not been widely adopted.
Acquired Growth Hormone Deficiency
In acquired forms of GH deficiency, there may be a history of a precip­
itating event (cranial irradiation, head trauma) or a history suggestive 
of an intracranial lesion (headaches, vomiting, visual disturbances). 
Affected children often have normal growth until the onset of the dis­
order; thereafter, their growth is attenuated.
On physical examination, there may be evidence of the underlying 
disturbance (bitemporal hemianopsia, optic atrophy, or papilledema in 
midline tumors such as craniopharyngioma; dermatitis, scalp lesions, 
or hepatosplenomegaly in Langerhans cell histiocytosis). The typical 
case will either be a child with a known history of conditions that 
can affect the anterior pituitary (head injury, irradiation, tumor) who 
shows deceleration of growth or a child who was growing normally 
and then has an obvious growth failure. Lab tests will show decreased 
IGF-­1 levels (and in some cases, abnormal levels of other pituitary hor­
mones); cranial imaging (usually an MRI with and without contrast) 
should then be done in all such cases. Bone age may not be delayed 
if the onset of GH deficiency was relatively recent. The diagnosis of 
GH deficiency is usually confirmed by provocative testing and patients 
can then be treated with the usual doses of GH. In patients with brain 
tumors, treatment is usually delayed for at least 1 year after completion 
of therapy because of the theoretical risk that GH therapy may increase 
the size of any tumor that is present.
Traditionally, GH therapy for GH deficiency was continued until 
linear growth was completed (i.e., until the closure of epiphyses), 
though it could be stopped at any point before that if the child is sat­
isfied with their attained height. Because of the extremely high cost of 
GH therapy ($50,000–$100,000 per year in the United States), many 
third-­party payers require cessation of therapy once a reasonable adult 
height has been reached (exact targets vary depending on the plan).
Growth Hormone Insensitivity
GH action may be impaired due to variants of the GH receptor (Laron 
syndrome), defects in postreceptor signaling, variants in the IGF-­1 
gene, deficiency of the ALS protein, and defects in IGF-­1 action (see 
Tables 56.3, 56.5, 56.6, and 56.7). All of these conditions are very rare 
and constitute only a tiny fraction of the cases of short stature and 
growth failure seen in clinical practice.
The GH receptor consists of an extracellular ligand-­binding domain, 
a single membrane-­spanning domain, and a cytoplasmic signaling 
component. Circulating GH-­binding protein (GHBP) is just the extra­
cellular domain of the GH receptor protein. Pathologic variants in this 
receptor lead to various forms of Laron syndrome, characterized by 
GH resistance (hence elevated GH levels), low IGF-­1 and IGFBP3, and 
extreme degrees of growth failure. In some (but not all) cases, the extra­
cellular domain of the receptor is involved, so GHBP level is also low.
Other clinical features of Laron syndrome include small head cir­
cumference, characteristic facies with saddle nose and prominent fore­
head, delayed skeletal maturation, small genitalia and testes, short limb 
length compared to trunk length, and abnormal body composition, 
with osteopenia and obesity. Intellectual development is normal or 
only modestly impaired. Prenatal growth is near normal, but postnatal 
growth is profoundly affected, with heights as low as −10 SD.
It is worth noting that untreated children do not have a shortened 
lifespan and have a lower-­than-­average risk for cancer.
Defects in the post-­GH receptor signaling pathway can also cause 
short stature. Several patients have been described with GH insensi­
tive caused by a homozygous missense variant in the gene encoding 
STAT5B protein, which is an essential component of the JAK-­STAT 
signaling pathway that is activated by the GH receptor. These patients 
have severe postnatal growth failure as well as immune disregulation 
related to the role of STAT5B in the immune system.
Variants in the gene encoding IGF-­1 cause profound prenatal 
as well as postnatal growth failure. Complete absence of IGF-­1 is 
probably lethal in humans, but individuals have been described with 
deletions in the IGF-­1 gene causing partial loss of function. These 
patients also have microcephaly, significant developmental delay, and 
hearing loss.
IGF-­1 is carried in the bloodstream primarily as part of a ternary 
complex with IGFBP3 and ALS. ALS deficiency leads to low circulat­
ing IGF-­1 levels (probably via accelerated IGF-­1 metabolism) and leads 
to mild short stature and pubertal delay.
IGF-­1 receptor variants are extremely rare in liveborn babies and 
present with profound prenatal and postnatal growth failure. These 
children may have normal or only mildly abnormal cognitive develop­
ment. Unlike the other GH insensitivity syndromes, circulating levels 
of IGF-­1 are normal or elevated in these patients.
All forms of GH insensitivity (except rare IGF-­1 receptor defects) 
lead to IGF-­1 deficiency. The FDA has approved treatment of these dis­
orders with recombinant IGF-­1 in cases where height and IGF-­1 lev­
els are more than 3 SD below the mean, with elevated or normal GH 
levels, and no response to GH therapy. Commercial availability of this 
product has varied and obtaining supplies for therapy may sometimes 
be a problem.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1082
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism impairs linear growth (Fig. 56.7). Thyroid deficiency 
may be congenital or acquired (Fig. 56.8). In view of the usefulness of 
neonatal thyroid screening programs, it is very uncommon for congen­
ital hypothyroidism to go untreated and cause short stature.
Acquired hypothyroidism in children usually results from auto­
immune thyroiditis. Children with Turner syndrome, Down syn­
drome, Klinefelter syndrome, celiac disease, or diabetes mellitus are at 
increased risk for autoimmune hypothyroidism, as are children with a 
family history of autoimmune disease. Acquired hypothyroidism tends 
to manifest most commonly in older children and teenagers. Often 
there are few complaints except for slow growth (after previously nor­
mal growth), weight gain, a goiter, or a combination of these. Other 
symptoms (dry hair or skin, constipation, cold intolerance) are less 
common. Postmenarchal females may have menorrhagia, amenor­
rhea, or, in rare cases, galactorrhea. School performance is generally 
not impaired. On physical examination, the major features are a height 
suggestive of deceleration from the previous growth curve, a goiter, and 
relative obesity (weight age > height age). The physical examination 
may also reveal bradycardia, dry hair or skin, and delayed reflexes.
In acquired hypothyroidism, the laboratory test results include a high 
level of TSH and a low or low-­normal T4 level or free thyroxine level 
(FT4). The presence of positive thyroid antibodies (antithyroperoxidase 
and antithyroglobulin antibodies) is consistent with autoimmune thy­
roiditis. The bone age is often significantly delayed in hypothyroidism.
Central hypothyroidism is uncommon. In the newborn period it 
usually (but not always) presents as a component of MPHD with TSH 
levels that are normal or even mildly elevated but that are inappropri­
ately low for the decreased T4 level. Acquired central hypothyroidism is 
usually due to known injury to the anterior pituitary (e.g., central ner­
vous system [CNS] tumors, granulomas, irradiation, head trauma) and 
is associated with other pituitary hormone deficiencies. In practice, it is 
much more common to see low T4 and normal or mildly elevated TSH 
levels in children who have another illness and have the syndrome of 
nonthyroidal illness (NTI) (previously known as euthyroid sick syn­
drome) leading to temporarily abnormal thyroid function tests.
The treatment of hypothyroidism is thyroid replacement therapy 
(l-­thyroxine).
Glucocorticoid Excess (Cushing Syndrome)
Cushing syndrome results from excessive levels of glucocorticoids. 
Whether endogenous or exogenous, glucocorticoids markedly stunt 
growth. In general, because such conditions are acquired, the history 
reveals a child previously growing well whose growth velocity slows. 
The child typically continues to gain weight at a rapid rate, even though 
linear growth is attenuated. This is in contrast to exogenous obesity, 
in which affected children tend to grow at normal or rapid rates. The 
history may indicate that the child was treated with oral, topical (espe­
cially with occlusive dressings), or intradermal glucocorticoids at high 
doses or for long durations. Alternate-­day oral glucocorticoids are 
much less likely to attenuate growth than are daily doses. Cushing syn­
drome is very unlikely with inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs), but a small 
effect on linear growth may be seen with the use of high-­potency ICSs.
Physical findings in endogenous Cushing syndrome may include 
acne, virilization, and increased appetite. Hyperpigmentation may 
occur when Cushing syndrome is secondary to excessive ACTH levels. 
This may be caused by ACTH from a pituitary tumor (Cushing dis­
ease) or (less commonly) from a nonpituitary source (ectopic ACTH 
syndrome).
The physical examination usually reveals short stature with relative 
obesity. Many affected children have the moon face and plethora char­
acteristic of Cushing syndrome. A buffalo hump, large purple striae, 
acne, and hypertension may also be present. Marked virilization is 
worrisome because it may indicate an adrenal tumor.
The diagnosis of endogenous Cushing syndrome is based on demon­
strating abnormally high glucocorticoid production (on 24-­hour urine 
sample for free cortisol, normalized to creatinine) and failure to sup­
press cortisol production adequately in response to exogenous gluco­
corticoid. A screening test for capacity to suppress cortisol secretion in 
response to exogenous glucocorticoid is the overnight dexamethasone 
suppression test. This involves the child taking 0.3 mg/m2 of dexameth­
asone at 11:00 p.m. (the standard dose of dexamethasone in adults is 1 
mg), followed by a measurement of circulating cortisol the following 
morning; a normal cortisol level after dexamethasone suppression is 
<2 mcg/dL (<55 nmol/L). False-­positive results may occur in the set­
ting of obesity, chronic illness, or stress. If the child shows biochem­
ical evidence of Cushing syndrome, further investigations, including 
CT, MRI, and measurement of ACTH levels, are needed to determine 
whether a pituitary tumor (commonest cause), an adrenal tumor, or 
ectopic ACTH production is present. Exogenous Cushing syndrome 
is usually evident from the history and physical examination results.
Treatment involves the removal of excess glucocorticoids by either 
reducing or discontinuing exogenous steroids if medically feasible or, 
in the case of endogenous hypercortisolism caused by a pituitary or 
adrenal tumor, by surgery.
Genetic Causes of Short Stature
A large number of single gene defects and copy number variants are 
known to be associated with short stature (see Table 56.7). Some of 
4
5
10
15
18
Age (Yr)
95
50
5
B
A
130
170
150
Height (cm)
C
Fig. 56.7  Patterns of linear growth. Normal growth percentiles (5th, 
50th, 95th) are shown along with typical growth curves for constitu­
tional delay of growth and adolescence (A), familial short stature (B), 
and acquired pathologic growth failure (C) (e.g., acquired primary hypo­
thyroidism). (From Styne DM. Endocrine disorders. In: Behrman RE, 
Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadel­
phia: WB Saunders; 1994:616.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1083
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
them cause other abnormal physical findings (syndromic), but genetic 
causes of short stature are also found in children who do not have any 
other physical finding. Genes that have been found to be associated 
with short stature include variants in PAPPA2, ACAN (aggrecan), 
NPPC (C-­natriuretic peptide, CNP), NPR2 (CNP receptor), PTPN11 
(and other RASopathies), FBN1, IHH, and BMP2. It is not routine 
practice to obtain genetic tests in otherwise normal children with 
short stature, but as technology progresses this may become standard 
of care in the future. Several chromosomal aneuploidies are associated 
with significant short stature, but apart from Turner syndrome and 
Down syndrome, these are relatively uncommon causes of short stat­
ure. Because of the relatively high prevalence of Turner syndrome, a 
karyotype is indicated in the evaluation of all prepubertal females with 
significant short stature.
Turner Syndrome
Turner syndrome is relatively common, with an incidence of 1 per 
2,500 liveborn females, and is caused by the absence or abnormality 
of an X chromosome. Short stature is the single most common physical 
finding in Turner syndrome and may occur in the absence of any other 
physical finding (Fig. 56.9). The mechanism by which short stature 
occurs in Turner syndrome is multifactorial, but haplo-­insufficiency 
(absence of one copy) of the Short Stature HomeoboX gene (SHOX) 
is believed to play a major role. This gene is located within the pseudo-­
autosomal region of the X chromosome, which escapes X-­inactivation 
and is therefore normally expressed from both copies of the X chro­
mosome. It is highly active in skeletal tissues and its absence in Turner 
syndrome (where only one X chromosome is present, or if present, the 
second X chromosome is abnormal) leads to haplo-­insufficiency and 
causes severe short stature.
Linear growth is only mildly affected in utero and birth size is 
normal or near normal. By early childhood, marked short stature is 
usually noted and there is progressive deviation of height away from 
the normal growth curve. Linear growth is further attenuated during 
the teenage years and mean adult height ranges from 142 cm to 146 
cm in various populations. Even in females with Turner syndrome, 
adult height is influenced by the height of the parents, and females 
with Turner syndrome who are born to tall parents tend to be taller. 
Breast enlargement and menses generally fail to occur as a result of 
ovarian failure. However, the presence of pubertal development should 
not deter consideration of the diagnosis because approximately 10% of 
patients have some residual ovarian tissue rather than streak gonads. In 
a few cases, even fertility has been reported.
In addition to short stature and ovarian failure, there may be various 
dysmorphic features, including webbed neck, low posterior hairline, 
lymphedema beginning in the neonatal period (manifesting mainly as 
puffy hands and feet), increased carrying angle of the arm, pigmented 
nevi, short fourth metacarpals, nail abnormalities, and renal and car­
diac anomalies (coarctation of the aorta). But any or all of these may be 
absent and short stature may be the only abnormality in some females 
with Turner syndrome (particularly in those with chromosomal mosa­
icism, which can occur in up to a third of cases). Therefore, the absence 
of dysmorphic features should not preclude consideration of Turner syn­
drome in short females.
A karyotype analysis is necessary to confirm or rule out the diag­
nosis of Turner syndrome in any female with short stature of unknown 
A
B
C
Fig. 56.8  A, B, A 10-­year-­old boy with acquired hypothyroidism, before treatment. Note short stature, 
immature body proportions, sleepy expression, generalized myxedema, and protuberant abdomen. C, After 
4 months of thyroid hormone therapy, the child has grown, has lost myxedema, and has a bright facial 
expression. (From Kaplan SA, ed. Clinical Pediatric and Adolescent Endocrinology. Philadelphia: WB Saun­
ders; 1982:93.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1084
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
origin. This should initially be performed on a blood sample, but if 
there is a high index of suspicion, other tissues (such as a skin biopsy 
for fibroblast analysis) should be screened due to the high prevalence 
of mosaicism. Additional laboratory features may include abnormally 
high levels of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-­
stimulating hormone (FSH), which are indicative of ovarian failure; 
however, levels may be normal in middle childhood because of normal 
CNS suppression of gonadotropin secretion at that time.
Although short stature in Turner syndrome is not believed to result 
from GH deficiency, treatment of Turner syndrome with GH therapy 
(typically in higher doses than those required for classical GH defi­
ciency) increases final height and is recommended. Addition of low-­
dose oxandrolone may further increase the growth of females with 
Turner syndrome and is a useful adjunct in females who are diagnosed 
relatively late and who may not reach a normal height with GH therapy 
alone.
Down Syndrome
Short stature is a prominent feature in Down syndrome, but the mech­
anism by which trisomy 21 causes impaired growth is not known. It is 
independent of the hypothyroidism that may also occur in this condi­
tion. Specific treatment for short stature is typically not recommended 
in this condition.
Prader-­Willi Syndrome
Prader-­Willi syndrome (PWS) is characterized by hypotonia, failure 
to thrive with poor suck during infancy, hypogonadism (manifested 
as cryptorchidism in males), short stature with small hands and feet, 
hyperphagia leading to morbid obesity beginning in early childhood, 
developmental delay/intellectual disability, and behavioral issues, 
including obsessive-­compulsive disorder. Average adult height is 147 
cm (4 feet, 9 inches) in females and 155 cm (5 feet, 1 inch) in males. 
PWS is caused by the absence or inactivity of a segment of the pater­
nally inherited chromosome 15 (15q11.2-­13), whereas deletion of 
the same chromosomal segment in the maternally inherited chro­
mosome causes Angelman syndrome. It is thus a classic example of 
genomic imprinting, a phenomenon in which the expression of a gene 
or genomic region differs depending on the chromosome’s parent of 
origin.
PWS may be due to a deletion of the PWS region of the paternal 
chromosome (about 65% of cases) or the inheritance of two complete 
copies of the maternal chromosome 15 and the absence of the pater­
nal chromosome (a condition labeled maternal uniparental disomy, 
responsible for 30–35% of the cases). In about 2% of the cases it appears 
to be due to a defect in the imprinting center rather than the absence 
of the paternal genes. DNA methylation probes will detect almost 
all cases by revealing whether the patient has maternal and paternal 
methylation patterns (normal), absence of the paternal pattern (caus­
ing PWS), or absence of the maternal pattern (causing Angelman syn­
drome). Further genetic testing is then needed to determine whether 
the cause is a deletion, a disomy, or an imprinting center defect.
Early treatment with GH increases final height, and it also improves 
body composition and the achievement of developmental milestones. 
It may also decrease the incidence of morbid obesity. For these reasons, 
most authorities consider early treatment with GH (starting between 
4 months and 2 years of age) to be standard of care in PWS. Because 
of some reports of possible increase in the rate of sudden death from 
upper airway obstruction in the first months of treatment, a sleep study 
and/or an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) consult may be recommended 
before initiating treatment, with the sleep study repeated 6–12 weeks 
after starting treatment and annually thereafter.
Russell-­Silver Syndrome/Silver-Russell Syndrome
Russell-­Silver syndrome is characterized by severe IUGR that persists 
in postnatal life. These children have proportionate short stature, a nor­
mal head circumference, triangular facies, downturned corners of the 
mouth, and a prominent forehead. A clinical diagnosis is made when 
the presence of four or more of the Netchine-­Harbison criterion are 
present (Table 56.8). Molecular testing only identifies a causal varia­
tion in 60% of cases. Other features may include fifth finger clinodac­
tyly, multiple café-­au-­lait macules, fasting hypoglycemia, and excessive 
sweating. These children usually have feeding difficulties and may 
exhibit mild developmental delay.
Russell-­Silver syndrome is associated with methylation abnor­
malities in an imprinting control region on the paternal chromosome 
11p15.5 in ~60% of subjects. In another 10% it is caused by maternal 
uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (absence of the paternal chro­
mosome 7). Rare sequence variants can be seen involving the genes 
Fig. 56.9  Five different females with 45,XO syndrome illustrating the variability of features such as webbed 
neck and broad chest. (From Lemli L, Smith D. The XO syndrome. A study of the differentiated phenotype in 
25 patients. J Pediatr. 1963;63:577–588.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1085
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
IGF2, CDKN1C, PLAG1, and HMGA2. No genetic cause is identified in 
up to 40% of remaining children and the diagnosis is based on clinical 
criteria. Treatment with GH increases height, but the doses required 
may be higher than average because of some element of GH resistance.
Short Stature HomeoboX (SHOX) Gene Variants
The short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene is located within the pseu­
doautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes. This region escapes 
X-­inactivation and so it is normally expressed from both X chromo­
somes in females. In males the gene is expressed from the X as well 
as the Y chromosomes. Haplo-­insufficiency of the SHOX gene (vari­
ants affecting one copy of the gene) leads to short stature that may be 
associated with other skeletal findings such as the Madelung deformity 
(a dinner fork deformity of the distal forearm and wrist), mesomelia 
(shortening of the forearm and leg), cubitus valgus, and dislocation of 
the ulna. The combination of short stature and several of the aforemen­
tioned significant skeletal abnormalities is labeled Leri-­Weill dyschon­
drosteosis and is more common in females (ratio 4:1). In other cases, 
the skeletal abnormalities may be relatively subtle and isolated short 
stature may be the only notable finding.
Screening for SHOX gene variants is reserved for children with 
any combination of the following physical findings: increased U/L, 
reduced arm span/height ratio, increased sitting height/height ratio, 
above-­average body mass index, Madelung deformity, cubitus val­
gus, short or bowed forearm, dislocation of the ulna at the elbow, or 
the appearance of muscular hypertrophy. In otherwise short chil­
dren who do not have any of these associated findings, the yield 
from testing for SHOX variants is very low. Treatment with GH can 
increase final height, though higher-­than-­average doses may be 
required.
Noonan Syndrome
Noonan syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 1,000–2,500 live births. 
Molecular testing of the 13 genes known to be causally associated 
with Noonan syndrome identifies a pathogenic variant in PTPN11 in 
50% of affected individuals; SOS1 is the next most frequent seen in 
approximately 13%, while RAF1, RIT1, and KRAS are seen in approx­
imately 5% each, respectively. The remaining genes are noted in fewer 
than 1% of cases. They include BRAF, LZTR1, NRAS, PPP1CB, MRAS, 
SHOC2, RRAS2, and SOS2. In about 20% of the patients, no casually 
associated pathogenic variant is detected. One of the reasons for this is 
that RAS-­related disorders are known to have a relatively high degree 
of somatic mosaicism. The syndrome is characterized by minor facial 
dysmorphism (hypertelorism, downward eye slant, and low-­set ears), 
proportionate short stature, and right-­sided heart disease, most often 
pulmonic stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Other common 
findings include a short, webbed neck; chest deformity (pectus exca­
vatum); cryptorchidism; intellectual disability; bleeding diathesis; and 
lymphedema. GH therapy is recommended to treat short stature asso­
ciated with Noonan syndrome and is an FDA-­approved indication for 
the use of GH.
Malnutrition
Worldwide, malnutrition resulting from poverty is still the common­
est cause of short stature. In North America, malnutrition may arise 
from inadequate intake secondary to poverty or deprivation, poor 
intake secondary to overt or occult chronic illness (e.g., inflammatory 
bowel disease, renal failure), or inability to utilize food intake (mal­
absorption). In all these conditions, weight tends to be depressed to 
a greater degree than height. The history should include review of the 
child’s food intake (often best obtained by a 3-­day diet record), appe­
tite, and detailed review of systems. Specific nutritional disorders, such 
as rickets, may also lead to short stature. Appropriate treatment leads to 
acceleration of linear growth, typically lagging a few weeks or months 
behind weight gain. Catch-­up growth occurs but may not compensate 
for all of the lost height potential in longstanding cases, leading to a 
permanent height deficit.
Chronic Illness
Chronic illnesses, such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, 
renal dysfunction, and chronic inflammation, can lead to short stat­
ure. The mechanisms of impaired growth include poor appetite or 
poor intake (inflammatory bowel disease, renal dysfunction), mal­
absorption (celiac disease), medications (chronic glucocorticoids for 
severe asthma), chronic acidosis (renal tubular acidosis), and second­
ary endocrine dysfunction (GH resistance associated with systemic 
inflammation). Although the primary disorder is evident in many 
cases, short stature is sometimes the presenting feature of the chronic 
disease. This occurs notably in inflammatory bowel disease, celiac dis­
ease, and renal dysfunction.
Gastrointestinal Disease: Children usually have a greater deficit in 
weight than height. Gastrointestinal symptoms are frequently present, 
but short stature alone may be the initial presentation of celiac disease 
and inflammatory bowel syndrome. The growth failure in inflamma­
tory bowel disease is due to a combination of decreased food intake, 
malabsorption, and the inflammatory process (mediated by proin­
flammatory cytokines). This may be further aggravated by the use of 
high-­dose glucocorticoids for treatment. GH therapy has been shown 
to increase height velocity in some small trials in inflammatory bowel 
disease, but no consensus exists yet about its role in these children. 
Celiac disease responds to a gluten-­free diet and height velocity nor­
malizes with adequate treatment.
Renal Disease: Children with chronic kidney disease may develop 
growth failure due to chronic metabolic acidosis, uremia, poor nutri­
tion, anorexia, anemia, calcium and phosphorus imbalance, renal 
osteodystrophy, and impairment of GH action. It may also be aggra­
vated by the use of high-­dose glucocorticoids. GH therapy is recom­
mended for children with profound growth failure and is typically 
continued until renal transplantation.
Pulmonary Disease: Growth failure in cystic fibrosis is secondary 
to both its pulmonary and gastrointestinal manifestations. Chronic 
infection and systemic inflammation contribute to short stature.
TABLE 56.8  Netchine-­Harbison Clinical 
Scoring System (NH-­CSS) for Silver-­Russell 
Syndrome
Small for gestational age (birthweight and/or length ≥2 standard deviations 
(SD) below the mean for gestational age)
Postnatal growth failure (length/height ≥ SD below the mean at 24 mo)
Relative macrocephaly at birth (head circumference >1.5 SD above 
birthweight and/or length)
Frontal bossing or prominent forehead (forehead projecting beyond the facial 
plane on a side view as a toddler [1–3 yr])
Body asymmetry (limb length discrepancy ≥0.5 cm, or <0.5 cm with two or 
more other asymmetric body parts)
Feeding difficulties or body mass index ≤2 SD at 24 mo or current use of a 
feeding tube or cyproheptadine for appetite stimulation
A score of 4 or more indicates a high likelihood for clinical diagnosis 
and molecular testing is warranted. Adapted from Aziz S, et al. A pro­
spective study validating a clinical scoring system and demonstrating 
phenotypical-­genotypical correlations in Silver-­Russell syndrome. J Med 
Genet. 2015;52(7):446–453.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1086
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Severe asthma may interfere with growth directly as well as via the 
effect of glucocorticoid therapy. Daily use of systemic glucocorticoids 
for any significant length of time will lead to growth suppression, but 
potent ICSs may also have noticeable systemic effects in some cases 
(probably due to individual differences in technique and sensitivity). 
Alternate-­day dosing and drug holidays can reduce this risk of growth 
suppression from oral corticosteroids. In the case of ICSs, the use of 
the minimum effective potency and dose may help ameliorate systemic 
effects in children who exhibit signs of growth failure.
Immunodeficiencies: Both congenital and acquired immunode­
ficiencies (HIV infection) are associated with growth failure. Mech­
anisms include anorexia, malabsorption, diarrhea, chronic infection, 
and systemic inflammation. Diagnosis is usually evident but an occa­
sional child with common variable immune deficiency may present 
with growth failure before clues in the history and physical exam­
ination lead to an evaluation of immune status. Successful treatment 
of the underlying disease will usually lead to an improvement in 
growth.
In most of these systemic illnesses, the history typically reveals 
that the child had been growing normally until some point. Then 
the growth rate slowed, which is suggestive of onset of an illness. The 
history may reveal a clear earlier diagnosis of chronic illness or may 
include symptoms suggestive of the underlying disorder (e.g., loss of 
appetite, diarrhea, mouth sores, and fever). The physical examination 
typically shows that the weight is more depressed than the height, but 
typically head circumference is preserved. If there is microcephaly, 
a primary genetic etiology should be considered. There may also be 
features indicative of the underlying disorder (e.g., pallor in anemia, 
perianal findings in Crohn disease).
Laboratory studies that screen for chronic illness (CBC, ESR, chem­
istry profile, UA) may at times provide clues to the diagnosis. Screen­
ing for celiac disease with tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A 
(IgA) antibody testing may be indicated, especially if failure to thrive 
appears after a period of normal growth or if weight is affected more 
than height. If indicated by the clinical features and/or screening labo­
ratory studies, definitive diagnosis requires directed tests (e.g., endos­
copy and biopsy for inflammatory bowel disease or celiac disease, 
sweat chloride test for cystic fibrosis).
The management of these conditions rests on specific therapy 
directed at the underlying condition (e.g., gluten-­free diet for celiac 
disease). When the disease is adequately treated, the growth rate often 
improves but catch-­up growth may not compensate for all of the lost 
height potential in long-standing cases, leading to a permanent height 
deficit. GH therapy may be indicated if the height deficit is severe and is 
unlikely to correct with treatment of the underlying disease alone. GH 
is specifically approved for the treatment of short stature in children 
with renal insufficiency.
Emotional Deprivation
Deprivation can stunt growth in two ways. First, a child may be 
deprived of food (an example of malnutrition); in this case, the child’s 
weight is generally depressed more than the height. Second (and more 
rarely), a child who is emotionally deprived (and emotional depri­
vation, rather than actual physical abuse, seems to be key) may have 
profound short stature without apparent malnutrition (psychosocial 
dwarfism). In this case, the height is depressed more than the weight 
(Fig. 56.10). Such a child may (in some but not all cases) have the clini­
cal features of GH deficiency and may in fact show laboratory evidence 
of hypopituitarism. But when placed in a more nurturing environment, 
the child grows markedly, and the GH levels revert to normal. This dis­
order may be difficult to diagnose, and the social history is critical. The 
diagnosis ultimately rests on significant improvement of growth once 
the environment improves.
Iatrogenic Causes
Treatments for medical conditions may secondarily impair growth. 
The classic example is glucocorticoids. This is obviously a risk with 
prolonged systemic steroid use but even inhaled or topical steroids 
(especially if used over a wide area or under occlusive cover) may sup­
press growth. A significant proportion of the dose of ICSs is depos­
ited in the oral cavity and oropharynx and after being swallowed is 
absorbed via the gastrointestinal tract. Much of this is metabolized to 
inactive metabolites in the liver (first-­pass metabolism), but some still 
escapes inactivation and may have systemic effects. Systemic effects 
are generally mild, but long-­term studies show that high-­potency ICSs 
(budesonide, fluticasone) do have a small but measurable impact on 
linear growth. The final adult height may be decreased by 1–2 cm in 
long-­term users of ICSs. Since poorly controlled asthma is a serious 
condition and may have an even bigger impact on growth, this rela­
tively small effect should not prevent the use of ICSs in asthmatics who 
need it. But an occasional child may have more significant slowing of 
growth based on individual differences in sensitivity, metabolism, and 
technique, and this possibility should be kept in mind as a possible 
cause of slow growth.
Spinal irradiation for treatment of malignancies may stunt growth 
by limiting further spinal growth; this is associated with a high U/L. 
Treatments for hyperactivity (sympathomimetic agents suppress 
appetite) may interfere with growth and cause a small but measurable 
decrease in final height in some children.
BONE DYSPLASIAS
Skeletal dysplasias constitute a broad group of genetic disorders in 
which there is innate failure of normal bone or cartilage development. 
S
T
A
T
U
R
E
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
62
42
44
46
48
60
58
52
54
56
in
30
32
34
36
38
40
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
150
155
AGE (YEARS)
cm
in
cm
11
12
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
145
50
160
Fig. 56.10  Growth chart of a boy with deprivation dwarfism (psychoso­
cial dwarfism). Between ages 6 and 87/12 years, he had chemical evi­
dence of growth hormone (GH) deficiency. After placement in a chronic 
care facility (arrow), his growth rate improved markedly, and his GH levels 
reverted to normal. NCHS, National Center for Health Statistics. (From 
Styne DM. Growth. In: Greenspan FS, Forsham PH, eds. Basic and Clini­
cal Endocrinology. 3rd ed. Los Altos, CA: Appleton & Lange; 1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1087
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
There are 461 unique skeletal disorders classified into 42 groups 
(see Table 56.4).
Abnormal body proportions are characteristic of these conditions (dis­
proportionate short stature), although there are some exceptions. Bone 
ages are not reliable indicators of osseous maturity in these conditions.
Achondroplasia
Achondroplasia is the classic example of an osteochondrodystrophy 
(Fig. 56.11). The incidence is 1 per 20,000. This condition is caused by 
the autosomal dominant pathogenic variant p.Gly380Arg in the fibro­
blast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) in 98% of cases; approximately 
80% are due to de novo variation (i.e., spontaneous new pathogenic 
variant in offspring). Short stature, body disproportion with short 
limbs, hypotonia, and a relatively large head with midface hypoplasia 
are often noted at birth. Progressive deceleration of growth rate begins 
in infancy, and the humerus and femur are particularly shortened (rhi­
zomelia, i.e., proximal shortening of the limbs). The hands may show 
a three-­pronged configuration (trident hand). In addition, there may 
be hydrocephalus as a result of narrowing of the foramen magnum, 
kyphosis, stenosis of the spinal canal, and vertebral disk lesions. The 
diagnosis is clinical and is supported by characteristic radiologic fea­
tures that include small cuboid vertebral bodies and anterior beaking 
of the first or second lumbar vertebra. The average adult height is 
125 cm (4 feet, 1 inch) in girls and 131 cm (4 feet, 3 inches) in boys. 
Treatment with an agent that antagonizes the gain-­of-­function effect 
on chondrocyte maturation results in an increased annualized growth 
velocity. Longitudinal studies are ongoing to determine the impact on 
the foramen magnum and risk for spinal stenosis.
Hypochondroplasia
Hypochondroplasia is an allelic variant of achondroplasia and mani­
fests with short stature and dysmorphic features that are often milder 
than in achondroplasia. In particular there are few craniofacial abnor­
malities, and body disproportion may be subtle. Newborns may be 
slightly small, but short stature generally becomes apparent by age 3 
years. The short stature is minimally disproportionate with relatively 
short limbs. The hands and feet are usually stubby. Genu varum may 
occur. Radiologic hallmarks include metaphyseal indentation and flar­
ing as well as hypoplasia of the ilia with small greater sciatic notches. 
Some reports suggested a beneficial effect of GH but this remains a 
nonstandard indication for GH treatment.
Spondyloepiphysial dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of dys­
plasias that primarily affect the epiphyses and the vertebral bodies. 
Most forms are characterized by short-­trunk dwarfism (preferential 
shortening of the trunk as compared with the extremities) and vertebral 
anomalies. These conditions may lead to spinal cord compression due 
to subluxation of the cervical spine. GH therapy is not recommended.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Moderate and severe forms of osteogenesis imperfecta are associated 
with proportional short stature. The diagnosis is typically made on the 
basis of bone fragility and fractures; short stature is not a presenting 
feature.
EVALUATING THE CHILD WITH SHORT STATURE
Statistically, most children with short stature will turn out to have one 
of the normal variant causes of short stature (familial short stature or 
constitutional delay) or will have ISS. An extensive evaluation will not 
reveal a specific cause in most patients. On the other hand, short stat­
ure in general and growth failure in particular may be the first sign of 
serious systemic disease or endocrine disorder and appropriate evalua­
tion is essential to make the correct diagnosis. It is best to start the eval­
uation with a thorough history (including a family history and direct 
A
B
Fig. 56.11  Achondroplasia. A, One-­year-­old boy with height age of 4 months.B,Four-­year-­old girl with height 
age of 20 months. (A, From Smith DW. Compendium on shortness of stature. J Pediatr. 1967;70:504; B, from 
Jones KL, ed. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1988.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1088
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
measurement of the heights of both parents if possible) and physical 
examination (including careful measurement and plotting of height on 
appropriate growth charts) and then order laboratory tests and imag­
ing studies based on this evaluation and specifically tailored to the par­
ticular child instead of simply ordering a certain panel of tests on every 
child with short stature.
At the first contact with a short child, the physician usually does 
not know if the height velocity is also abnormal. If the initial history 
and examination do not indicate that a specific cause may be present, 
it is best to schedule a second visit in 4–6 months to reassess the height 
and to accurately measure the height velocity. But if the initial history 
and examination indicate possible pathology, or if the short stature is 
unusually severe (more than 2.5 SD below the mean is a good cut-­off), 
then some immediate lab tests and a bone-­age X-­ray may be performed 
at the first visit.
At any stage, the finding of a subnormal growth velocity is more con­
cerning than the finding of short stature. Normal growth variants are not 
characterized by a subnormal growth velocity, and (barring mismea­
surement) a growth rate below the normal range is a cause of concern 
and should trigger an evaluation. A figure of 5 cm per year is frequently 
used as a rough measure of the minimum height velocity in childhood 
(after age 3), though strictly speaking, normal height velocity may be as 
low as 4 cm per year for boys and 4.5 cm per year for girls in children 
between age 6 and puberty.
Initial screening labs should include an IGF-­1 level (to assess GH 
secretion), a TSH (to evaluate the thyroid gland), and a bone-age 
X-­ray to assess bone maturation and obtain an estimate of the final 
adult height. A CBC (to rule out anemia) and a creatinine level (to 
assess renal function) as well as an ESR or CRP to identify systemic 
inflammation may be indicated as well. A karyotype is mandatory in 
any female with significant short stature because of the possibility of 
Turner syndrome. Beyond that, the testing will be guided by the his­
tory, the physical examination, and the results of initial screening labs.
IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS IN THE HISTORY
Pregnancy and Birth History
Did the mother have illnesses or take medication during the pregnancy? 
Maternal illness or use of certain drugs can cause poor fetal growth.
What was the birthweight and length? IUGR may lead to continu­
ing small stature.
Did the baby have perinatal problems such as unexplained hypogly­
cemia, prolonged jaundice, or, in males, a small phallus? These are all 
suggestive of congenital GH deficiency.
Did the neonate have other perinatal problems (birth asphyxia, 
puffy extremities)? These may provide clues to the underlying cause of 
short stature (significant hypoxia may lead to hypopituitarism; puffy 
extremities in a female are suggestive of Turner syndrome).
Infancy and Childhood
What was the child’s growth pattern? The child who is short but grow­
ing at a normal rate and paralleling the 3rd percentile is more likely to 
have familial or constitutional short stature. The child whose height 
deviates progressively away from the normal curve (especially after 24 
months of age) is much more likely to have an underlying medical dis­
order. When this progressive deviation occurs from early childhood 
and continues, it often represents a congenital disorder (e.g., Turner 
syndrome, congenital GH deficiency). However, growth attenuation 
that occurs after a sustained period of normal growth suggests that a 
disorder has been acquired (e.g., acquired GH deficiency, inflamma­
tory bowel disease).
What were the child’s developmental milestones? How is the 
school performance? Slow development or poor school performance 
may indicate a central disorder or may represent part of a syndrome 
(e.g., PWS). Hypothyroidism acquired after age 3 years usually does 
not interfere with school performance, although inadequately treated 
congenital hypothyroidism often leads to intellectual impairment. This 
question may also elicit a history of emotional problems.
Has the child had any serious illnesses or been on medication? 
Chronic illness often impedes growth, as do certain medications (glu­
cocorticoids). A history of nonendocrine medical problems may also 
provide clues to the underlying disorder (e.g., the presence of aortic 
coarctation may be suggestive of Turner syndrome).
Review of Systems
How is the child’s appetite? What does the child eat in a typical 3-­day 
period (often best described by a formal diet record)? Adequate caloric 
intake is needed for growth. Inadequate intake may be a symptom of 
underlying chronic disease.
Does the child have abdominal pain, diarrhea, unexplained fevers, 
mouth or anal sores, or joint pain? These symptoms suggest occult 
inflammatory bowel disease.
Does the child have neck swelling, lethargy, constipation, cold 
intolerance, or weight gain without much increase in height? These are 
among the symptoms of acquired hypothyroidism.
Does the child have headaches, vomiting, or visual disturbances? 
Symptoms of CNS dysfunction, raised intracranial pressure, or both 
suggest the possibility of acquired hypopituitarism in association with 
a central lesion such as a tumor or hydrocephalus.
Has the child begun pubertal development? Puberty influences 
growth. Children with constitutional delay in growth and development 
have delayed puberty and often have an exaggerated nadir of growth 
velocity before puberty begins. However, the more puberty is delayed, 
the greater the likelihood of a medical disorder such as hypogonad­
ism. Delayed puberty may also be a manifestation of hypogonadism 
(Turner syndrome), or it may be secondary to a growth-­impeding 
disorder (hypothyroidism, malnutrition, chronic illness). Precocious 
puberty is not a cause of growth failure (it should accelerate growth), but 
it may lead to short final adult height because of premature fusion of the 
epiphyses.
Family History
What were the heights of parents and other family members at the child’s 
age, and when did they undergo puberty? What are the current heights of 
parents and family members? The most frequent causes of short stature 
are familial short stature and constitutional delay in growth and devel­
opment. In the former, a family history of short stature is elicited. In the 
latter, a family history of delayed puberty is elicited.
Physical Examination
Height and weight should each be plotted carefully on growth charts. 
The degree of short stature in relation to peers is ascertained. Previous 
height measurements provide an index of the child’s pattern of growth. 
Weight that is depressed more than height in a short child is suggestive 
of chronic illness or malnutrition. In contrast, a child who is short but 
chubby is more likely to have an endocrine disorder or syndrome (e.g., 
GH deficiency, hypothyroidism, Cushing syndrome, PWS).
Exogenous obesity is usually associated with relatively tall stature. 
Disproportionate short stature is characteristic of skeletal dysplasias 
(short limbs in the case of achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia, 
short trunk in some rare forms of skeletal dysplasia) and may also be 
seen in long-standing hypothyroidism.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1089
CHAPTER 56  Short Stature
The presence of dysmorphic features is often suggestive of a syn­
drome or genetic disorder (e.g., Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome). 
Midline craniofacial defects are suggestive of hypopituitarism.
Goiter, delayed dentition, bradycardia, dry hair or skin, or delayed 
reflexes may be suggestive of hypothyroidism.
Cherubic or doll-­like appearance, high-­pitched voice, delayed den­
tition, poor musculature, or relative adiposity may be suggestive of GH 
deficiency.
Bitemporal hemianopsia, papilledema, optic atrophy, or accelerat­
ing head circumference in a young child is suggestive of a CNS abnor­
mality (craniopharyngioma) causing hypopituitarism.
The stage of puberty is noted. Delayed puberty is compatible with 
constitutional delay in growth and development, hypogonadism, pan­
hypopituitarism, severe hypothyroidism, or chronic illness.
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
Specific Treatment of the Primary Disorder
If a child is found to have a clear medical condition causing short stat­
ure and for which treatment is available (e.g., hypothyroidism, GH 
deficiency), the appropriate treatment (thyroid replacement therapy 
or GH therapy, respectively) improves growth markedly as long as the 
epiphyses remain open. Often, such children experience accelerated 
(catch-­up) growth for some time after appropriate treatment is insti­
tuted. Complete compensation for growth failure is unlikely to occur if 
the disorder was many years in duration or occurred very close to the 
onset of normal puberty.
Sex Steroids
Sex steroid treatments may be administered to adolescents with consti­
tutional delay of growth and development. Males with delayed puberty 
may be treated with testosterone enanthate or cypionate (50–100 mg/
mo intramuscularly or subcutaneously for 3–6 months; smaller doses 
given more frequently may be more physiologic and are preferred by 
some practitioners) to gradually bring about secondary sexual char­
acteristics and accelerated linear growth. This is often gratifying for 
males and is usually followed by spontaneous pubertal development. 
The low dose of testosterone is designed to avoid undue advancement 
of bone age and loss of growth potential. Oxandrolone is a testos­
terone derivative with less androgenic effects than testosterone, and 
does not aromatize to estrogen, so theoretically it may be preferable to 
depot-­testosterone injections. Several small studies report beneficial 
effects of oxandrolone in males with constitutional delay of growth 
and puberty. The usual dose is 2.5 mg daily for anywhere from 3 to 12 
months. Giving oxandrolone (in addition to GH therapy) to females 
with Turner syndrome leads to better height outcomes than GH alone, 
so this is frequently done at around age 8–10 years in females who are 
still well short of a normal height. Females with Turner syndrome who 
started GH relatively early in life are less likely to require the addition 
of oxandrolone. The usual dose is 0.03–0.05 mg/kg/day. Side effects at 
this dose are rare, but signs of virilization should prompt a reduction 
in dose.
Estrogen
Just as males with constitutional delay are treated with androgens, 
females with pubertal delay and mild short stature may be treated with 
a short course of estrogen therapy. However, benign constitutional 
delay is less likely in females (who are more likely to have an underlying 
pathologic cause such as Turner syndrome) and such treatment is rel­
atively rare. If it is contemplated, care should be taken to exclude other 
causes of pubertal delay and to use low doses of estrogens because 
estrogens promote epiphyseal closure.
Counseling
Reassurance and counseling should be available for all patients. For many 
children with familial short stature or constitutional delay in growth and 
development, it is reassuring to be told that they are normal and are likely 
to reach a normal adult height or one in keeping with the family heights. 
This is particularly true for children with delayed puberty, in whom the 
discrepancy in height in comparison with peers (who have gone through 
their pubertal growth spurts) is disconcerting. It is helpful if parents do 
not dwell on the child’s height but focus on the child’s strengths. Gym­
nastics, wrestling, soccer, and swimming are often activities at which 
short children are not at a disadvantage and in which they may excel.
Growth Hormone Therapy
There is a broad consensus for the use of GH therapy in children with 
short stature caused by classical GH deficiency, Turner syndrome, 
Noonan syndrome, SHOX haplo-­insufficiency, PWS, Russell-­Silver 
syndrome, and chronic renal failure. Children who were born SGA 
and fail to catch up to the normal range of height by age 2 (by age 4 
in Europe) are also candidates for GH therapy. The FDA has approved 
GH for children with ISS, but this treatment remains controversial and 
the cost-­benefit ratio remains uncertain.
Side effects of GH therapy include fluid retention that is usually 
mild and tends to resolve with continued treatment. Mild headaches 
are also common and are usually benign. Increased intracranial pres­
sure (pseudotumor cerebri) is a rare but serious dose-­related side 
effect. It usually resolves if treatment is stopped, and after resolution, 
treatment can frequently be restarted at a lower dose. The incidence of 
slipped capital femoral epiphyses is increased and scoliosis may be 
worsened during GH therapy, likely secondary to accelerated growth. 
GH-­neutralizing antibodies may appear but are rarely of clinical signif­
icance. GH can accelerate the growth of existing nevi and can induce 
insulin resistance, but this does not appear to be clinically significant.
Because of its growth-­promoting effects, there has long been con­
cern about a possible increase in the incidence of cancer. No significant 
increase in common childhood cancers has been noted yet in surveil­
lance studies, but (somewhat unexpectedly) in one French study (the 
Safety and Appropriateness of Growth hormone treatments in Europe 
[SAGhE] study) the group treated with GH had a standardized mor­
tality ratio (SMR) of 1.33 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.08–1.64) 
compared to controls. Cardiovascular disease was responsible for most 
of the excess mortality. Although all-­type cancer-­related mortality 
was not increased in the French cohort, bone tumor–related mortality 
was increased. There were weaknesses in the design of this study and 
a smaller study from Belgium, the Netherlands, and Sweden did not 
show the same results, but the study did raise concerns about long-­
term safety. More long-­term follow-­up data is being collected to deter­
mine the true long-­term safety profile of GH. Until more information 
becomes available, most authorities do not recommend any changes in 
current practice, but this may change if new studies reveal new hazards. 
It should be kept in mind that GH therapy on a large scale did not begin 
until 1985, so even the earliest treated subjects are not very old at this 
time; impact on the risk of cancer or heart disease in the elderly (if any) 
may not be detectable in various study cohorts at this time.
OTHER TREATMENTS
Recombinant human IGF-­1 is indicated for the treatment of extremely 
short children with primary IGF-­1 deficiency (both height and IGF-­1 
>3 SD below the mean for age) caused by severe GH insensitivity (e.g., 
Laron syndrome and IGF-­1 gene defects). Availability may be an issue. 
Possible side effects include hypoglycemia, increased intracranial pres­
sure, and adenotonsillar hypertrophy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1090
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S (TAB L ES  5 6 .9  AN D 5 6 .1 0)
Short stature may be a variant of normal development or may indicate a 
serious underlying problem (see Tables 56.3, 56.5, 56.7, and 56.9). When 
short stature is associated with a slow growth velocity, progressive devi­
ation from the child’s previous growth channel, obesity, headache, vom­
iting, dysmorphic features, or a goiter, or if short height is inconsistent 
with the family history, a search for an underlying medical disorder 
should be undertaken. Understanding how to measure a child accurately, 
performing simple proportion measurements, and calculating growth 
velocity are skills that all pediatricians must have to diagnose short stat­
ure and identify associated disease states and syndromes.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 56.9  Red Flags in the Evaluation of 
Short Stature
Height >2–2.5 standard deviations below the mean for age
Subnormal growth velocity
Abnormal body proportions
Abnormal height:weight ratio
Dysmorphic features including midline facial defects
Goiter
Abnormal central nervous system (headache, cranial neuropathies) and 
ophthalmologic (visual field defects, papilledema) examinations
Acquired growth failure in a previously growing child
TABLE 56.10  Conditions Not to Miss
Hypoglycemia in a child with no risk 
factors for hypoglycemia
Consider hypopituitarism in the 
differential
Hypoglycemia, jaundice, and 
microphallus in a newborn boy
Rule out growth hormone deficiency
Obesity in a child who is short
Rule out hypothyroidism, growth 
hormone deficiency, Cushing 
syndrome, Prader-­Willi syndrome, 
Laurence-­Moon-­Biedl syndrome
Shortness in a child with a goiter
Rule out hypothyroidism
Shortness in a child with headache, 
vomiting, or visual disturbance
Rule out hypopituitarism secondary 
to central nervous system lesion, 
including craniopharyngioma or 
hydrocephalus
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1090.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alatzoglou KS, Dattani MT. Genetic causes and treatment of isolated growth 
hormone deficiency—an update. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010;6(10):562–576.
Allen DB, Cuttler L. Clinical practice. Short stature in childhood—challenges 
and choices. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(13):1220–1228.
Ambler GR, Fairchild J, Wilkinson DJ. Debate: idiopathic short stature should 
be treated with growth hormone. J Paediatr Child Health. 2013;49(3):165–
169.
Andrade AC, Jee YH, Nilsson O. New genetic diagnoses of short stature 
provide insights into local regulation of childhood growth. Horm Res 
Paediatr. 2017;88:22–37.
Azzi S, Salem J, Thibaud N, et al. A prospective study validating a clinical 
scoring system and demonstrating phenotypical-genotypical correlations 
in Silver-Russell syndrome. J Med Genet. 2015;52:446–453.
Badaru A, Wilson DM. Alternatives to growth hormone stimulation testing in 
children. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2004;15(6):252–258.
Bogin B, Varela-Silva MI. Leg length, body proportion, and health: a review 
with a note on beauty. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2010;7:1047–1075.
Bouali H, Latrech H. Achondroplasia: current options and future perspective. 
Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2015;12(4):388–395.
Chen EY, Liao YC, Smith DH, et al. The human growth hormone locus: 
nucleotide sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics. 1989;4:479–497.
Cohen J, Blethen S, Kuntze J, et al. Managing the child with severe primary 
insulin-like growth factor-1 deficiency (IGFD): IGFD diagnosis and 
management. Drugs R D. 2014; 14(1):25–29.
Cohen LE. Idiopathic short stature: a clinical review. J Am Med Assoc. 
2014;311(17):1787–1796.
Coste J, Pouchot J, Carel JC. Height and health-related quality of life: a 
nationwide population study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(9):3231–
3239. https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2012-1543.
Dauber A, Rosenfeld RG, Hirschhorn JN. Genetic evaluation of short stature. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(9):3080–3092.
de Paula FJ, Góis-Júnior MB, Aguiar-Oliveira MH, et al. Consequences of 
lifetime isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency and effects of short-
term GH treatment on bone in adults with a mutation in the GHRH-
receptor gene. Clin Endocrinol. 2009;70(1):35–40.
Downie AB, Mulligan J, Stratford RJ, et al. Are short normal children at a 
disadvantage? The Wessex growth study. BMJ. 1997;314:97–100.
Ghigo E, Bellone J, Aimaretti G, et al. Reliability of provocative tests to assess 
growth hormone secretory status. Study in 472 normally growing children. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996;81(9):3323–3327.
Grimberg A, Allen DB. Growth hormone treatment for growth hormone 
deficiency and idiopathic short stature: new guidelines shaped by the 
presence and absence of evidence. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29(4):466–471. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000505.
Jee YH, Baron J, Nilsson O. New developments in the genetic diagnosis 
of short stature. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2018;30(4):541–547. https://doi.
org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000653.
Kayemba-Kay’s S, Epstein S, Hindmarsh P, et al. Does plasma IGF-BP3 
measurement contribute to the diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency 
in children? Ann Endocrinol. 2011;72(3):218–223.
Larson A, Nokoff NJ, Meeks NJ. Genetic causes of pituitary hormone 
deficiencies. Discov Med. 2015;19(104):175–183.
Lee PA, Chernausek SD, Hokken-Koelega AC, et al. International Small For 
Gestational Age Advisory Board consensus development conference 
statement: management of short children born small for gestational 
age, April 24–October 1, 2001. International Small For Gestational Age 
Advisory Board. Pediatrics. 2003;111(6 Pt 1):1253–1261.
Little MA. Evolutionary strategies for body size. Front Endocrinol. 2020;11:107. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2020.00107. Published 2020 Mar 10.
Mehlman CT, Ain MC. Evaluation of the child with short stature. Orthop Clin 
North Am. 2015;46(4):523–531. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocl.2015.06.006.
Navarro R, Dunn JD, Lee PA, et al. Translating clinical guidelines into practice: 
the effective and appropriate use of human growth hormone. Am J Manag 
Care. 2013;19(suppl 15):s281–s289.
Oberfield SE. Growth hormone use in normal, short children—a plea for 
reason. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:557–559.
Pfäffle R. Hormone replacement therapy in children: the use of growth 
hormone and IGF-I. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;29(3):
339–352.
Pinto G, Cormier-Daire V, Le Merrer M, et al. Efficacy and safety of growth 
hormone treatment in children with hypochondroplasia: comparison with 
an historical cohort. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;82(6):355–363.
Polidori N, Castorani V, Mohn A, et al. Deciphering short stature in children. 
Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2020;25(2):69–79. https://doi.org/10.6065/
apem.2040064.032.
Ranke MB. Treatment with recombinant human insulin-like growth factor-1 
in severe primary IGF deficiency and beyond. Horm Res Paediatr. 
2015;83(5):358–360.
Rochira V, Kara E, Carani C. The endocrine role of estrogens on human male 
skeleton. Int J Endocrinol. 2015;2015:165215.
Sandberg DE, Colsman M. Growth hormone treatment of short stature: status 
of the quality of life rationale. Horm Res. 2005;63(6):275–283.
Savarirayan R, Tofts L, Irving M, et al. Once-daily, subcutaneous vosoritide 
therapy in children with achondroplasia: a randomised, double-blind, 
phase 3, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2020;396:684–692.
Şıklar Z, Berberoğlu M. Syndromic disorders with short stature. J Clin Res 
Pediatr Endocrinol. 2014;6(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.4274/Jcrpe.1149.
Swerdlow AJ, Cooke R, Albertsson-Wikland K, et al. Description of the 
SAGhE cohort: a large European study of mortality and cancer incidence 
risks after childhood treatment with recombinant growth hormone. Horm 
Res Paediatr. 2015.
Tanner J, Davies P. Clinical longitudinal standards for height and height 
velocity for North American children. J Pediatr. 1985;107:317–329.
Zahnleiter D, Uebe S, Ekici AB, et al. Rare copy number variants are a 
common cause of short stature. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003365. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003365.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
