841
Most gait disturbances are benign and resolve with normal growth and 
development. Others are pathologic in origin and necessitate treatment 
(Table 45.1).
GAIT CYCLE
The normal gait cycle is described by foot placement. The gait cycle 
begins with right heel strike; is followed by left toe-­off, left heel strike, 
and right toe-­off; and ends with right heel strike. These five events 
describe one gait cycle and include two phases: stance and swing. The 
stance phase is the period of time during which one of the two feet is 
on the ground. The swing phase is the period during which a limb is 
being advanced forward without ground contact.
Measuring the duration of the gait cycle makes it possible to calcu­
late the time required for each of the five phases. During normal gait, 
the duration of each phase is as follows: for weight acceptance, 11%; for 
single limb stance, 39%; for weight release, 11%; and for swing phase, 
39%. Velocity, cadence, step length, stride length, and step width may 
be calculated from the timed and measured gait cycle.
DEVELOPMENT OF GAIT
Central nervous system maturation is necessary for the develop­
ment of normal gait and accounts for the normal progression of 
developmental milestones. The typical milestones for locomotion 
include independent sitting at 6 months of age, crawling at about 9 
months, walking without assistance at 12–15 months, and running 
at 18 months. A normal 1-­year-­old child has a wide-­based stance 
and a rapid cadence with short steps; the elbows are flexed and 
reciprocal arm motion is not present. Foot strike occurs without an 
initial heel strike. A 2-­year-­old child shows increased velocity, step 
length, and diminished cadence in comparison with a 1-­year-­old 
child. Most of the adult gait patterns are present in children by 3 
years, with changes in velocity, stride, and cadence continuing to 7 
years of age. The gait characteristics of a 7-­year-­old child are similar 
to those of an adult.
CLINICAL EVALUATION OF GAIT DISTURBANCES
History
The clinician should inquire about the pregnancy and delivery, the age 
at which developmental milestones occurred, the presence of any sys­
temic illnesses (including chronicity, fever, rash, weight loss, and other 
organ system involvement), and whether there is a family history of 
any congenital musculoskeletal abnormalities or syndromes. With 
regard to the gait disturbance, it is important to inquire when it was 
first observed, whether it is unilateral or bilateral, whether it is asso­
ciated with any injuries or intercurrent systemic illnesses, if there is 
associated pain or weakness, and whether there has been a history of 
improvement or worsening with time.
Physical Examination
General Musculoskeletal Examination
Although most of the findings in gait disturbances are confined to the 
lower extremities, the upper extremities and spine may be involved 
as part of an underlying disease process. A general assessment of all 
extremities and the spine should be performed to identify any abnor­
mal motion, tenderness, swelling, deformity, or increased warmth.
The lower extremity musculoskeletal examination should begin 
with the child ambulating in the examination room or adjacent hall­
way. The child must be adequately undressed and be observed from a 
distance while walking so that the trunk and lower extremities can be 
clearly visualized. The positions of the thighs, knees, lower legs, and 
feet should be observed during ambulation. Combining gait obser­
vation with the history typically allows for diagnosing most of the 
common gait disturbances such as torsional variations (in-­toeing and 
out-­toeing), equinus gait (toe-­walking), and limping.
Examination of the lower extremities should include measurement 
of lower extremity lengths and assessment of the hip, knee, ankle, and 
subtalar joints. The thighs, lower legs, and feet are inspected for evi­
dence of asymmetry, soft tissue swelling, or injury. Palpation for ten­
derness or areas of increased warmth is performed. The shape of the 
foot is assessed for possible intrinsic deformity.
Lower extremity length measurements. The most accurate method 
of measuring lower extremity length is with radiographs; however, if 
radiographs are not readily available, this assessment is best performed 
by having the child stand on a firm, level surface with the examiner 
standing behind the child and placing index fingers over the lateral 
aspect of each of the child’s iliac crests. The presence or absence of 
pelvic obliquity is observed, and blocks of various heights are placed 
beneath the child’s foot on the short side until the pelvis is level. The 
height of the blocks indicates the amount of lower extremity length 
discrepancy. Measurements obtained by use of a tape measure can also 
be performed but are less accurate. The most common measurements 
using this method are from the anterior-­superior iliac spine to the 
distal aspect of the medial malleolus. These landmarks are sometimes 
difficult to palpate accurately, and there can be considerable error using 
this method. The Galeazzi test can assess for femoral or tibial length 
discrepancy or hip dislocation leading to a perceived limb length 
disturbance (Fig. 45.1). Tibial length can also be assessed by having 
the patient in a prone position and knees flexed to 90 degrees and then 
observing the relative height of the feet.
Joint assessment. The ranges of motion of the hips, knees, ankles, 
and subtalar joints must be assessed. Hip flexion is measured, as are 
any flexion contractures. With the hip in extension, the degrees of 
abduction, adduction, internal rotation, and external rotation are 
Gait Disturbances
Alicia C. Zolkoske and Shayne D. Fehr
45
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
842
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
measured, preferably with a goniometer, and are recorded. Hip rotation 
is most accurately measured with the child in the prone position with 
the knees flexed. Older children and adolescents are typically more 
comfortable when measured in the supine position with hips and knees 
flexed to 90 degrees. Knee flexion and extension, ankle dorsiflexion, 
and plantar flexion, as well as subtalar motion, must be assessed and 
recorded.
Spinal evaluation. Spinal mobility should be assessed because 
abnormalities such as spondylolysis, nerve root impingement, diskitis, 
and tumors may manifest as a gait disturbance. The child’s ability to flex 
forward and to reverse lumbar lordosis is a sign of normal mobility (see 
Chapter 46). Areas of vertebral bone tenderness and muscle spasm are 
determined by direct palpation.
Neurologic Evaluation
Many gait disturbances have a neurologic cause or association. The 
neurologic examination should include assessment of unilateral 
or bilateral involvement, the presence of paresthesia, and muscle 
strength testing, sensory assessment (particularly to establish the 
specific level or distribution of any potential sensory deficits), deep 
tendon reflexes, and pathologic reflexes, such as the Babinski sign. 
Abnormal rectal tone or bladder distention is concerning for a spinal 
lesion.
Radiographic Assessment
The need for radiographic evaluation is based on the differential diag­
nosis. For many gait disturbances, radiographic assessment is not 
required. When necessary, plain radiographs of the lower extremities, 
pelvis, or spine are obtained first, followed by special diagnostic stud­
ies, such as anteroposterior (AP) leg length radiographs to assess for 
discrepancy, technetium bone scan to localize occult lesions such as 
avascular necrosis or stress fracture, and CT to characterize specific 
lesions. MRI is helpful in the diagnosis of occult or soft tissue lesions, 
such as infection, tumors, or metabolic bone disease, as well as other 
pathologic structural processes of the spine, such as syrinx, tethered 
cord, or disk anomaly.
TABLE 45.1  Causes of Gait Disturbances
Mechanical
Acute injuries (accidental or nonaccidental)
Overuse conditions (mainly sports-­related)
Dysplastic lesions
Limb length discrepancy
Osseous
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Osteochondritis dissecans of knee and talus
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteomyelitis
Diskitis
Osteoid osteoma or other primary bone tumor
Articular
Developmental hip dysplasia
Septic arthritis
Transient synovitis
Rheumatic disease (JIA, SLE)
Hemophilia-­related hemorrhage
Ankylosis of a joint
Neurologic
Guillain-­Barré syndrome and other peripheral neuropathies
Intoxication
Cerebellar ataxia
Brain tumor
Lesion occupying spinal cord space
Posterior column spinal cord disorders
Myopathy
Hemiplegia
Complex regional pain syndrome
Cerebral palsy
Acute flaccid myelitis
Hematologic/Oncologic
Sickle cell pain crisis
Leukemia, lymphoma
Metastatic tumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Other
Soft tissue infection
Myositis
Fasciitis
Bursitis
Kawasaki disease
Conversion disorder/functional disorder
Gaucher disease
Phlebitis
Scurvy
Rickets
Peritonitis
JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Galeazzi test
Short tibia
Short femur
Fig. 45.1  The Galeazzi test assesses for developmental dysplasia of the 
hip in infants and can be used to screen for femoral or tibial length dis­
crepancy in older children and adults. With the patient in a supine posi­
tion, the hips are flexed to 45 degrees and the knees to 90 degrees with 
the feet flat on the examining table. Inequality in the height of the knees 
is considered a positive Galeazzi sign and in infants is often related to 
developmental dysplasia of the hip. The test may produce a false nega­
tive if there is bilateral developmental dysplasia of the hip. For leg length 
discrepancy, in instances of tibial shortening, the knee on the affected 
side will be shifted inferiorly or caudally relative to the unaffected side 
(left-­hand side of figure). In instances of femoral shortening, the knee 
on the affected side is shifted cephalad (right-­hand side of figure). (From 
Tillotson L, Fieraru G, Briant-­Evans T. Examination of the hip for MRCS 
OSCE. Surgery [Oxford]. 2020;38:65–69, Fig. 3.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
843
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
Laboratory Tests
Tests such as CBC with differential, ESR, and CRP level are indicated if 
an infectious, rheumatic, or otherwise inflammatory condition is sus­
pected. Rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody determinations 
are less helpful in the diagnosis of rheumatic causes of gait disturbances 
(see Chapter 44). Other tests may be indicated for the diagnosis of spe­
cific disorders. Electromyography, nerve conduction studies, muscle 
biopsies, and nerve biopsies are frequently necessary in the diagnosis of 
myopathic or neuropathic disorders (see Chapter 35). Determinations 
of creatine phosphokinase, aldolase, and aspartate aminotransferase 
levels are important in the evaluation of striated muscle function and 
should be ordered if an underlying myopathy or myositis is suspected.
GAIT DISTURBANCES
The three most common categories of gait disturbances of childhood 
are torsional variations (in-­toeing and out-­toeing), toe-­walking (equi­
nus gait), and limping.
Torsional Variations
The presence of in-­toeing or out-­toeing does not necessarily imply 
an abnormality of the foot; rather, it indicates only the direction in 
which the foot is pointing during ambulation. Torsional variations can 
be located from the proximal (i.e., the hip) to the distal (i.e., the foot) 
region in the involved extremity. Some causes, such as clubfeet, are 
obvious, whereas others are subtle. Most torsional variations resolve 
with normal growth and development. The common causes of in-­
toeing and out-­toeing are listed in Table 45.2.
Normal Developmental Alignment
In utero positioning affects the alignment of the lower extremities of 
infants. In the typical in utero position, the hips are flexed, abducted, 
and externally rotated; the knees are flexed; and the lower legs are 
internally rotated. The feet are in a supinated position against the pos­
terolateral aspect of the opposite thigh. The musculoskeletal examina­
tion of an infant characteristically shows 20-­ to 30-­degree hip flexion 
contractures, 50–60 degrees of abduction, 80–90 degrees of external 
rotation in extension, and minimal or no internal rotation. The knees 
have 20-­ to 30-­degree flexion contractures, and internal tibial torsion is 
present. These are normal findings. The increased external rotation of 
the hip is caused not by femoral retroversion but rather by a posterior 
hip capsule contracture, which begins to resolve at the time of indepen­
dent ambulation.
The combination of external rotation at the hip and internal rota­
tion of the lower leg results in physiologic genu varum, a bowed 
appearance of the lower extremities, particularly when in the weight-­
bearing position, that reflects this physiologic torsional combination. 
After the child attains independent ambulation, this bowed appear­
ance improves over a 6-­ to 12-­month period with expected resolution 
by 2 years of age in over 95% of children. Exaggerated bowing under 
the age of 2 years, failure to progress through the anticipated develop­
mental stages of limb alignment, asymmetry, pain, or deformity iso­
lated to the tibia may be signs of pathologic genu varum warranting 
further evaluation; the primary differential diagnosis of pathologic 
genu varum consists of tibia vara (Blount disease), rickets and other 
metabolic bone diseases, and asymmetric growth following infection 
or trauma or in the setting of benign or malignant neoplasms. Ini­
tial evaluation typically consists of anteroposterior radiographs of 
the bilateral lower extremities with the knees moved into a forward-­
facing position so as to minimize confounding from external rotation 
at the knees. Tibia vara is characterized by pathologic disruption of 
growth at the medial aspect of the proximal tibial physis and may be 
described as infantile (presentation prior to age 4 years) or adolescent 
(presentation in later childhood or adolescence); infantile tibia vara 
is more often bilateral, whereas adolescent disease may be either uni­
lateral or bilateral. In addition to bowing, gait observation may reveal 
varus thrust, which consists of sudden lateral movement of the knee 
during the stance phase. In tibia vara, the anteroposterior radiographs 
of the bilateral lower extremities with the knees in a forward-­facing 
position reveal medial beaking and downward sloping of the proxi­
mal tibia metaphysis. Patients with rickets often have short stature 
and may additionally present with pathologic fractures. Bone density 
may be decreased on radiography, though bone mineralization may 
appear normal as well; patients with severe rickets may have widened 
and cupped physes and flared metaphyses. Initial serum evaluation 
of rickets consists of determining levels of parathyroid hormone, 
calcium, and inorganic phosphorus concentrations; investigations 
for underlying liver or kidney disease should be undertaken as well. 
Congenital pseudoarthrosis of the tibia and congenital pseudoar­
throsis of the fibula are very rare forms of angular deformity of the 
lower extremity that result in bowing; pathogenesis is believed to be 
related to abnormalities of the periosteum. Both are associated with 
neurofibromatosis type 1. Affected patients typically present not with 
a pseudoarthrosis, but with anterolateral bowing of the lower leg that 
is noted at birth. Rather, pseudoarthroses typically arise following 
pathologic fracture and subsequent nonunion of the affected bone, 
usually after the patient begins ambulating. Despite aggressive sur­
gical management, nonunion and progressive deformity may persist.
Physiologic or developmental genu valgum (“knock knees”) is 
seen between 3 and 4 years of age. This is true genu valgum, an angular 
phenomenon, and is not the result of torsional variations. This condi­
tion resolves with growth and normal adult knee alignment is obtained 
between 5 and 8 years of age. Newborns have a mean varus alignment 
of 15 degrees that corrects to neutral alignment between 18 and 20 
months of age. The maximum valgus of 12 degrees occurs by 3–4 years 
of age. By 7 years of age, the valgus alignment corrects to that of a nor­
mal adult (8 degrees in females, 7 degrees in males). Overall, 95% of 
cases of developmental genu valgum resolve with growth, even in chil­
dren with more pronounced findings. In some children, the condition 
may not completely correct until adolescence or may resolve incom­
pletely; in the absence of known trauma or underlying metabolic dis­
ease, short stature, or infection, persistent bilaterally symmetric genu 
valgum is considered idiopathic. The differential diagnosis of nonidio­
pathic, bilaterally symmetric genu valgum includes rickets, other met­
abolic diseases such as mucopolysaccharidosis, and skeletal dysplasias. 
Pathologic genu valgum may also be unilateral; unilateral valgus defor­
mity is often secondary to previous trauma, such as a nondisplaced 
tibial metaphyseal fracture. Other etiologies include post-­traumatic or 
postinfectious partial physeal arrest; conditions associated with benign 
neoplasms, such as Ollier disease (multiple enchondromas) or multiple 
hereditary exostosis; or asymmetric manifestations of metabolic dis­
ease or skeletal dysplasia.
TABLE 45.2  Common Causes of In-­Toeing 
and Out-­Toeing
In-­Toeing
Out-­Toeing
Medial (internal) femoral torsion
Lateral (external) femoral torsion
Medial (internal) tibial torsion
Lateral (external) tibial torsion
Metatarsus adductus
Calcaneovalgus feet
Talipes equinovarus (clubfoot)
Hypermobile pes planus
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
844
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
Torsional Profile
The torsional or rotational profile aids in the diagnosis and sequential 
follow-­up of children with torsional variations (Fig. 45.2).
Foot progression angle. The foot progression angle, which is the 
direction of the long axis of the foot with regard to the direction in which 
the child is walking (Fig. 45.3), should be measured. Inward rotation is 
given a negative value and outward rotation a positive value. A normal 
foot progression angle in children and adolescents is 10 degrees (range, 
−3 to +20 degrees). The foot progression angle defines whether the gait 
is normal or if there is an in-­toeing or out-­toeing gait. Recording the 
angle allows for comparison during follow-­up evaluations.
Hip rotation. Measuring hip rotation allows for indirect assessment 
of femoral version. Typically, the femoral neck creates an anteriorly 
directed angle with the transcondylar axis of the distal femur (Fig. 45.4). 
This anterior angulation is known as femoral anteversion and decreases 
from approximately 40 degrees at birth to 15 degrees by maturity. 
Increased internal rotation at the hip indicates excessive anteversion; 
increased external rotation at the hip indicates retroversion. Hip rotation 
is assessed with the child in the prone position with the knees together 
and flexed 90 degrees (Fig. 45.5). In this position, the hip is in neutral 
alignment. Rotating the lower leg outwardly produces internal rotation 
of the hip; rotating the lower leg inwardly produces external rotation 
of the hip. A newborn hip in extension typically rotates externally 
80–90 degrees and has a limited internal rotation of 0–10 degrees. By 1 
20
10
0
1
3
5
7
9
11
Age (years)
B
A
13 15-19
30’s 50’s
2 SD
Foot Progression Angle
FPA
Medial Rotation
MR girls
Lateral Rotation
LR
Thigh–Foot Angle
TFA
Medial Rotation
MR boys
2 SD
70+
–10
80
FPA
R
Rotational Profile
L
MR
LR
TFA
Foot
60
40
20
1
3
5
7
9
11
Age (yr)
C
13 15-19
30’s 50’s
2 SD
2 SD
70+
0
80
60
40
20
1
3
5
7
9
11
Age (yr)
D
13 15-19
30’s 50’s
2 SD
2 SD
70+
0
40
20
0
–20
–40
1
3
5
7
9
11
Age (yr)
F
13 15-19
30’s 50’s
2 SD
2 SD
70+
100
80
60
40
20
1
3
5
7
9
11
Age (yr)
E
13 15-19
30’s 50’s
2 SD
2 SD
70+
Fig. 45.2  The torsional or rotational profile from birth to maturity. A, The rotational profile is assessed and 
tracked at each visit. B, Mean foot progression angle (FPA) by age. C, Mean femoral medial rotation in girls 
by age. D, Mean femoral medial rotation in boys by age. E, Mean lateral rotation by age. F, Mean thigh-­foot 
angle. All graphs include 2 standard deviations from the mean. (From Morrissey RT, Weinstein SL, eds. Lovell 
and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1990.)
Fig. 45.3  Foot progression angle. The long axis of the foot is compared 
with the direction in which the child is walking. If the foot points out­
ward, the angle is positive. If the foot points inward, the angle is neg­
ative.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
845
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
year of age, there is approximately 30–40 degrees of internal rotation. 
Hip rotation should be bilaterally symmetric. Asymmetric rotation is 
often indicative of a hip disorder and necessitates radiographs of the 
pelvis. The mean hip internal rotation in extension in older males is 
50 degrees (range, 25–65 degrees), and that in females is 40 degrees 
(range, 15–60 degrees).
Thigh-­foot angle. With the child in the prone position and the 
knees approximated and flexed 90 degrees, the long axis of the foot 
in the neutral or simulated weight-­bearing position can be compared 
with the long axis of the thigh (Fig. 45.6). Inward rotation is given 
a negative value, whereas outward rotation is given a positive value. 
Inward rotation is indicative of internal tibial torsion, and outward 
rotation represents external tibial torsion. This angle must be accurately 
measured and recorded. The mean thigh-­foot angle is 10 degrees 
(range, −5 to +30 degrees) from middle childhood through adult life. 
Infants have a mean thigh-­foot angle of −5 degrees (range, −35 to +40 
degrees) as a consequence of the normal in utero position.
Foot shape. With the child again in the prone position, the shape of 
the foot is easily appreciated, allowing for assessment of children with 
metatarsus adductus or a calcaneovalgus foot. The mobility of the ankle 
and subtalar joint can also be evaluated with the child in this position.
In-­Toed Gait
Internal femoral torsion. Increased femoral anteversion, also 
referred to as internal femoral torsion, is the most common cause of 
in-­toeing in children 3 years of age or older and occurs twice as often in 
girls as in boys. Many affected children have generalized ligamentous 
laxity. Increased femoral anteversion is secondary to excessive or 
persistent infantile femoral anteversion and is almost always a benign 
condition that typically improves by 8–9 years of age. Severe anteversion 
or lack of progressive improvement by late childhood warrants referral 
to an orthopedic surgeon.
Children with increased anteversion often run with a circumduc­
tion gait secondary to internal rotation at the hip, and the parents may 
30°
Longitudinal axis
of femoral neck
Coronal plane of
femur as expressed
by transcondylar line
Angle of
anteversion
Fig. 45.4  Femoral version. Typically, the femoral neck creates an anteri­
orly directed angle with the transcondylar axis of the distal femur.
Fig. 45.5  Hip rotation in extension. The child is in the prone position, with the knees flexed 90 degrees. The 
lower leg is vertically oriented. This is considered the neutral position. Outward rotation (A) of the leg pro­
duces internal hip rotation; inward rotation (B) produces external hip rotation.
Fig. 45.6  Thigh-­foot angle. With the child in the prone position and the knees flexed and approximated, the 
long axis of the foot can be compared with the long axis of the thigh. The long axis of the foot bisects the 
heel and the third or middle toe. A, External tibial torsion produces excessive outward rotation. B, Normal 
alignment is characterized by slight external rotation. C, Internal tibial torsion produces inward rotation.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
846
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
note that the child W-­sits rather than sitting cross-­legged (Fig. 45.7). 
W-­sitting is of no concern developmentally, is the position of comfort 
for the child, and does not cause or worsen in-­toeing in children. Chil­
dren will typically stop sitting in this position after sufficient improve­
ment in the internal torsion allows them to sit cross-­legged more 
comfortably. Common femoral anteversion should not be viewed as a 
reason for decreased athletic ability or as a risk factor for arthritis, bun­
ions, or back pain. A relationship with patellofemoral pain has been 
reported in some populations.
Physical examination. Gait assessment reveals that the entire lower 
extremity is inwardly rotated during ambulation. Foot progression angle 
is typically negative and a circumduction-­type gait may be noted. Hip 
rotation assessment characteristically reveals 80–90 degrees of internal 
rotation in the prone, extended position (Fig. 45.8). External rotation, 
as a consequence, is limited to 0–10 degrees. Features of generalized 
ligamentous laxity are often present, including elbow, wrist, and finger 
hyperextension; thumb hyperabduction; knee hyperextension; and 
hypermobile pes planus.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographic evaluation of internal 
femoral torsion is not necessary. Anteroposterior radiographs of the 
pelvis are typically normal, but there may be the appearance of a 
relatively vertical femoral neck angle, or coxa valga. If coxa valga is 
noted, repeating the radiograph with the hips in 15 degrees of abduction 
and 30–40 degrees internal rotation will typically reveal a normal 
femoral neck angle. In more severe cases, MRI, CT, or ultrasonography 
of the proximal and distal femur can be used to accurately measure the 
degree of torsion.
Internal tibial torsion. Internal tibial torsion is the most common 
cause of in-­toeing in children younger than 2 years and is secondary to 
normal in utero positioning. This condition is commonly seen during 
the second year of life and may be associated with metatarsus adductus. 
Significant improvement usually does not occur until the child begins 
to pull up to standing and walk independently. Spontaneous resolution 
with normal growth and development can be anticipated typically by 
4–5 years of age. Rarely, persistent or severe internal tibial torsion in an 
older child or adolescent may necessitate surgical derotation.
Physical examination. The degree of tibial torsion can be assessed 
by measuring the thigh-­foot angle (see Fig. 45.6). The measurements 
should be recorded on each visit to the physician to document 
improvement.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographic evaluation of internal 
tibial torsion is not necessary. MRI and CT can assess the degree of 
tibial torsion, but these are rarely required.
Metatarsus adductus. Metatarsus adductus is the most common 
congenital foot deformity, occurs equally in boys and girls, and is 
bilateral in approximately 50% of cases. Metatarsus adductus has 
hereditary tendencies and is more common in first-­born children, 
most likely as a result of increased molding from the more rigid 
primigravida uterus and abdominal wall. Up to 10% of children 
with metatarsus adductus have developmental dysplasia of the hip. 
Significant metatarsus adductus persisting or manifesting after 4 years 
of age may require surgical correction.
Physical examination. In metatarsus adductus, the forefoot is 
adducted and occasionally supinated, while the hindfoot and midfoot 
are normal. A visual line bisecting the heel should normally pass 
through the second toe or second web space; in metatarsus adductus 
this line intersects the forefoot more laterally. The lateral border of 
the foot is convex, the base of the fifth metatarsal is prominent, and 
the medial border of the foot is concave. There is usually an increased 
interval between the first and second toes, with the great toe being 
held in an inwardly rotated or varus position (Fig. 45.9). Ankle range 
of motion is normal. Forefoot mobility, assessed by stabilizing the 
Fig. 45.7  W-­sitting is the position of comfort for children with increased 
femoral anteversion.
Fig. 45.8  A, Clinical photograph of a 5-­year-­old girl demonstrating 
internal femoral torsion. She has approximately 80 degrees of internal 
rotation bilaterally. B, External rotation is limited to approximately 15 
degrees, for a total arc of rotation of 90–95 degrees.
Fig. 45.9  Foot shape. In the same position as for measurement of the 
thigh-­foot angle, the shape of the foot can also be evaluated. In this 
illustration, the left foot has normal alignment and the right foot demon­
strates metatarsus adductus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
847
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
hindfoot and midfoot in a neutral position and applying pressure 
over the first metatarsal head with the opposite hand, can vary from 
flexible to rigid. Most cases of flexible metatarsus adductus resolve by 
several months of age; rigid deformities may require casting or surgical 
correction. In the walking child with an uncorrected or partially 
corrected metatarsus adductus, there is an in-­toed gait, abnormal shoe 
wear, and possible discomfort from shoe pressure.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographs of the foot are not 
necessary for routine, flexible metatarsus adductus. When obtained, 
anteroposterior and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs demonstrate 
adduction of the metatarsals at the tarsometatarsal joint and an 
increased intermetatarsal angle between the first and second 
metatarsals. The midfoot and hindfoot are usually normal. Radiographs 
should be obtained if the deformity is rigid or if there are any suspected 
abnormalities of the midfoot or hindfoot.
Talipes equinovarus (clubfoot). Talipes equinovarus is classified as 
either positional or congenital. Positional clubfoot is a normal foot 
that has been held in the deformed position in utero, and which is 
flexible on examination in the newborn nursery. Congenital clubfoot 
represents a deformity not only of the foot but also of the entire lower 
leg and is categorized as either idiopathic or syndromic. There is a 
spectrum of severity, but clubfoot associated with neuromuscular 
diagnoses or syndromes is typically rigid and more difficult to treat. 
Clubfoot is also extremely common in patients with spinal dysraphism, 
arthrogryposis, and chromosomal syndromes such as trisomy 18 and 
chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
Congenital clubfoot, when diagnosed and treated in infancy with 
serial casting, typically does not produce a gait disturbance. However, 
foot contact pressures may remain high, indicating that gait is not 
entirely normal following correction. In-­toeing secondary to persistent 
internal tibial torsion is common after appropriate treatment. A mild 
lower extremity length discrepancy of up to 2 cm may be seen in ado­
lescence but usually does not produce a limp or necessitate treatment. 
On occasion, residual muscle imbalance may cause the child to walk on 
the lateral border of the foot, leading to discomfort and an antalgic gait 
that may require further surgical correction.
Out-­Toed Gait
External femoral torsion. Femoral retroversion, also referred to 
as external femoral torsion, is a rare disorder that usually causes no 
significant functional impairment unless it is associated with a slipped 
capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). If the femoral retroversion is caused 
by SCFE, the slip is treated surgically. On occasion, persistent femoral 
retroversion following surgical treatment of SCFE can lead to ongoing 
functional impairment, such as a severe out-­toed gait and difficulty 
in approximating the knees in the sitting position, and may require 
further surgical correction.
Physical examination. Children with external femoral torsion 
demonstrate limited internal rotation and excessive external rotation 
when the hip is examined in the extended position. The hip externally 
rotates 70–90 degrees, whereas internal rotation is only 0–20 degrees. 
Idiopathic external femoral torsion is usually bilateral. If the deformity 
is unilateral, especially in an obese older child or a young adolescent, 
SCFE must be considered and evaluated.
Radiographic evaluation. Anteroposterior and frog-­leg lateral 
radiographs of the pelvis are necessary for any child or adolescent 
presenting with external femoral torsion, especially one who is 
obese, has atraumatic or referred anterior thigh or knee pain, or has 
unilateral deformity. Approximately 20% of children with SCFE have 
simultaneous bilateral involvement. The typical changes of SCFE 
include widening of the physis and an abnormal relationship between 
the capital femoral epiphysis (CFE) and the femoral neck. The femoral 
head appears to be slipped inferiorly and posteriorly, but in actuality, 
the femoral neck is displaced anteriorly and superiorly.
External tibial torsion. External tibial torsion is common and is 
secondary to a normal variation of in utero positioning in which the 
plantar surface of the foot is against the wall of the uterus, forcing it into 
a hyperdorsiflexed, everted position. This rotated alignment produces 
external tibial torsion and typically an associated calcaneovalgus foot 
(Fig. 45.10). When this alignment of the lower leg and foot is combined 
with the exaggerated external rotation of the normal newborn hip, the 
lower extremity appears to have severe out-­toeing and external rotation. 
This condition follows the same clinical course as internal tibial torsion 
in that significant improvement does not occur during the first year 
of life. With the onset of independent ambulation, spontaneous 
improvement begins and is typically complete by 2–3 years of age.
Physical examination. External tibial torsion results in a positive 
thigh-­foot angle of 30–50 degrees.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographic assessment for external 
tibial torsion is not necessary.
Calcaneovalgus foot. The calcaneovalgus foot is common in 
newborns and is secondary to in utero positioning (see Fig. 45.10). 
The foot is hyperdorsiflexed with varying degrees of eversion 
and forefoot abduction. External tibial torsion is usually present. 
Calcaneovalgus foot is typically unilateral but may occasionally be 
bilateral. The hyperdorsiflexion of the foot usually resolves during the 
first 3–6 months of life. On occasion, resistant feet may require passive 
stretching, taping, or casting into a plantarflexed position. Usually, by 
the time the child begins to pull to standing and walk independently, 
the calcaneovalgus condition has resolved. The external tibial torsion, 
however, persists and follows the same natural history as internal tibial 
torsion.
Physical examination. The involved extremity demonstrates out-­
toeing, the dorsum of the foot can easily be brought into contact with 
the anterior aspect of the lower leg, and the forefoot has an abducted 
appearance. The increased dorsiflexion should not be confused with the 
increased joint mobility of premature infants. The deformity is flexible, 
and plantarflexion of the ankle is normal or almost normal. External 
tibial torsion of 30–50 degrees is a common associated finding.
Calcaneovalgus foot must be distinguished from the following 
three conditions: (1) congenital vertical talus, (2) posteromedial 
bowing of the tibia, and (3) neuromuscular abnormalities, such as 
Fig. 45.10  A, A clinical photograph of a 2-­month-­old girl demonstrating 
excessive external tibial torsion. This reverse or anterior thigh-­foot angle 
shows approximately 50 degrees of external tibial torsion. B, A calca­
neovalgus foot with forefoot abduction and increased hindfoot valgus 
in the same infant. There is also hyperdorsiflexibility of the foot in the 
ankle.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
848
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
paralysis of the gastrocnemius muscle. Differentiation is typically 
based on physical examination findings, though radiographs may 
be required. Congenital vertical talus results in a rocker-­bottom 
appearance to the foot. The deformity in congenital vertical talus 
is rigid with inability to achieve passive ankle plantarflexion, as 
opposed to the flexible deformity seen with a calcaneovalgus foot. 
In posteromedial bowing of the tibia, the apex of the deformity is in 
the distal tibia, whereas the apex of the deformity in a calcaneovalgus 
foot is located at the ankle.
Radiographic evaluation. Simulated weight-­bearing anteroposterior 
and lateral radiographs with forced plantarflexion of the foot may be 
necessary to differentiate between the calcaneovalgus foot and a congenital 
vertical talus. In a calcaneovalgus foot, the radiographs either are normal 
or reveal an increase in hindfoot valgus. In the congenital vertical talus, 
the hindfoot is in equinus, whereas the midfoot and the forefoot are 
dorsally displaced, producing a rocker-­bottom appearance. The talus is 
also noted to be out of plane with the metatarsals. Anteroposterior and 
lateral radiographs of the tibia and fibula are necessary if there is bowing 
of the lower leg.
Hypermobile pes planus. Hypermobile, flexible, or pronated feet 
are flatfeet, a common cause of concern to parents. Children with 
this deformity are usually asymptomatic and have no limitation of 
activities. An individual may present for concerns of out-­toeing 
because of the overpronation of the midfoot and hindfoot, which 
may allow the forefoot to become abducted. Flexible flatfeet are 
also common in neonates and toddlers as a result of the associated 
laxity in the bone-­ligament complexes of the feet and the abundant 
fat in the area of the medial longitudinal arch. Most children with 
flatfeet improve by 6 years of age. In the older child, flexible flatfeet 
are usually secondary to generalized ligamentous laxity. Most older 
children and adolescents with flexible flatfeet or hypermobile pes 
planus are asymptomatic, though feet that are symptomatic with 
vigorous physical activity usually respond readily to the use of 
commercially available medial longitudinal arch supports. When 
the child has excessive heel valgus, pronation, or abnormal shoe 
wear that is unresponsive to a commercially or custom-­made arch 
support, the use of a custom orthosis may be beneficial. Surgery is 
rarely indicated.
Physical examination. In the non–weight-­bearing position in the 
older child with a flexible flatfoot, the normal medial longitudinal arch 
is visible, but in the weight-­bearing position, the foot becomes pronated 
with varying degrees of pes planus and hindfoot valgus. Instead of 
bearing weight over the lateral column of the foot, the weight is shifted 
medially, producing pronation. Subtalar motion is examined with the 
ankle in the neutral position and should be normal or slightly increased. 
Loss of subtalar motion may indicate a rigid flatfoot. Common causes 
of rigid flatfeet include neuromuscular disorders, tarsal coalition, and 
Achilles tendon contracture, which may present with external foot 
progression due to associated limited subtalar motion. Rigid flatfeet 
may also be a familial trait. Other joints, especially the elbows, hands, 
and knees, usually demonstrate generalized ligamentous laxity in 
patients with flexible flatfeet. Children with flexible flatfeet should be 
evaluated for external tibial torsion.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographs of asymptomatic flexible 
flatfeet are usually not indicated. Standing anteroposterior oblique 
and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs are obtained, if necessary. 
The most common indication is the presence of pain (Table 45.3). 
Anteroposterior radiographs reveal an increase in the talocalcaneal 
angle (>25 degrees) caused by the excessive hindfoot valgus. The lateral 
view shows distortion of the normal straight-­line relationship between 
the long axis of the talus and the first metatarsal and flattening of the 
normal medial longitudinal arch.
Equinus Gait (Toe-­Walking)
Toe-­walking can be a normal finding in children up to 3 years of age. 
Persistent toe-­walking thereafter or acquired toe-­walking at a later age 
is considered abnormal and necessitates careful evaluation. The dif­
ferential diagnosis for persistent or acquired toe-­walking includes the 
following:
	1.	 Neuromuscular disorders, such as cerebral palsy, Duchenne mus­
cular dystrophy, or spinal cord abnormality resulting from a teth­
ered spinal cord or diastematomyelia
	2.	 Congenital Achilles tendon contracture (idiopathic toe-­walking)
	3.	 Habitual toe-­walking
	4.	 Lower extremity length discrepancy
The differentiation of toe-­walking can usually be determined from 
the history and the physical examination. The examiner should estab­
lish the time at onset, the amount of time a child spends walking on his 
or her toes, whether it can be voluntarily corrected, and whether there 
has been improvement or worsening over time.
Neuromuscular Disorders
The neuromuscular disorder most likely to produce an equinus gait, 
either unilateral or bilateral, is cerebral palsy. The most common 
TABLE 45.3  Differential Diagnosis of Foot 
Pain According to Age
Age Group
Diagnostic Considerations
0–6 yr
Poorly fitting shoes
Fracture
Puncture wound
Foreign body
Osteomyelitis
Cellulitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Hair tourniquet
Dactylitis
Leukemia
6–12 yr
Poorly fitting shoes
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (enthesopathy)
Puncture wound
Sever disease (calcaneal apophysitis)
Accessory tarsal navicular bone
Hypermobile flatfoot
Tarsal coalition
Oncologic (Ewing sarcoma, leukemia)
12–18 yr
Poorly fitting shoes
Stress fracture
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Foreign body
Ingrown toenail
Metatarsalgia
Plantar fasciitis
Achilles tendinopathy
Accessory ossicles (navicular, os trigonum)
Tarsal coalition
Avascular necrosis of metatarsal (Freiberg infarction) or 
navicular (Kohler disease) bones
Plantar warts
From Marcdante K, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 
7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
849
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
type of cerebral palsy is spastic diplegia, a disorder in which the lower 
extremities are more involved than the upper extremities. Prematurity 
is a common risk factor for spastic diplegia. It can be symmetric or 
asymmetric, with one side being slightly more involved than the other. 
Spastic diplegia tends to produce a bilateral equinus gait. Spastic hemi­
plegia, in which only one side is involved, is usually caused by birth 
trauma (asphyxia), perinatal stroke, or underlying congenital malfor­
mation and results in unilateral toe-­walking.
Acquired or late-­onset toe-­walking is usually a result of a devel­
oping neuromuscular disorder, including hereditary and acquired 
peripheral neuropathies. Weakness and sensory changes in periph­
eral neuropathies tend to progress in a distal-­to-­proximal fashion (see 
Chapter 35). Dystrophinopathies, such as Duchenne muscular dystro­
phy, tend to produce proximal weakness first, though can also result in 
toe-­walking (see Chapter 35). As fat and fibrous tissues replace muscle, 
equinus and other contractures occur. There is usually a history of pro­
gressive clumsiness and frequent episodes of falling. The diagnosis of 
muscular dystrophy is usually made when the child is between 3 and 
5 years of age. The diagnosis is suggested by markedly elevated cre­
atine kinase (CK) levels and is confirmed by muscle biopsy or genetic 
testing. In a spastic equinus gait without contracture, physical therapy 
and orthoses (daytime, nighttime, or both) may be beneficial. If a con­
tracture has developed, serial casting may be performed in young chil­
dren, whereas surgical lengthening of the Achilles is usually necessary 
in older children.
Physical examination. The examination of a child with toe-­walking 
secondary to cerebral palsy reveals either an Achilles contracture 
or a spastic equinus gait without contracture, as well as abnormal 
neurologic findings. These findings include increased muscle tone, 
spasticity, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, and pathologic reflexes, 
such as a positive Babinski sign. Hamstring tightness, in addition to 
ankle equinus, may be a subtle sign of underlying mild cerebral palsy.
Children with peripheral neuropathy tend to have mixed motor and 
sensory findings that develop in a distal-­to-­proximal fashion. Children 
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy typically demonstrate pseudo­
hypertrophy of the calves in addition to equinus contracture. They 
have proximal muscle weakness first, and then generalized weakness, 
and perhaps decreased or absent upper extremity and patellar tendon 
reflexes, depending on the stage of progression. Ankle reflexes are usu­
ally preserved.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographic evaluation of a child 
with toe-­walking is rarely necessary. MRI of the brain and spine 
is occasionally required during the evaluation of a possible 
neuromuscular disorder.
Other testing. Dynamic electromyography, nerve conduction 
studies, and gait analysis studies can be helpful in distinguishing among 
toe-­walking caused by mild cerebral palsy, neuropathy, myopathy, or a 
congenital Achilles contracture. Serum muscle enzyme (CK, aspartate 
aminotransferase, and aldolase) levels and muscle biopsies are required 
for children with suspected Duchenne muscular dystrophy or other 
myopathies. Targeted gene panels or genomic sequencing, as well as 
functional and genetic mitochondrial studies, can assist in establishing 
the etiology of neuromuscular disorders.
Lower Extremity Length Discrepancy
Lower extremity length discrepancy is a common cause for a unilat­
eral equinus gait in older children and adolescents. Usually, mild dis­
crepancies of less than 2 cm can be adequately compensated for during 
normal gait with minimal, if any, limping or toe-­walking. Greater dis­
crepancies may result in toe-­walking and may require surgical correc­
tion. The differential diagnosis of a lower extremity length discrepancy 
is extensive (Table 45.4).
Physical examination. Examination of a child with a lower 
extremity length discrepancy shows shortness of the involved 
extremity; this can be measured by placing blocks of various heights 
beneath the foot until the pelvis is level. The range of motion of the 
TABLE 45.4  Causes of Lower Extremity 
Length Discrepancy
Shortening
Lengthening
Congenital
Congenital
Hemiatrophy*
Skeletal dysplasias
Short femur
Proximal focal femoral deficiency*
Fibular, tibial hemimelia
Developmental dysplasia of the hip*
Hemihypertrophy*
Local vascular malformation
Tumor: Developmental
Tumor: Developmental
Neurofibromatosis
Multiple exostosis
Enchondromatosis (Ollier disease)
Osteochondromatosis
Fibrous dysplasia (Albright syndrome)
Punctate epiphyseal dysplasia
Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica 
(Trevor disease)
Radiation therapy before skeletal 
maturity (physeal arrest)*
Resection of benign or malignant 
neoplasm
Neurofibromatosis
Soft tissue hemangioma
Arteriovenous malformation
Hemihypertrophy with Wilms 
tumor
Aneurysm
Infection
Infection: Inflammation
Osteomyelitis*
Septic arthritis
Tuberculosis
Metaphyseal osteomyelitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Hemarthrosis (hemophilia)
Trauma
Trauma
Physeal injury*
Failed joint replacement
Osteotomy, atrophic nonunion
Overlapping, malposition of fracture 
fragments*
Burns
Metaphyseal, diaphyseal fracture
Diaphyseal operations (bone 
grafts, osteosynthesis, 
periosteal stripping)
Neuromuscular Disease
Poliomyelitis
Cerebral palsy*
Myelomeningocele
Peripheral neuropathy
Focal cerebral lesions (hemiplegia)
Other
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease*
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Russell Silver syndrome
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome
*Common.
Modified from Moseley C. Leg-­length discrepancy. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 1986;33(6):1385; Tachdjian M. Pediatric Orthopedics. 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1990; reprinted and modified from 
Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1992:1702.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
850
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
joints of the involved extremity, especially of the hips, must be assessed. 
The neurologic examination is also important. Children with subtle 
neurologic disorders, such as cerebral palsy, may also have a very mild 
lower extremity length discrepancy that contributes to an equinus gait.
Radiographic evaluation. Children with a lower extremity length 
discrepancy require radiographic assessment. Lower extremity lengths 
are typically measured radiographically by one of several methods, 
including the teleoroentgenogram, orthoroentgenogram, scanogram, 
and low-­dose biplanar radiography. Digital teleoroentgenograms and 
orthoroentgenograms are currently preferred, but low-­dose biplanar 
radiography is becoming more commonplace. The teleoroentgenogram 
is a single radiographic exposure of both lower extremities in the standing 
position. Limb length can be measured using tools within the digital 
radiography software. Advantages include single exposure and detection 
of angular deformities. The orthoroentgenogram consists of overlapping 
exposures centered on the hips, knees, and ankles on a long cassette. Like 
the teleoroentgenogram, an advantage of this type of radiograph is that it 
shows associated angular deformities. A scanogram consists of three strip 
exposures of the hips, knees, and ankles on a standard-­sized cassette with 
a radiographic ruler adjacent to the extremity. This is an accurate method 
of assessing limb length but does not demonstrate angular deformities. 
Low-­dose biplanar radiography is a three-­dimensional imaging method 
with superior accuracy and decreased radiation exposure but requires 
skilled interpretation to correctly align the limbs for computer-­assisted 
measurement. CT-­based measurement is accurate but is not commonly 
used secondary to the amount of radiation exposure required. 
Radiographs of the left hand and wrist for bone age are also obtained to 
assess when skeletal maturity will occur.
Habitual Toe-­Walking
Habitual toe-­walking occurs in a child who is walking on their toes 
voluntarily. Toe-­walking occurs relatively commonly in young walkers. 
History and physical examination findings are entirely normal; this is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. The treatment of habitual toe-­walking is obser­
vation. As the child becomes heavier and the central nervous system 
matures, the toe-­walking should resolve.
Physical examination. The findings in the examination of the child 
with habitual toe-­walking are normal. The ankle has a full range of motion, 
and there is no evidence of an underlying neuromuscular disorder.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographic evaluation is not indicated.
Idiopathic Toe-­Walking
Idiopathic toe-­walking is defined as the presence of an equinus gait in 
a child over 2 years of age with or without Achilles tendon contracture 
in the absence of other etiologies, including habitual toe-­walking. The 
birth and developmental history and the neurologic findings are usu­
ally normal. However, mild developmental delays, especially in speech 
and in fine and gross motor skills, are seen in some children, as are 
possible deficits in sensory processing. A family history of Achilles 
contracture, male predominance, and learning disabilities are com­
mon findings. Muscle biopsy samples have shown an increase in type 
I fibers, suggesting a neuropathic process. Serial casting typically leads 
to resolution, though, in some children, surgical lengthening of the 
Achilles tendon may be required.
Physical examination. If present, Achilles tendon contracture 
leads to an inability to dorsiflex the foot to the neutral or plantigrade 
position. Examination of the ankle shows a 10-­ to 15-­degree fixed 
equinus contracture. The assessment of an Achilles contracture should 
be performed with the hindfoot held in a slightly supinated position 
to bring the calcaneus beneath the talus. If this position is not used, 
dorsiflexion of the foot produces hindfoot valgus with the appearance 
of more dorsiflexion than is actually present. Dorsiflexion should 
be assessed with knee in flexion and extension to evaluate tension 
in the gastrocnemius. In congenital Achilles contractures, no other 
musculoskeletal or neurologic abnormalities are present.
Radiographic evaluation. Radiographs are not necessary unless an 
associated abnormality within the foot is thought to be present. Should 
this occur, anteroposterior and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs of 
the foot should be obtained.
Limping
Limping is categorized as either painful (antalgic gait) or nonpain­
ful (Trendelenburg gait), depending on the length of the stance phase. 
With an antalgic gait, the stance phase is shortened because the child 
decreases the time spent on the painful extremity. In a Trendelenburg 
gait (Fig. 45.11), which indicates underlying proximal muscle weakness 
(e.g., muscular dystrophy) or hip instability (e.g., developmental hip 
dysplasia), the stance phase is the same for the involved and uninvolved 
sides, but the child leans over the involved side to shift the center of grav­
ity for balance. If the disorder is bilateral, it produces a waddling gait. 
The differential diagnosis is extensive (Table 45.5). Most causes involve 
the lower extremity, but spinal disorders can also produce limping or dif­
ficulty walking, especially if there is spinal cord, nerve root, or peripheral 
nerve involvement, as can intraabdominal pathology, such as appendici­
tis or torsion of the testes or ovaries. Painful (antalgic) gaits are predom­
inantly caused by trauma, infection, neoplasia, and rheumatic disorders. 
Trendelenburg gaits are generally caused by congenital, developmental, 
or neuromuscular disorders. Thus, antalgic gaits typically result from 
acute disorders, whereas Trendelenburg gaits usually result from chronic 
disorders. The type of gait, the presence or absence of systemic symp­
toms, and the anatomic location of the symptoms can usually be deter­
mined from the history and physical examination findings.
Antalgic Gait
Congenital origin: Tarsal coalition. Tarsal coalition, also called 
peroneal spastic flatfoot, is characterized by a painful, rigid valgus 
Fig. 45.11  Trendelenburg gait. With functional weakness of the hip 
abductor muscles, it is difficult to support the body’s weight on the 
affected side; the pelvis tilts down and away from the weak side, and 
the patient leans toward the affected side.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
851
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
TABLE 45.5  Differential Diagnosis of Limping in Children
Age Group
Diagnostic Considerations
Early walker: 
1–3 yr of age
Painful Limp
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis
Iliopsoas abscess
Testicular torsion
Ovarian torsion
Transient synovitis
Occult trauma (“toddler’s fracture”)
Nonaccidental trauma
Intervertebral diskitis
Malignancy
Painless Limp
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Neuromuscular disorder
Cerebral palsy
Stroke
Lower extremity length inequality
Child: 3–10 yr 
of age
Painful Limp
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Iliopsoas abscess
Testicular torsion
Ovarian torsion
Transient synovitis
Trauma
Discoid meniscus
Rheumatic disorders
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Intervertebral diskitis
Malignancy
Age Group
Diagnostic Considerations
Child: 3–10 yr of 
age—cont’d
Painless Limp
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder
Polio
Cerebral palsy
Stroke
Muscular dystrophy (Duchenne)
Adolescent: 
11 yr of age to 
maturity
Painful Limp
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Iliopsoas abscess
Testicular torsion
Ovarian torsion
Trauma
Discoid meniscus
Rheumatic disorder
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis: acute; unstable
Osgood-­Schlatter disease
Chondrolysis
Malignancy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
Painless Limp
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis: chronic; stable
Developmental dysplasia of the hip: acetabular dysplasia
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder
Nerve entrapment syndrome
Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies
Stroke
From Marcdante K, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015.
or pronation deformity of the midfoot and hindfoot, in association 
with peroneal muscle spasm but without true spasticity. This condition 
represents a congenital fusion or failure of segmentation between two 
or more tarsal bones. However, any condition that alters the normal 
motion of the subtalar joint may produce the clinical appearance 
of a tarsal coalition. Thus, congenital malformation, inflammatory 
disorders, infection, neoplasms, and trauma involving the subtalar 
joint can manifest with pain, limping, or other symptoms similar to 
those of a tarsal coalition.
The most common coalitions occur between the calcaneus and 
navicular (calcaneonavicular) and the middle or medial facet between 
the talus and calcaneus (talocalcaneal). Coalitions can be fibrous, carti­
laginous, or osseous. The incidence of tarsal coalition is approximately 
1%, and it appears to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. 
Approximately 60% of calcaneonavicular and 50% of talocalcaneal coa­
litions are bilateral. Casting and orthotics may provide some relief of 
symptoms, though surgical repair is typically required.
Physical examination. The onset of symptoms is insidious and 
usually occurs during late childhood or early adolescence. Although 
mild limitation of subtalar motion and a valgus or pronated hindfoot 
may have been present since early childhood, the onset of symptoms 
varies with the age at which the fibrous or cartilaginous coalition begins 
to ossify and further decrease motion. The talonavicular coalition 
ossifies between the ages of 3 and 5 years, the calcaneonavicular 
coalition between 8 and 12 years, and the middle facet talocalcaneal 
coalition between 12 and 16 years of age. The pain is typically felt 
laterally in the hindfoot and radiates proximally along the lateral 
malleolus and distal fibula into the peroneal muscle region. Symptoms 
are usually aggravated by sports or other vigorous activities and are 
relieved by rest. The foot is pronated in both the weight-­bearing and 
the non–weight-­bearing positions. Subtalar joint motion is diminished 
or absent, and attempts at motion produce pain.
Radiographic evaluation. The diagnosis of tarsal coalition 
is made radiographically. The initial radiographs should include 
anteroposterior, oblique, and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs of 
the foot. The oblique view is helpful for identifying changes at the 
calcaneonavicular joint. Beaking of the anterior aspect of the talus in 
the lateral view suggests a talocalcaneal coalition. Axial views of the 
hindfoot can be useful in the diagnosis of a middle facet talocalcaneal 
coalition. CT has traditionally been the diagnostic procedure of choice 
for coalition, but MRI is useful for detecting fibrous coalitions. Either 
CT or MRI should be performed on all coalitions for surgical planning 
because more than one coalition can be present.
Developmental origin
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (LCPD) is 
idiopathic avascular necrosis of the CFE and its associated complications 
in an immature, growing child. This disorder is caused by an interruption 
of the blood supply to the CFE, occurs predominantly in males (up to 5:1), 
and is bilateral in approximately 20% of affected children. Children with 
LCPD have delayed skeletal or bone age, disproportionate growth, and 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
852
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
mildly short stature. Secondary osteonecrosis is seen in patients with sickle 
cell anemia. LCPD is a local, self-­healing disorder. Prevention of femoral 
head deformity and secondary degenerative osteoarthritis in adulthood is 
the only indication for treatment.
Physical examination. The symptomatic onset of LCPD typically 
occurs between 2 and 12 years of age, at a mean age of 7 years. Younger 
age at presentation is a positive prognostic indicator. Most of these 
children present to care with a limp and mild or intermittent pain in the 
anterior thigh or knee, such that this condition is often referred to as a 
“painless limp.” Pertinent early physical findings include antalgic gait; 
muscle spasm with mild restriction of hip motion, especially abduction 
and internal rotation; proximal thigh atrophy; and mild short stature.
Radiographic evaluation. The diagnosis is typically made from 
anteroposterior and frog-­leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis (Fig. 
45.12). The radiographic characteristics can be divided into five 
distinct stages, depending on the interval from the onset of symptoms: 
(1) cessation of CFE growth, (2) subchondral fracture, (3) resorption 
or fragmentation, (4) reossification, and (5) healed, or residual. The 
symptoms are usually most pronounced during the phase of the 
subchondral fracture and fragmentation. A child with LCPD has the 
potential for collapse and extrusion of the femoral head, which results 
in a permanent deformity. If plain radiographs do not demonstrate 
LCPD in suspected cases, a bone scan or MRI is helpful.
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. SCFE is the most common 
adolescent hip disorder. It generally occurs in obese adolescents with 
delayed skeletal maturation, or in tall and thin adolescents who have 
had a recent growth spurt. SCFE can also occur as a complication of an 
underlying endocrine disorder, such as hypothyroidism and pituitary 
disorders. When SCFE occurs before puberty, a hormonal abnormality 
or systemic disorder should be suspected. The histopathologic features 
of SCFE indicate that mechanical factors are the ultimate cause of 
slippage. The initial abnormality is most likely secondary to endocrine 
changes during early adolescence. Obesity produces high shear forces 
across a weakened and obliquely oriented CFE, resulting in slippage. 
Surgical stabilization is required.
Physical examination. The physical findings depend on the degree 
of slippage and the classification. The disorder is classified as either 
stable or unstable. In an unstable or acute SCFE, the CFE is separated 
from the femoral neck. This is extremely painful, and the adolescent is 
unable to stand or bear weight. In a stable or chronic SCFE, the most 
common type, the CFE and femoral neck are in continuity, and the 
slippage is occurring slowly by plastic deformation. The adolescent has 
an antalgic, out-­toed gait. The hip range of motion demonstrates a lack 
of internal rotation and an increase in external rotation; as the hip is 
flexed, it becomes progressively more externally rotated. Limitation of 
flexion and abduction in extension may also be present as a result of the 
deformity of the proximal femur.
Radiographic evaluation. The diagnosis of SCFE is confirmed 
radiographically. Anteroposterior and frog-­leg lateral radiographs of 
the pelvis must be obtained (Fig. 45.13). Both hips should be visualized 
on each radiograph for simultaneous comparison. The earliest sign 
of SCFE is widening of the physeal plate without slippage, which is 
considered a pre-­slip condition. If slippage occurs, the CFE remains 
in the acetabulum, whereas the femoral neck rotates anteriorly and 
superiorly, resulting in varus orientation and retroversion of the 
femoral head and neck. The severity of slippage can be classified by 
the degree of displacement of the CFE on the femoral neck. Hip pain 
and limping following surgical correction of SCFE can be related to 
chondrolysis, rapidly progressive destruction of the articular cartilage 
of the hip. Chondrolysis can also occur following infection of the hip 
or may be idiopathic.
Trauma
Sprains, strains, and contusions. Sprains are ligamentous injuries, 
whereas strains are musculotendinous injuries. Contusions are the 
result of a direct injury and involve the skin and the subcutaneous 
tissues as well as underlying muscle.
Sprains are divided into three grades:
Grade I: mild with only slight stretching of the ligament
Grade II: a moderate injury with partial tearing of the ligament but 
normal stability
Grade III: a severe injury with ligamentous disruption and instability
Sprains, strains, and contusions of the lower extremities are among 
the most common injuries that produce limping. There is usually a his­
tory of trauma, and the location is readily apparent because of soft tis­
sue swelling, ecchymosis, and pain. Most of these injuries occur during 
athletic activities, but they can also be the result of falls or other minor 
injuries. In the absence of an associated physeal injury or other frac­
ture, treatment is typically bracing and/or brief immobilization with a 
gradual return to activity.
Physical examination. In sprains, the physical examination 
typically reveals that the involved ligament is tender to direct palpation. 
There may be soft tissue swelling as well as ecchymoses. The range of 
motion of the involved joint is typically decreased because of pain. On 
occasion, a mild joint effusion or hemarthrosis may be present.
Strains involve the muscles, and there is usually tenderness to pal­
pation, soft tissue swelling, and pain with joint motion as a result of 
stretching of the involved muscle. A palpable defect within the muscle 
Fig. 45.12  A, An anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis demonstrating 
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (LCPD) of the right hip. The capital femoral 
epiphysis (CFE) is collapsing, and there is mild widening of the medial 
joint space. The left CFE is normal. B, A frog-­leg lateral radiograph of the 
pelvis demonstrating limited hip abduction caused by LCPD.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
853
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
is uncommon except in the most severe injuries. These injuries usually 
limit the excursion of the muscle and its associated joints.
Radiographic evaluation. In children who sustain severe sprains, 
strains, or contusions evidenced by limping, swelling, or deformity, 
anteroposterior and lateral radiographs should at least be obtained. A 
word of caution regarding sprains is necessary: In children, ligaments 
are usually stronger than the adjacent physes. Therefore, a physeal 
injury known as a Salter-­Harris fracture may be present and may 
have nearly the same clinical features as a sprain (Fig. 45.14 and Table 
45.6). Even with negative radiographs a subtle physeal injury may be 
present. Bony tenderness over the physis is a distinguishing physical 
exam finding of a Salter-­Harris fracture.
Occult fractures. Occult fractures of the tibia are a relatively 
common cause of limping or refusal to bear weight in very young 
children. They can also occur in the femur and fibula. These fractures 
can be the result of very innocuous trauma, such as tripping while 
walking, stepping on a toy, or falling from a height. Frequently, the 
injury may not have been observed, and the child cannot convey to the 
parents what happened, confounding diagnosis.
The most common occult fracture in early childhood is the “toddler’s 
fracture” of the tibia. This is a spiral fracture of the distal third of the tibia 
without an associated fibula fracture. It most commonly occurs in chil­
dren younger than 4 years of age. Occult tibia fractures can also occur in 
the metaphyseal regions, usually distally, but only rarely in the diaphysis. 
Diaphyseal fractures are more commonly the result of child abuse.
Physical examination. Physical findings in a child with an occult 
fracture can be subtle. There is usually minimal, if any, soft tissue 
swelling. There is mild tenderness and perhaps increased warmth on 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 45.13  A, An anteroposterior radiograph of the right hip in a 13-­year-­old obese boy who had been limping 
and complaining of anterior thigh and knee pain for approximately 2 months. There is a mild stable or chronic 
slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). Klein line, a line drawn along the superior aspect of the femoral neck, 
does not intersect the lateral portion of the capital femoral epiphysis (CFE) and thereby indicates slippage. 
Also, the physis is wide and irregular. B, A frog-­leg lateral radiograph clearly demonstrates the slippage of 
the CFE with respect to the femoral neck. C, An anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis demonstrates an 
asymptomatic mild stable or chronic left SCFE. It is always important to order radiographs of the pelvis rather 
than individual views of the right or left hip. D, A frog-­leg lateral radiograph confirms bilateral SCFE.
I
II
III
IV
V
Fig. 45.14  Salter-­Harris classification of physeal fractures, types I–V.
TABLE 45.6  Salter-­Harris Classification
Salter-­Harris Type
Characteristics
I
Separation through the physis, usually through the 
zones of hypertrophic and degenerating cartilage 
cell columns
II
Fracture through a portion of the physis but 
extending through the metaphysis
III
Fracture through a portion of the physis extending 
through the epiphysis and into the joint
IV
Fracture across the metaphysis, physis, and epiphysis
V
Crush injury to the physis
From Baldwin KD, Shah AS, Wells L, et al. Common fractures. In: 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Table 703-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
854
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
palpation over the fracture. On occasion, the increased warmth may 
be indicative of osteomyelitis. Stress examination of the involved bone 
increases discomfort.
Radiographic evaluation. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs 
should be obtained (Fig. 45.15). The characteristic finding of a toddler’s 
fracture is a faint oblique fracture line crossing the distal third of the tibia. 
More proximal fractures, or tibial spiral fractures in nonambulatory 
children, are concerning for nonaccidental trauma and require further 
directed evaluation or consultation. On occasion, oblique radiographs 
may be helpful in revealing the fracture. Frequently, initial radiographs 
reveal no abnormality. If these initial plain radiographs are normal, the 
child has no systemic symptoms, and an occult fracture of the tibia 
is suspected, simple immobilization in a long-­leg cast is indicated. 
Another set of radiographs in 1–2 weeks usually reveals the fracture 
and evidence of healing. If, however, the child has systemic symptoms, 
such as low-­grade fever, and if osteomyelitis is thought to be present, 
evaluation including a CBC with differential, blood culture, CRP level, 
ESR, and an MRI should be obtained.
Neoplasia. Benign and malignant neoplastic lesions that involve 
bone, cartilage, or soft tissue of the spine, pelvis, and lower extremities 
can manifest as a mass, can cause pain, and can produce an antalgic 
gait. Leukemia or metastatic neuroblastoma of the bone marrow 
may produce deep bone pain and limp without objective findings 
of swelling or tenderness on physical examination. Night pain is a 
common characteristic of both benign and malignant primary or 
metastatic tumors. Osseous lesions can usually be diagnosed on plain 
radiographs, whereas for those of cartilage or soft tissue, MRI or other 
special imaging studies may be required for diagnosis.
Benign neoplasms. The most common benign lesions that 
produce limping include a unicameral (simple) bone cyst and osteoid 
osteoma (Table 45.7). Other less common benign lesions that can 
produce pain and limping include eosinophilic granuloma of the bone, 
osteochondroma, and chondroblastoma. Chondroblastoma typically 
involves the epiphysis.
In unicameral bone cysts, the symptoms are usually caused by a 
nondisplaced pathologic fracture. On occasion, a displaced fracture 
may occur. The most common location for a unicameral bone cyst 
is the proximal humerus, followed by the proximal femur. These 
can occur in any of the bones of the lower extremities, including 
the foot.
Osteoid osteomas have a highly vascularized nidus, which incites 
an intense, painful, inflammatory reaction that produces sclerosis 
of the surrounding bone. The pain is typically worse at night and is 
characteristically relieved by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) and aspirin, though this medication is not recommended in 
children due to risk of Reye syndrome.
Radiographic evaluation. Most benign neoplasms are visible 
on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the symptomatic area. 
Characteristics of benign lesions include well-­circumscribed lesions 
without periosteal new bone formation or soft tissue mass. If a lesion 
is suspected but not visible on plain radiographs, such as may occur in 
an osteoid osteoma, a technetium bone scan may be helpful. Further 
evaluation can be achieved with CT or MRI. Diagnosis is further aided 
by surgical biopsy, which may also allow for surgical treatment.
Malignant neoplasms. Leukemia is the most common childhood 
malignancy and is frequently accompanied by musculoskeletal 
complaints, such as limping, fever, bone pain, pallor, bruising, 
and weight loss (Fig. 45.16). Common malignancies involving the 
musculoskeletal system include osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, 
and intraspinal tumors, such as astrocytomas (Table 45.8). Intraspinal 
tumors tend to produce neurologic symptoms, such as muscle 
weakness, as the cause of limping. The other lesions may produce a 
mass, bone weakness, and possible pathologic fractures. Weight loss, 
fever, and pain are common associated complaints.
Physical examination. A careful musculoskeletal and neurologic 
examination is necessary for any child with a suspected neoplasm. 
In many cases, a mass, either in the involved bone or in adjacent soft 
tissues, may be palpable. These are typically tender and warm. These 
lesions are frequently adjacent to joints and may result in decreased 
range of motion. Neurologic evaluation may show evidence of muscle 
weakness or abnormal reflexes, suggestive of spinal cord or peripheral 
nerve involvement.
Radiographic evaluation. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs 
of the involved area usually reveal the presence of a neoplasm. 
Characteristics of a malignant osseous lesion include bone destruction, 
permeative or infiltrative appearance, periosteal new bone formation 
(Codman triangle), and an associated soft tissue mass (see Table 45.8). 
Radiographic abnormalities associated with acute leukemia include 
diffuse osteopenia, metaphyseal bands, periosteal new bone formation, 
geographic lytic lesions, sclerosis, and permeative distraction. 
Additional studies, such as a bone scan or MRI, may be helpful in 
localizing the lesion.
Infection and inflammation
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis. Bone and joint infections 
are common causes of limping in toddlers and children. When the 
infection is confined to the synovium of a joint, the condition is 
Fig. 45.15  A, An anteroposterior radiograph of the lower leg of a 
2-­year-­old girl who had been limping on the left lower leg for approxi­
mately 1 week. There was no history of trauma. No obvious abnormality 
is visible in this view. B, A lateral radiograph showing a faint oblique frac­
ture line (arrows). This is characteristic of the “toddler’s fracture.” There 
is already early subperiosteal new bone or callus formation posteriorly.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
855
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
termed septic arthritis. If the primary focus of the infection is within 
bone, even if the joint is secondarily involved, the condition is termed 
osteomyelitis. Bacterial pathogens are the most frequent cause of 
osteoarticular infections in children, with Staphylococcus aureus being 
the most frequent etiology. In neonates, group B streptococcus and 
gram-­negative bacteria are common. Beyond the neonatal period, 
Kingella kingae is the second most frequent cause in children under 5 
years of age. In older children and adolescents with puncture wounds 
of the foot, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, S. aureus, and streptococci are 
commonly implicated. Lyme arthritis should be considered in endemic 
areas. Sexually active adolescents may develop septic arthritis as a 
result of gonococcal infections. Patients with sickle cell anemia may 
develop osteomyelitis as a result of Salmonella species or pneumococcal 
infection.
Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis most commonly involves the 
femoral neck, the distal femoral metaphysis, and the proximal tibial 
metaphysis. Acute septic arthritis usually involves the hip, knee, or 
ankle. Children with these infections may be acutely ill; many may just 
have fever, limp, and localized pain. Treatment is with surgical drainage 
as needed and with prolonged antibacterials.
Subacute osteomyelitis, which has very distinct manifestations, 
occurs most commonly in the knee (Fig. 45.17). These children are 
usually afebrile and have night pain; hematologic studies yield normal 
findings. Radiographs show sclerotic metaphyseal lesions that occa­
sionally cross the growth plate into the epiphysis. Culture specimens 
are positive only occasionally and typically show S. aureus.
Recurrent episodes of noninfectious, multifocal bone inflammation 
are the hallmark of chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis, sometimes 
referred to as chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis, which can 
produce a painful limp with involvement of the hip or lower extremi­
ties. The disorder is autoinflammatory in nature, begins in late child­
hood or early adolescence, and affects females more frequently than 
males. Chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis may mimic acute hematog­
enous osteomyelitis at onset, particularly if there is initially one focus 
of bone inflammation. Inflammatory markers and imaging findings are 
similar to those in acute hematogenous osteomyelitis, although micro­
biologic studies are universally negative. The diagnosis becomes more 
apparent as multiple episodes of bone inflammation, affecting distinct 
anatomic sites, develop over time.
Recurrent episodes of nonbacterial osteomyelitis are also a feature of 
SAPHO syndrome (synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis), 
a rare disorder of immune disregulation, and Majeed syndrome, an 
autosomal recessive disorder (LPIN2 gene) characterized by recurrent 
episodes of nonbacterial osteomyelitis, congenital dyserythropoietic 
TABLE 45.7  Benign Bone Tumors and Cysts
Disease
Characteristics
Radiographic Findings
Treatment
Prognosis
Osteochondroma 
(osteocartilaginous exostosis)
Common; distal metaphysis of the 
femur, proximal humerus, proximal 
tibia; painless, hard, nontender mass
Bony outgrowth; sessile or 
pedunculated
Excision, if symptomatic
Excellent; malignant 
transformation rare
Multiple hereditary 
osteochondromas
Osteochondroma of long bones; bone 
growth disturbances
As above
As above
Multiple lesions develop until 
skeletal maturity, after which 
no new lesions develop; 
malignant transformation rare
Osteoid osteoma
Pain relieved by aspirin; femur and 
tibia; found predominantly in boys
Dense sclerosis surrounds 
small radiolucent nidus <1 cm
As above
Excellent
Osteoblastoma (giant osteoid 
osteoma)
As above, but more destructive
Osteolytic component; size 
>1 cm
As above
Excellent
Enchondroma
Tubular bones of hands and feet; 
pathologic fractures, swollen bone; 
Ollier disease if multiple lesions 
are present
Radiolucent diaphyseal or 
metaphyseal lesion; may 
calcify
Excision or curettage
Excellent; malignant 
transformation rare
Nonossifying fibroma
Silent; rare pathologic fracture; late 
childhood, adolescence
Incidental radiographic 
finding; thin sclerotic border, 
radiolucent lesion
None or curettage with 
fractures
Excellent; heals spontaneously
Eosinophilic granuloma
Age 5–10 yr; skull, jaw, long bones; 
pathologic fracture; pain
Small, radiolucent without 
reactive bone; punched-­out 
lytic lesion
Biopsy, excision rare; 
irradiation
Excellent; may heal 
spontaneously
Brodie abscess
Insidious local pain; limp; suspected 
as malignancy
Circumscribed metaphyseal 
osteomyelitis; lytic lesions 
with sclerotic rim
Biopsy; antibiotics
Excellent
Unicameral bone cyst (simple 
bone cyst)
Metaphysis of a long bone (femur, 
humerus); pain, pathologic fracture
Cyst in medullary canal, 
expands cortex; fluid-­filled 
unilocular or multilocular 
cavity
Curettage; steroid 
injection into lesion
Excellent; some heal 
spontaneously
Aneurysmal bone cyst
As above; contains blood, fibrous 
tissue
Expands beyond metaphyseal 
cartilage
Curettage, bone graft
Excellent
Modified from Marcdante K, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
856
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
anemia, joint inflammation, and neutrophilic dermatosis, as well as 
systemic inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease 
or psoriasis. Deficiency of interleukin-­1 receptor antagonist (DIRA) 
presents in infancy with sterile osteitis and periostitis plus a pustular 
rash, often without fever. Multifocal osteolytic lesions are present in 
long bones, the clavicle, and ribs. This is an autosomal recessive disor­
der (IL1RN gene).
Physical examination. Children with acute bone and joint 
infections may exhibit bacteremia and signs of infection, including 
elevations in temperature, white blood cell count, ESR, and CRP level. 
Some infants present only with pseudoparalysis of the affected limb. 
When the hip joint is involved, the child holds the hip in a position of 
flexion, abduction, and external rotation. This position unwinds the 
hip capsule and allows it to hold the greatest volume of intracapsular 
fluid. This initially decreases pressure, but as the pus continues to 
accumulate, even this position fails to relieve symptoms. A hip joint 
effusion is usually not palpable, but there may be overlying soft tissue 
swelling and tenderness.
Infections of peripheral joints, such as the knee, are more easily 
diagnosed. There is typically a joint effusion and perhaps soft tissue 
swelling, erythema, and increased warmth over the metaphysis if 
osteomyelitis is present. Osteomyelitis typically manifests with point 
tenderness over the involved site; with continued bone destruction and 
rupture of pus into the periosteum, tenderness becomes more diffuse. 
Infections can also occur about the ankle and foot. Infection of the 
foot is less common except as a sequela to puncture wounds through 
a tennis shoe, producing the classic P. aeruginosa or staphylococcal 
osteomyelitis-­osteochondritis.
Radiographic evaluation. Plain radiographs are not helpful in the 
first 7–10 days of acute hematogenous osteomyelitis, inasmuch as they 
are usually normal, but must be obtained in the assessment of the child. 
After 10–14 days of active infection, bone destruction or periosteal 
bone elevation is seen. MRI, or alternately bone scan, is both sensitive 
and specific for osteomyelitis and septic arthritis, even early in the 
course of the disease (Figs. 45.18 and 45.19).
If a septic process about the hip is suspected, an ultrasound study 
may be beneficial in demonstrating an effusion. If this is present, 
arthrocentesis or hip aspiration is necessary. The synovial fluid analysis 
should include a cell count, measurement of protein and glucose lev­
els, Gram stain, cultures, and sensitivity studies. K. kingae polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) testing should be performed, particularly in 
younger children. Infections of peripheral joints, such as the knee, are 
more readily diagnosed by arthrocentesis.
If an osteomyelitis of a metaphyseal region is suspected based on 
imaging studies, the subperiosteal space and bone may be directly aspi­
rated with a large-­bore needle. The material should be sent for bacte­
rial culture, as well as for K. kingae nucleic acid amplification testing 
in younger children, and Lyme testing in endemic areas. Any positive 
bacterial culture results should have antibacterial susceptibility testing 
performed so as to guide therapy. Despite these interventions, micro­
biologic studies may frequently fail to yield results.
Spondylodiskitis. Diskitis, inflammation of the vertebral disk 
that is often related to infection, may produce refusal to walk and/or 
limping via disk or bone inflammation, referred pain, or intraspinal 
extension (see Chapter 46) (Fig. 45.20).
Rheumatic causes. Juvenile inflammatory arthritides affecting the 
hip, knee, or ankle joints can result in an antalgic gait (see Chapter 
44). Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura) can 
also produce arthritis or enthesitis that can result in a painful limp 
(see Chapter 44). Autoimmune and autoinflammatory disorders 
characterized by bone inflammation were discussed previously.
Transient synovitis. Transient synovitis of the hip (also known as 
toxic synovitis) is the most common cause of limping in children. It 
can occur in all age groups, but the mean age at onset is 6 years; most 
patients are between 3 and 8 years of age. Hip transient synovitis is 
characterized by acute onset of monoarthritic hip pain, an associated 
limp, and mild restriction of hip motion, especially abduction and 
internal rotation. The pain is felt in the groin, anterior thigh, or knee. 
Any child with atraumatic anterior thigh or knee pain must be carefully 
evaluated for hip disease because these are the sites of referred pain. 
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis must be excluded.
The cause of this disorder remains uncertain. Suspected causes include 
active or recent systemic viral infection, trauma, and allergic hypersensi­
tivity. Approximately 70% of affected children have had a nonspecific viral 
upper respiratory infection 7–14 days before the onset of symptoms.
A
B
Fig. 45.16  A, Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph of a 2-­year-­old girl who 
had been limping for 4 months. There is an extensive destructive lesion 
on the right proximal femur. B, A large soft tissue mass is demonstrated 
on MRI scan. The preoperative diagnosis was Ewing sarcoma, but at 
biopsy the diagnosis was acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
857
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
Physical examination. The patient is usually ambulatory, and the 
hip is not held in a position of flexion, abduction, or external rotation 
unless a significant effusion has developed. The child walks with an 
antalgic gait on the involved side and is usually afebrile. Laboratory 
findings are usually within normal limits, but occasionally a minimal 
elevation of the white blood cell count or ESR may be seen.
Radiographic evaluation. Anteroposterior and frog-­leg lateral 
radiographs of the pelvis are obtained to rule out the presence of 
other lesions. The radiographs in transient synovitis are normal. On 
occasion, ultrasonography of the hip may be useful in demonstrating a 
small joint effusion. MRI is helpful in identifying septic joints or other 
causes of pain when there is doubt regarding the diagnosis. Bone scans 
as well may be helpful in difficult or unusual cases; in synovitis, these 
results are always normal. When the diagnosis of transient synovitis 
is in doubt, hip arthrocentesis may be necessary. The fluid that is 
aspirated shows a low white blood cell count (typically well under 
25,000 cells/μL), and the cultures are negative.
Trendelenburg Gait
Developmental anomalies
Developmental dysplasia of the hip. Developmental dysplasia of 
the hip (DDH) refers to the condition of increased laxity of the hip 
joint and encompasses the following classifications: (1) acetabular 
dysplasia, (2) hip subluxation, and (3) hip dislocation. Developmental 
dysplasia of the hip is considered either typical, in which no underlying 
genetic or syndromic association is identified, or teratologic. Early 
identification and management improve the functional outcome of 
surgical repairs. If not identified and appropriately treated, DDH 
TABLE 45.8  Comparison of Osteogenic and Ewing Sarcoma
Osteogenic Sarcoma
Ewing Sarcoma
Age
Adolescence
Childhood and adolescence
Ancestry
All
Predominantly non-­Hispanic White
Sex (M:F ratio)
1.5:1
1.5:1
Cell
Spindle cell, osteoid
Nonosseous, small round cell
Predisposing risk factors
Retinoblastoma
Radiotherapy
Alkylating agents
None
Site
Metaphysis, epiphysis; distal femur > proximal tibia > 
proximal humerus
Diaphysis, medullary cavity, cortical bone, soft tissue; femur > pelvis > tibia 
> humerus
Presentation
Local pain
Pain, fever, increased ESR, FUO, weight loss
Roentgenogram
Lytic, sclerotic
Mottled, lytic
Sunburst pattern
Onion-­skin pattern
Differential diagnosis
Ewing sarcoma, osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, lymphoma, neuroblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
Metastasis
Lung, bones
Skip lesions in the same bone
Lung, bones
Treatment
Surgery, chemotherapy
Surgery, radiotherapy
Limb salvage if tumor is resectable and the patient is 
near adult height
Chemotherapy
Outcome
50–60% survival
60% survival without metastasis; 5–15% with metastasis, primary site 
dependent
Poor prognosis
Onset at age <10 yr, large tumor size (>15 cm), symptoms 
<2 mo, metastasis
Pelvis, soft tissue tumor, increased LDH, metastasis, increased circulating 
PMNs, decreased circulating lymphocytes
F, female; FUO, fever of unknown origin; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; M, male; PMN, polymorphonuclear neutrophil.
Modified from Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:1312.
Fig. 45.17  A, Anteroposterior radiograph of the distal femur in a 
12-­year-­old girl with limping and nighttime knee pain for 6 months. 
There is a lucent lesion with surrounding sclerosis in the metaphysis. 
The lesion crosses the epiphysis; this is characteristic of a subacute 
osteomyelitis. B, Anteroposterior tomography clearly demonstrates the 
lucent nature of the lesion and its surrounding sclerosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
858
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
will present with limping, toe-­walking, or both. When the problem 
occurs unilaterally, the child walks with a mild Trendelenburg gait or 
demonstrates toe-­walking. With bilateral involvement, the child stands 
with an increased lumbar lordosis and has a waddling gait. There is 
functional impairment resulting from a lack of stability and associated 
muscle weakness, particularly in the hip abductors.
Physical examination. The most common physical finding in 
the older child with a developmentally dysplastic hip is limited hip 
abduction on the involved side. There may be a mild hip flexion 
contracture and apparent shortening of the extremity. The greater 
trochanter lies above a line between the anterior superior iliac spine 
and the ischial tuberosity (Nélaton line). In bilateral dislocations, the 
A
B
Fig. 45.18  A, A frontal radiograph demonstrates a lytic lesion in the distal tibial metaphysis extending into 
the epiphysis (arrows). B, A T1-­weighted fat-­saturated postgadolinium sagittal view demonstrates a thick, 
rim-­enhancing lesion with a small amount of nonenhancing fluid consistent with early abscess formation with 
epiphyseal extension (arrow) and a small cloaca (arrowhead) extending to the tibiotalar joint. (From Kan JH, 
Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Vol 
II. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:1472.)
A
B
Fig. 45.19  Acute osteomyelitis of the distal femur in a 5-­year-­old boy. A, T2-­weighted fat-­saturated axial MRI 
shows a large subperiosteal abscess (arrows) at the posterior aspect of the femur. Increased signal is seen 
within the bone, and there is adjacent soft tissue edema. B, T1-­weighted fat-­saturated postgadolinium sagittal 
MRI shows the longitudinal extent of the subperiosteal abscess with an enhancing wall (arrows). (From Kan 
JH, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. 
Vol II. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:1476.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
859
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
physical findings are more symmetric but there is still limitation of hip 
abduction. Positive Trendelenburg signs are present on the involved 
sides. The normal response to a Trendelenburg test occurs when the 
patient stands on the uninvolved leg and the abductor muscles are able 
to maintain balance by elevating the contralateral pelvis. A positive 
Trendelenburg sign, resulting from weakness, is demonstrated when 
the abductor muscles are unable to maintain pelvic balance and the 
patient compensates by leaning to the affected side (see Fig. 45.11).
Radiographic evaluation. The diagnosis can be made from 
routine anteroposterior and frog-­leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis 
(Fig. 45.21). Specialized studies, such as MRI and CT, are usually not 
necessary. Ultrasound study is not usually necessary in an ambulatory 
child older than 6 months of age because the CFE is ossified.
Lower extremity length discrepancy. Lower extremity length 
discrepancy in older children and adolescents has been discussed 
earlier in this chapter.
Neuromuscular Origin
Cerebral palsy (see Chapter 38). Children with spastic hemiplegia 
or diplegia may have an associated painless limp caused by muscle 
spasticity and concomitant weakness of the antagonist muscles. The 
history should focus on risk factors for cerebral palsy, prematurity, 
and other congenital anomalies external to the central nervous system, 
followed by a physical examination, with particular attention to the 
neurologic system. The neurologic examination reveals evidence of 
increased muscle tone, spasticity, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, and 
pathologic reflexes, such as Babinski signs.
Nerve 
entrapment 
syndromes 
(mononeuropathies). 
Nerve 
entrapment lower extremity mononeuropathies may produce a 
limp or abnormal gait secondary to pain or muscle weakness (Table 
45.9). Peroneal nerve entrapment at the level of the head of the fibula 
is the most common entrapment mononeuropathy. The common 
fibular (peroneal) nerve wraps around the head of the fibular bone 
and connects to the periosteum, making it susceptible to trauma or 
external compression (Fig. 45.22). Workers who squat (farmers, carpet 
layers), habitual leg crossing, neuromas, Baker cysts, and ankle sprains 
(traction injury) are risk factors. Pain, foot drop, and paresthesia are 
common manifestations.
A
C
T 12
L 1
T 12
L 1
D
B
E
Fig. 45.20  A 15-­month-­old girl with an abnormal gait and concern for an intraspinal mass had diskitis/osteo­
myelitis. Lateral spine radiographs demonstrate narrowing of the T12-­L1 intervertebral disk space (arrow in A). 
An axial bone window from a noncontrast CT scan of the spine demonstrates irregularity to the vertebral end 
plates (arrows in B). A sagittal T2-­weighted image (C), a sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted postcontrast image 
(D), and an axial T1-­weighted postcontrast image (E) of the thoracolumbar junction demonstrate loss of height of 
the T12-­L1 intervertebral disk space with adjacent T2 prolongation of the adjacent end plates (arrows in C), with 
corresponding abnormal enhancement in the same regions (arrows in D), and surrounding masslike soft tissue 
enhancement (arrowheads in E). Note the thickening/elevation and enhancement of the posterior longitudinal 
ligament (arrowheads in D). (From Pollock AN, Henesch SM. Infections of the spine and spinal cord. In: Coley BD, 
ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Vol I. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:465.)
Fig. 45.21  An anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis of an 18-­month-­old 
girl demonstrating a developmental dislocation of the left hip. The 
­acetabulum is severely dysplastic, there is delayed ossification in the ­capital 
femoral epiphysis compared to the normal right hip, and the femoral head is 
displaced laterally and superiorly.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 45.9  Lower Limb Mononeuropathies
Condition
Etiology
Symptoms
Testing
Results
Femoral neuropathy
Trauma, retroperitoneal 
hematoma caused by 
anticoagulation, cardiac 
catheterizations 
Weak quadriceps muscle, 
weakness of knee extension, 
absent knee jerk, groin pain, 
and decreased sensation over 
medial and anterior thigh and 
lower leg in the saphenous 
nerve distribution
Motor nerve conduction to 
quadriceps
Saphenous sensory study
EMG of quadriceps as well as 
other L3 and L4 muscles (e.g., the 
adductor muscles); consider an 
EMG screen for radiculopathy
Reduced amplitude or absent 
saphenous nerve response
Reduced CMAP over rectus 
femoris
On EMG, fibrillations in the 
femoral nerve–innervated 
muscles
Lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve 
entrapment at 
thigh (meralgia 
paresthetica)
Repeated low-­grade 
trauma, obesity, 
pregnancy, tight clothing 
most commonly under 
the lateral end of the 
ilioinguinal ligament
Pure sensory syndrome at the 
lateral thigh including unpleasant 
paresthesias, burning, or a dull 
ache; no motor symptoms
Can be aggravated by prolonged 
standing or walking
Lateral femoral cutaneous study
Femoral evaluation as above should 
be considered
Reduced amplitude in lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerve
This nerve is technically challenging 
to study and side-­to-­side 
comparisons are useful
Peroneal nerve 
entrapment at the 
head of the fibula
Fractures, plaster casts, 
tight stockings, improper 
positioning, excessive 
weight loss, farm work, 
tumors, crossing legs for 
a long time
Foot drop, weakness of eversion, 
numbness on the dorsum of 
the foot, and pain
SPS testing
Motor nerve conduction below and 
across the fibular head recorded 
from EDB or tibialis anterior if EDB 
is atrophied
Exclude L5 radiculopathy by EMG
Test an additional motor and sensory 
nerve in the same leg
Reduced or absent SPS response
Conduction block across the fibular 
head
Conduction velocity reduced in 
fibular head segment by >10 m/
sec compared with leg segment
Fibrillations in muscles innervated 
by fibular (peroneal) nerve
Tibial nerve 
entrapment at tarsal 
tunnel under flexor 
retinaculum of 
medial malleolus
Compression from shoes, 
casting, post-­traumatic 
fibrosis, overuse, 
ganglion cysts
Pain in foot and ankle, wasting 
and weakness in feet, sensory 
impairment at toes and sole of 
the foot
Plantar sensory (mixed) nerve 
conductions
Tibial motor to AH muscle
Another motor and sensory nerve to 
exclude polyneuropathy
EMG of intrinsic foot muscles
Consider EMG screen for 
radiculopathy or sciatic neuropathy
Prolonged or absent latencies or 
low amplitudes in plantar nerves
Prolonged, absent, or small distal 
responses across tarsal tunnel
Fibrillations in the AH or other 
intrinsic foot muscle innervated 
by the tibial nerve
Normal EDB EMG and sural sensory 
nerve
AH, abductor hallucis; CMAP, compound muscle action potential; EDB,extensor digitorum brevis; EMG, electromyography; SPS, superficial fibular 
(peroneal) sensory nerve
Modified from Cifu DX, ed. Braddom’s Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Table 8-­19.
TN
SN
CPN
PL
SPN
DPN
Fig. 45.22  The intimate relationship of the peroneal nerve to the fibular head is 
demonstrated. CPN, common peroneal (fibular) nerve; PL, peroneus longus; SN, sci­
atic nerve; TN, tibial nerve. (From Dong Q, Jacobson JA, Jamadar DA, et al. Entrap­
ment neuropathies in the upper and lower limbs: anatomy and MRI features. Radiol 
Res Pract. 2012;2012:230679, Fig. 17.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
861
CHAPTER 45  Gait Disturbances
Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies is another 
potential mononeuropathy; when the lower extremity is involved, uni­
lateral paresthesias and motor weakness may be present. This is an 
autosomal dominant disorder due to a deletion or pathologic variant 
in the PMP22 gene.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Conditions associated with limp must be divided into acute, painful 
lesions and chronic, painless lesions; on occasion, presentations may 
be mixed. Infection and trauma must be considered emergencies, as 
should conditions that are joint or limb threatening, such as septic 
arthritis and osteomyelitis of the hip, avascular necrosis, or SCFE. In 
addition, signs of spinal cord involvement (see Chapter 46) suggest 
acute processes that warrant immediate attention to prevent perma­
nent paralysis.
Red flags include acute hip pain, fever with limp, neurologic man­
ifestations (including bowel and bladder dysfunction or paresthesias), 
point tenderness, the presence of a mass, night awakening pain, and 
signs of weight loss or hematologic abnormalities such as pallor or 
bruising.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
861.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Badii M, Wade AN, Collins DR, et al. Comparison of lifts versus tape 
measure in determining leg length discrepancy. J Rheumatol. 
2014;41(8):1689–1694.
Escott BG, Ravi B, Weathermon AC, et al. EOS low-­dose radiography: a 
reliable and accurate upright assessment of lower-­limb lengths. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am. 2013;95(23):e1831–e1837.
Sutherland DH, Olshen R, Cooper L, et al. The development of gait. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 1980;62(3):336–353.
Tillotson L, Fieraru G, Briant-­Evans T. Examination of the hip for MRCS 
OSCE. Surgery. 2020;38(2):65–69.
Rotational Abnormalities: Femoral/Tibial Torsion
Birch JG. Blount disease. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2013;21(7):408–418.
Cobanoglu M, Cullu E, Kilimci FS, et al. Rotational deformities of the long 
bones can be corrected with rotationally guided growth during the growth 
phase. Acta Orthop. 2016;87(3):301–305.
Eisenberg KA, Vuillermin CB. Management of congenital pseudoarthrosis 
of the tibia and fibula. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med. 2019;12(3):356–368. 
Published online June 22.
Erkocak OF, Altan E, Altintas M, et al. Lower extremity rotational deformities 
and patellofemoral alignment parameters in patients with anterior knee 
pain. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2016;24:3011–3020.
Kahf H, Kesbeh Y, van Baarsel E, et al. Approach to pediatric rotational limb 
deformities. Orthop Rev (Pavia). 2019;11(3):8118.
Koenig JK, Pring ME, Dwek JR. MR evaluation of femoral neck version and 
tibial torsion. Pediatr Radiol. 2012;42(1):113–115.
Lincoln TL, Suen PW. Common rotational variations in children. J Am Acad 
Orthop Surg. 2003;11(5):312–320.
Mooney 3rd JF. Lower extremity rotational and angular issues in children. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 2014;61(6):1175–1183.
Park H, Park M, Kim SM, et al. Hemiepiphysiodesis for idiopathic genu 
valgum: percutaneous transphyseal screw versus tension-­band plate. J 
Pediatr Orthop. 2018;38(6):325–330.
Ruwe PA, Gage JR, Ozonoff MB, et al. Clinical determination of femoral 
anteversion: a comparison of established techniques. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
1992;74(6):820–830.
Strecker W, Keppler P, Gebhard F, et al. Length and torsion of the lower limb. 
J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1997;79(6):1019–1023.
Rotational Abnormalities: Metatarsus Adductus
Marshall N, Ward E, Williams CM. The identification and appraisal of 
assessment tools used to evaluate metatarsus adductus: a systematic review 
of their measurement properties. J Foot Ankle Res. 2018;11:25.
Williams CM, James AM, Tran T. Metatarsus adductus: development 
of a non-­surgical treatment pathway. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2013;49(9):E428–E433.
Rotational Abnormalities: Talipes Equinovarus (Clubfoot)
Jeans KA, Erdman AL, Karol LA. Plantar pressures after nonoperative 
treatment for clubfoot: intermediate follow-­up at age 5 years. J Pediatr 
Orthop. 2015. [Epub ahead of print.]
Roye BD, Vitale MG, Gelijins AC, et al. Patient-­based outcomes after clubfoot 
surgery. J Pediatr Orthop. 2001;21(1):42–49.
Rotational Abnormalities: Calcaneovalgus Foot
Chan MC, Khan SA. Ilizarov reconstruction of chronic bilateral calcaneovalgus 
deformities. Chin J Traumatol. 2019;22(4):202–206.
Mosca VS. Other conditions of the foot. In: Morrissy RT, Weinstein SL, 
eds. Pediatric Orthopaedics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2001:1178.
Rotational Abnormalities: Hypermobile Pes Planus
Akrali O, Tiner M, Ozaksoy D. Effects of lower extremity rotation on 
prognosis of flexible flatfoot in children. Foot Ankle Int. 2000;21(9):772–
774.
Atik A, Ozyurek S. Flexible flatfoot. North Clin Istanb. 2014;1(1):57–64.
Equinus Gait (Toe-­Walking)/Neuromuscular Disorders
Drefus LC, Hafer JF, Scher DM. Simulated ankle equinus affects knee 
kinematics during gait. HSS J. 2016;12(1):39–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11420-­015-­9474-­4.
Rose J, Martin JG, Torburn L, et al. Electromyographic differentiation 
of diplegic cerebral palsy from idiopathic toe-­walking: involuntary 
coactivation of the quadriceps and gastrocnemius. J Pediatr Orthop. 
1999;19(5):677–682.
Congenital Achilles Tendon Contracture (Idiopathic Toe-­Walking)
Eastwood DM, Menelaus MB, Dickens DR, et al. Idiopathic toe-­walking: does 
treatment alter the natural history? J Pediatr Orthop B. 2000;9(1):47–49.
Haynes KB, Wimberly RL, VanPelt JM, et al. Toe walking: a neurological 
perspective after referral from pediatric orthopaedic surgeons. J Pediatr 
Orthop. 2018;38(3):152–156.
Oetgen ME, Peden S. Idiopathic toe walking. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 
2012;20(5):292–300.
Congenital Achilles Tendon Contracture (Idiopathic Toe-­Walking): 
Lower Extremity Length Discrepancy
Davidson RS. Leg-­length discrepancy. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3613–3617.
Khamis S, Carmeli E. A new concept for measuring leg length discrepancy. J 
Orthop. 2017;14(2):276–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jor.2017.03.008.
Limping (General)
Barkin RM, Barkin SZ, Barkin AZ. The limping child. J Emerg Med. 
2000;18(3):331–339.
Leet AI, Skaggs DL. Evaluation of the acutely limping child. Am Fam Physician. 
2000;61(4):1011–1018.
Tarsal Coalition
Blakemore LC, Cooperman DR, Thompson GH. The rigid flatfoot. Tarsal 
coalitions. Clin Podiatr Med Surg. 2000;17:531–555.
Bohne WH. Tarsal coalition. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2001;13(1):29–35.
Guignand D, Journeau P, Mainard-­Simard L, et al. Child calcaneonavicular 
coalitions: MRI diagnostic value in a 19-­case series. Orthop Traumatol Surg 
Res. 2011;97(1):67–72.
Legg–Calvé–Perthes Disease
Noonan KJ, Price CT, Kupiszewski SJ, et al. Results of femoral varus osteotomy 
in children older than nine years with Perthes’ disease. J Pediatr Orthop. 
2001;21:198–204.
Thompson GH, Price CT, Roy D, et al. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease: current 
concepts. Instr Course Lect. 2002;51:367–384.
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Kennedy JG, Hresko MT, Kasser JR, et al. Osteonecrosis of the femoral 
head associated with slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop. 
2001;21(2):189–193.
Septic Arthritis/Osteomyelitis
Blyth MJ, Kincaid R, Craigen MA, et al. The changing epidemiology of acute 
and subacute haematogenous osteomyelitis in children. J Bone Joint Surg 
Br. 2001;83(1):99–102.
Kim HK, Alman B, Cole WB. A shortened course of parenteral antibiotic 
therapy in the management of acute septic arthritis of the hip. J Pediatr 
Orthop. 2000;20(1):44–47.
Oudjhane K, Ozouz EM. Imaging of osteomyelitis in children. Radiol Clin 
North Am. 2001;39(2):251–266.
Popescu B, Tevanov I, Carp M, et al. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in 
pediatric patients: epidemiology and risk factors of a poor outcome. J Int 
Med Res. 2020;48(4):300060520910889.
Pöyhiä T, Azouz EM. MR imaging evaluation of subacute and chronic bone 
abscesses in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2000;30(11):763–768.
Rasool MN. Primary subacute haematogenous osteomyelitis in children. J 
Bone Joint Surg Br. 2001;83(1):93–98.
Rukavina I. SAPHO syndrome: a review. J Child Orthop. 2015;9(1):19–27.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
861.e2
Thakolkaran N, Shetty AK. Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in children. 
Ochsner J. 2019;19(2):116–122.
Waagner DC. Musculoskeletal infections in adolescents. Adolesc Med. 
2000;11(2):375–400.
Transient Synovitis
Do TT. Transient synovitis as a cause of painful limps in children. Curr Opin 
Pediatr. 2000;12(1):48–51.
McCarthy JJ, Noonan KJ. Toxic synovitis. Skeletal Radiol. 2008;37(11):963–965.
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip
Kim HT, Kim JI, Yoo CI. Diagnosing childhood acetabular dysplasia using the 
lateral margin of the sourcil. J Pediatr Orthop. 2000;20(6):709–717.
Kim HT, Wenger DR. The morphology of residual acetabular deficiency 
in childhood hip dysplasia: three-­dimensional computed tomographic 
analysis. J Pediatr Orthop. 1997;17(5):637–647.
LeBa TB, Carmichael KD, Patton AG. Ultrasound for infants at risk for 
developmental dysplasia of the hip. Orthopedics. 2015;38(8):e722–e726.
Mononeuropathies
Craig A. Entrapment neuropathies of the lower extremity. Pharm Manag PM 
R. 2013;5:S31–S40.
Donovan A, Rosenberg ZS, Cavalcanti CF. MR imaging of entrapment 
neuropathies of the lower extremity. Part 2. The knee, leg, ankle, and foot. 
Radiographics. 2010;30:1001–1019.
Genetic and Rare Disease Information Center (GARD). Hereditary 
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. https://rarediseases.
info.nih.gov/diseases/5221/hereditary-­neuropathy-­with-­liability-­to-­
pressure-­palsies.
Lönnqvist T, Pihko H. Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies 
(HNPP) in a toddler presenting with toe-­walking, pain and stiffness. 
Neuromusc Dis. 2003;13:827–829.
Nerve lesions and entrapment neuropathies of the lower limb orthopaedic 
medicine online. https://www.orthopaedicmedicineonline.com/
downloads/pdf/B9780702031458000934_web.pdf.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
