109
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Dizziness is a common but very nonspecific chief complaint about 
which some elaboration by the patient is generally required for the 
physician to understand exactly what the patient is experiencing. The 
description of the sensation is critical in distinguishing whether it is 
caused by vertigo, disequilibrium, lightheadedness, presyncope, or 
ataxia (Table 7.1). Although the differential diagnoses of these entities 
may overlap, there are conditions that are most specific to the individ­
ual symptom. All the entities are conditions that may affect children at 
any age, but older children are more capable of articulating the abnor­
mal sensation they feel. Children younger than 6 years of age may pres­
ent with nausea, vomiting, ataxia, or syncope.
Syncope is the abrupt transient loss of consciousness and postural 
tone that results from inadequate cerebral perfusion. There is a rapid 
and spontaneous recovery. Syncope is a common phenomenon in chil­
dren and adolescents that is usually benign. Between 30% and 40% of 
all adolescents and young adults have had one episode of syncope.
Presyncope is the feeling that the person is “about to pass out.” 
The patient feels as if they are going to lose consciousness but does 
not. The patient may experience lightheadedness, tunnel vision, 
graying out, and a spectrum of altered consciousness without loss of 
consciousness. Presyncope may or may not reflect the same patho­
physiologic process as true syncope. Presyncope may abort or prog­
ress to syncope. The diagnostic approach to presyncope is the same 
as for syncope.
Dizziness must be considered a change in mental status. It may 
potentially herald serious underlying central nervous system dysfunc­
tion. Dizziness must be better defined to distinguish vertigo from light­
headedness. The principal distinction with vertigo is the description 
of perceived environmental motion: swaying, whirling, or spinning. 
Lightheadedness is frequently associated with psychological stress, 
including anxiety, hyperventilation, depression, and panic attacks. The 
history surrounding episodes of lightheadedness is vital for formulat­
ing the differential diagnosis.
Disequilibrium refers to “balance problems” without vertigo. The 
characteristic historical feature is difficulty ambulating. A rare com­
plaint among children, disequilibrium in the young is most often 
caused by vestibular or cerebellar dysfunction and manifests as ataxia. 
Ataxia is an impairment of coordination, movement, and balance; this 
impairment is generally associated with dysfunction of the cerebellum 
or of the sensory and/or motor pathways connecting to the cerebellum. 
There are transient forms and progressive degenerative conditions that 
produce ataxia.
SYNCOPE
Syncope is a common phenomenon among children and adolescents. 
As many as 40% of children experience a syncopal event between the 
ages of 8 and 18 years. Before age 6 years, syncope is very unusual 
except in the setting of seizure disorders, breath-­holding spells, sys­
temic illnesses, and primary cardiac dysrhythmias. Syncopal episodes 
cause a large number of health care visits and a number of admissions 
to hospitals. Neurocardiogenic syncope (vasovagal) is reported as the 
most common cause followed by cardiogenic syncope. The differential 
diagnosis of syncope is noted in Tables 7.2 and 7.3; distinguishing fea­
tures are noted in Tables 7.4 and 7.5.
The pathophysiologic mechanism of syncope follows a common 
pathway with many inciting stimuli. Cerebral perfusion is compro­
mised by a transient decrease in cardiac output as a result of vasomotor 
changes, decreasing venous return, primary dysrhythmia, or impair­
ment of cerebral vascular tone. Adolescents with syncope subjected 
to a head-­up tilt-­table test reported blurred vision and constriction 
of visual fields before losing consciousness, as well as nausea, pallor, 
sweating, and dizziness, which may be accompanied by hypotension 
(systolic blood pressure <60 mm Hg) or bradycardia (heart rate <40 
beats/min) with an occasional junctional rhythm and occasionally 
asystole. Symptoms are relieved rapidly by returning to the supine posi­
tion. Several situational factors can exacerbate this response, including 
warm temperature, a confined space such as being in a crowded room, 
anxiety or fear, sudden surprise, the sight of blood, and pain such as 
from needle sticks or shots. Other situational factors include urination, 
swallowing, coughing, defecation, and hair combing.
This response is caused by an imbalance of parasympathetic and 
sympathetic tone, which results in peripheral vasodilation, including 
venodilation, but in no augmentation of venous return, because there is 
no accompanying increase in large skeletal muscle activity to augment 
systemic venous return and maintain cardiac filling. Subsequent vagal 
output results in inappropriate bradycardia and further compromises 
cardiac output. The child faints and becomes supine, which restores 
systemic venous return. Awakening is accompanied by increased sym­
pathetic output, which restores the heart rate. The episode tends to be 
brief but may recur if the patient stands too quickly after the event.
In obtaining the history of a syncopal episode, attention should be 
paid to the time of day, time of last meal, activities leading up to the 
event, and associated symptoms such as palpitations, racing heartbeat, 
chest pain, headache, shortness of breath, nausea, diaphoresis, visual 
Syncope and Dizziness
Gary Cohen
7
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
110
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 7.1  Syncope and Dizziness
Vertigo
Presyncope
Disequilibrium
Lightheadedness
Patient complaint
“My head is spinning”
“The room is whirling”
“I feel I might pass out”
“I feel faint”
“I feel like blacking out”
“I feel unsteady”
“My balance is off”
“I feel dizzy”
“I feel disconnected, drugged”
Associated features
Motion, swaying, spinning, 
nystagmus
Syncope: loss of postural tone, brief 
loss of consciousness
Situational
Poor balance
No vertigo or ataxia
Anxiety, hyperventilation, 
paresthesias, respiratory 
alkalosis, panic attacks
Usual cause
Vestibular disorders
Impaired cerebral perfusion
Sensory and/or central neuro­
logic dysfunction
Anxiety and/or depressive 
disorders
Key differential 
diagnoses
Peripheral (labyrinthine-­ 
cochlear)
vs Central neurologic disorder
Neurocardiogenic (vagal)
vs Cardiac syncope
vs Neuropsychiatric syncope
Sensory deficit
vs Central neurologic disease
Anxiety/depression
vs Hyperventilation
vs Medication effects
changes, and hearing changes. Cataplexy may be confused with syn­
cope and is characterized by partial or complete paralysis of skeletal 
muscles resulting in a rapid progression of weakness of the face and 
neck followed by the muscles of the trunk and extremities. The patient 
loses tone and may fall to the floor but remains awake and immobile 
for 1–2 minutes. The patient usually senses an episode and may sit or 
lie down. Cataplexy is seen in patients with narcolepsy characterized 
by daytime sleepiness, hypnagogic hallucinations, or sleep paralysis. 
Triggers of cataplexy include intense positive or negative emotions, such 
as laughing, frustration, fright, surprise, or anger. Details of the synco­
pal event, such as the patient’s position (syncope while supine suggests a 
cardiac arrhythmia) when symptoms appeared, duration of the episode, 
and characterization of the patient’s appearance during and immedi­
ately after the episode, are also important. Almost without exception, by 
the time the patient presents to the office or emergency room, the phys­
ical examination findings are normal. Therefore, the history becomes 
TABLE 7.2  Noncardiac Causes of Syncope
 • Reflex vasodepressor syncope
 • Neurocardiogenic (vasovagal)
 • Emotion (seeing blood)
 • Pain (needle phobia)
 • Miscellaneous situational reflex
 • Tussive
 • Sneeze
 • Exercise, after exercise
 • Swallowing
 • Stretching
 • Defecation
 • Micturition
 • Hair grooming
 • Valsalva (increased intrathoracic pressure)
 • Trumpet playing
 • Weightlifting
 • Breath-­holding spells
 • Systemic illness
 • Hypoglycemia
 • Anemia
 • Infection
 • Hypovolemia, dehydration
 • Adrenal insufficiency
 • Narcolepsy, cataplexy
 • Pulmonary embolism
 • Pheochromocytoma
 • Carcinoid
 • Mastocytosis
 • Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
 • Central nervous system
 • Seizure (atonic, absence, myoclonic-­astatic)
 • Stroke, transient ischemic attack
 • Subarachnoid hemorrhage
 • Myotonic dystrophy
 • Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
 • Friedreich ataxia
 • Basilar artery migraine
 • Dysautonomia
 • Congenital myasthenia gravis
 • Syringomyelia
 • Arnold Chiari malformation
 • Drug effects
 • β-­Blocking agents
 • Vasodilating agents
 • Opiates
 • Sedatives
 • Drugs prolonging QT interval
 • Diuretics
 • Anticonvulsant agents
 • Antihistamines
 • Antidepressant agents
 • Anxiolytic agents
 • Drugs of abuse
 • Insulin, oral hypoglycemic agents
 • Carbon monoxide
 • Other etiologies
 • Carotid sinus sensitivity
 • Subclavian steal
 • Panic attack, anxiety
 • Conversion disorder
From Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:567, Table 87.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
111
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
the most important piece of information for developing the differential 
diagnosis, diagnostic evaluation, and management plan.
NEUROCARDIOGENIC SYNCOPE
There are several causes of neurocardiogenic syncope (vasovagal); 
this is the dominant etiology of syncope in children and adolescents. 
Excessive vagal tone may be primary or secondary to breath holding, 
cough, deglutition syncope, micturition, defecation, carotid sinus pres­
sure sensitivity, and orthostasis. Neurocardiogenic syncope has been 
described in association with hair brushing, swallowing, stretching, 
orthodontic maneuvers, anomalies of the cervical spine, and dental 
trauma. Many of these episodes may be forms of carotid sinus sensi­
tivity. Cough syncope may be related to prolongation of high intratho­
racic pressure that results in decreased venous return and subsequent 
decreased cardiac output.
The prodromal history is very important in evaluating neurocardio­
genic syncope. Syncope without warning, while the patient is supine, or 
during exercise implies a primary cardiac cause and a more serious etiology; 
it is associated with greater morbidity and potential mortality (see Table 7.3).
Neurocardiogenic syncope is a type of autonomic dysfunction that 
is also referred to as vasodepressor syncope, vasovagal syncope, and 
reflex syncope. Presentations include:
	1.	 Primary bradycardia, sometimes to the extreme of sinus arrest or 
even brief asystole, with subsequent hypotension. This is known as 
the cardioinhibitory response.
	2.	 Primary vasodepressor response that is characterized by hypoten­
sion with the heart rate relatively preserved.
	3.	 Mixed response, the most common response that features simulta­
neous hypotension and bradycardia.
The common pathway producing the heart rate and blood pressure 
responses and cerebral hypoperfusion is the Bezold-­Jarisch reflex (Fig. 
7.1). For most children and adolescents, prodromal warning signs 
herald the impending syncopal episode and can, after the first episode, 
allow the child enough time to prevent fainting by sitting with the head 
between the knees or by lying supine.
The physiologic mechanisms of neurocardiogenic syncope have 
been demonstrated with head-­up tilt-­table testing. Tilt-­table test­
ing can be performed with or without invasive blood pressure mon­
itoring. The goal is to reproduce the patient’s symptoms under close 
TABLE 7.3  Causes of Cardiovascular 
Syncope: Potentially Fatal if Unrecognized
	1.	ARRHYTHMIAS
	 A.	 Bradyarrhythmias
	
a.	 Sinus node dysfunction (especially in patients with congenital 
heart defects)
	
b.	 Atrioventricular block (congenital or acquired, Lyme, Fabry, Chagas 
diseases)
	
c.	 Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
	
d.	 Pacemaker malfunction
	 B.	 Tachyarrhythmias
	
a.	 Supraventricular
	
1.	 Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome
	
2.	 Supraventricular tachycardia/atrial arrhythmias (especially in 
patients with congenital heart defects)
	
b.	 Ventricular: ventricular tachycardia/torsades/ventricular fibrillation
	
1.	 Channelopathies
	
a.	 Long QT syndromes
	
b.	 Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
	
c.	 Brugada syndrome
	
d.	 Short QT syndrome
	
2.	 Drug induced
	
3.	 Idiopathic
	
a.	 Ventricular fibrillation
	
b.	 Ventricular tachycardia from outflow tract
	2.	STRUCTURAL/FUNCTIONAL HEART DISEASE
	 A.	 Cardiomyopathy
	
a.	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
	
b.	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
	
c.	 Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
	
d.	 Left ventricular noncompaction
	 B.	 Coronary anomalies
	
a.	 Anomalous origin
	
b.	 Kawasaki disease
	
c.	 COVID-­19
	 C.	 Valvar aortic mitral or pulmonary stenosis
	 D.	 Takotsubo disease
	
E.	 Acute myocarditis
	
F.	 Congenital heart disease (repaired and unrepaired)
	 G.	 Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolus
	 H.	 Aortic dissection (Marfan syndrome)
	
I.	 Cardiac masses (myxoma, rhabdomyoma, thrombus)
	
J.	 Eisenmenger syndrome
From MacNeill E, Vashist S. Approach to syncope and altered mental 
status. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2013;60:1083–1106.
TABLE 7.4  Clinical Features Suggesting 
Specific Causes of Syncope
Diagnostic Consideration
Neurocardiogenic
Symptoms after prolonged motionless standing, sudden unexpected pain, 
fear, or unpleasant sight, sound, or smell
Syncope in a well-­trained athlete after exertion (without heart disease)
Situational syncope during or immediately after micturition, cough, swallow­
ing, or defecation
Syncope with throat or facial pain (glossopharyngeal or trigeminal neuralgia)
Organic Heart Disease (e.g., Coronary Artery Disease, 
Aortic Stenosis, Primary Arrhythmia, Obstructive Hyper­
trophic Cardiomyopathy, Pulmonary Hypertension)
Brief sudden loss of consciousness, no prodrome, history of heart disease
Syncope with exertion, while sitting or supine
History of palpitations
Family history of sudden death
Neurologic
Seizures: longer period of being unconscious and confusion for >5 min after 
regaining consciousness (postictal)
Transient ischemic attack, subclavian steal, basilar migraine: syncope associ­
ated with vertigo, dysarthria, diplopia, arm exercise
Migraine: syncope associated with antecedent headaches
Other Vascular
Carotid sinus: syncope with head rotation or pressure on the carotid sinus (as 
in tumors, shaving, tight collars)
Orthostatic hypotension: syncope immediately on standing
Subclavian steal or aortic dissection: differences in blood pressure or pulse 
between the two arms
Drug Induced
Patient is taking a medication that may lead to long QT syndrome, orthosta­
sis, or bradycardia
Psychiatric Illness
Frequent syncope, somatic complaints, no heart disease
Modified from Kapoor WN. Syncope. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1856–1862.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
112
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
monitoring. Various tilt angles and durations have been described, as 
has the use of isoproterenol as a provocative stimulus.
If the history suggests the diagnosis of neurocardiogenic syncope 
with normal physical examination findings and a normal ECG, treat­
ment may be empirically started.
An ECG is recommended for all patients with syncope. Even when no 
longer symptomatic, the ECG may demonstrate characteristic features 
of Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome, Brugada syndrome, long and 
short QT syndromes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular dysplasia, and heart block.
Guidelines for the treatment of neurocardiogenic syncope are 
found in Table 7.6. The first line of treatment is education and counsel­
ing. Most patients will eventually outgrow neurocardiogenic syncope. 
Patients should maintain hydration and increase dietary salt if there 
are not any contraindications. Patients should be counseled to avoid 
situations that precipitate an event and taught to abort an event by lying 
down. Physical counterpressure maneuvers are helpful when there is a 
prodrome (see Table 7.6).
If the patient fails conservative therapies, pharmacologic treatments 
may be tried. Physicians have used fludrocortisone with increased salt 
intake, β-­adrenergic blockers, and midodrine, which has had promis­
ing results.
ORTHOSTATIC SYNCOPE
Conditions that produce hypotension (orthostatic or supine) fre­
quently produce syncope or presyncope. Cardiac function and struc­
ture are usually normal before the episode; during the predisposing 
illness, cardiac filling pressures are often reduced because of reduced 
venous return from hypovolemia or decreased peripheral vascular 
resistance (peripheral pooling of blood). Dehydration from diarrhea 
and vomiting, hyperthermia, hyperpyrexia, heat exhaustion, polyuria 
(diabetes mellitus), or poor intake from anorexia, together with the 
systemic effects of the primary illness, may produce orthostatic or true 
hypotension and syncope. In these conditions, dizziness, hypotension, 
or syncope occurs rapidly when the patient assumes an upright posi­
tion. Prolonged bed rest, combined with poor fluid intake during an 
illness, may also result in syncope or presyncope when the child arises 
to leave the bed. In most of these situations, fluid administration is suf­
ficient to restore intravascular volume and venous return to alleviate 
postural or supine hypotension.
POSTURAL ORTHOSTATIC TACHYCARDIA 
SYNDROME
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is characterized 
by recurrent (often daily) and long-­standing symptoms of orthostatic 
intolerance, exercise intolerance, lightheadedness, fatigue, sweating, 
TABLE 7.5  Comparison of Clinical Features of Syncope and Seizures
Features
Syncope
Seizures
Relation to posture
Common
No
Time of day
Diurnal
Diurnal or nocturnal
Precipitating factors
Emotion, injury, pain, crowds, heat, exercise, fear, 
dehydration, coughing, micturition
Sleep loss, drug/alcohol withdrawal
Skin color
Pallor
Cyanosis or normal
Diaphoresis
Common
Rare
Aura or premonitory symptoms
Long
Brief
Convulsion
Rare, brief
Common
Other abnormal movements
Minor twitching
Rhythmic jerks
Injury
Rare
Common (with convulsive seizures)
Urinary incontinence
Rare
Common
Tongue biting
No
Can occur with convulsive seizures
Postictal confusion
Rare
Common
Postictal headache
No
Common
Postevent recovery
Seconds to minutes
Often delayed
Focal neurologic signs
No
Occasional
Cardiovascular signs
Common (cardiac syncope)
No
Abnormal findings on EEG
Rare (generalized slowing may occur during the event)
Common
From Bruni J. Episodic impairment of consciousness. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic JM, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical 
Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:9.
SYNCOPE
BP
BP
Venous return
Vasodilation
Vagal efferent
Sympathetic tone
LVEDV
Inotropy
Contractility
Catechols
Reflex
Tilt
HR
BP
Fig. 7.1  Tilt-­table testing: the Bezold-­Jarisch reflex. BP, blood pressure; 
HR, heart rate; LVEDV, left ventricular end-­diastolic volume.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
113
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
headache, chest tightness, brain fog, palpitations, anxiety, tremor, and 
presyncope when upright. The syndrome may be secondary to auto­
nomic dysfunction. Symptoms are improved with lying down. Criteria 
to diagnose POTS include symptoms that have lasted >6 months; heart 
rate that increases by at least 40 beats/min or a maximum rate of 130 
if younger than 18 years or 30 beats/min or a maximum rate of >125 
if older than 18 years after assuming a standing from supine position 
for at least 10 minutes; symptoms worsen with standing and improve 
with recumbence; and the absence of other overt causes of orthostatic 
intolerance.
Several different pathophysiologic mechanisms have been described 
in patients with POTS, including:
	1.	 Peripheral autonomic denervation (neuropathic) leading to reduced 
venoconstriction and venous pooling with secondary tachycardia
	2.	 Hypovolemia
	3.	 Hyperadrenergic POTS associated with elevated systolic blood 
pressure and increased norepinephrine levels after standing for 10 
minutes
	4.	 Poor exercise tolerance
	5.	 POTS associated with other diseases including autoimmunity
A detailed history of orthostatic intolerance may identify symp­
toms of headache, fatigue, sleep disorder, weakness, hyperventilation, 
shaking, sweating, anxiety, dizziness, and presyncope. An evaluation 
for POTS may include a CBC, glucose, electrolytes, and thyroid func­
tion. Cardiac evaluation should include an ECG. A tilt-­table test is 
helpful to demonstrate the effects of orthostatic stress (increased 
heart rate).
There is no specific treatment for POTS. Medications that may 
aggravate symptoms of POTS should be avoided, including antihy­
pertensive agents, sedatives, and many other psychiatric medica­
tions. Patients should avoid aggravating factors, such as dehydration, 
extreme heat, and alcohol. Nonpharmacologic treatment includes 
aerobic exercise, compressive stockings, and increased fluid and salt 
intake. Pharmacologic treatment should be tailored to the variant the 
patient exhibits (Table 7.7).
Inappropriate sinus tachycardia (IST) presents with palpitations, 
fatigue, dizziness, and near syncope. It may be initially confused with 
POTS. In IST, the heart rate is elevated at rest (>100 beats/min) when 
supine and increases further with exercise. The mean 24-­hour heart 
rate is >90 beats/min. The differential diagnosis includes hyperthy­
roidism and pheochromocytoma. Treatment is difficult, but ivabradine 
with or without metoprolol may be effective.
CARDIAC SYNCOPE/SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH
A variety of cardiac conditions can result in hypotension and syncope 
(Tables 7.8, 7.9, and 7.10; see Table 7.3). Dysrhythmias are common 
and are usually silent between episodes (see Table 7.8). Supraventric­
ular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, and heart block are the most 
common types of dysrhythmia and may be primary or result from 
medications or illicit drugs. Any form of acquired heart block carries a 
high mortality rate (Fig. 7.2). A common cause of acquired heart block 
is Lyme disease. Heart block may necessitate temporary or permanent 
electronic pacing to maintain cardiac output.
TABLE 7.6  Treatment of Neurocardiogenic Syncope/Vasovagal Syncope (VVS)
RECOMMENDATIONS
Patient education on the diagnosis and prognosis of VVS is recommended.
In all patents with the common faint or VVS, an explanation of the diagnosis, education targeting awareness of and possible avoidance of triggers (prolonged 
standing, warm environments, coping with dental and medical settings), and reassurance about the benign nature of the condition should be provided.
Physical counterpressure maneuvers can be useful in patients with VVS who have a sufficiently long prodromal period.
Patients with a syncope prodrome should be instructed to assume a supine position to prevent a faint and minimize possible injury. In patients with a sufficiently 
long prodrome, physical counter-­maneuvers (leg crossing, limb and/or abdominal contraction, squatting, isometric handgrip, arm tensing) are a core manage­
ment strategy.
Midodrine is reasonable in patients with recurrent VVS with no history of hypertension, heart failure, or urinary retention.
Midodrine is a prodrug that is metabolized to desglymidodrine, which is a peripherally active α-­agonist used to ameliorate the reduction in peripheral sympa­
thetic neural outflow responsible for venous pooling and vasodepression in VVS.
The usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain in patients with frequent VVS.
There are two main methods of orthostatic training. Patients undergo repetitive tilt-­table tests in a monitored setting until a negative tilt-­table test occurs and 
then are encouraged to stand quietly against a wall for 30–60 min daily, or patients simply stand quietly against a wall at home for a prolonged period of time 
daily.
Fludrocortisone might be reasonable for patients with recurrent VVS and inadequate response to salt and fluid intake, unless contra­indicated.
Fludrocortisone has mineral corticoid activity resulting in sodium and water retention and potassium excretion, which results in increased blood volume. Serum 
potassium level should be monitored because of potential drug-­induced hypokalemia. POST II (Prevention of Syncope Trial II) reported a marginally insignificant 
31% risk of reduction in adults with moderately frequent VVS, which was significant in patients after 2 wk dose stabilization period.
Encouraging increases in salt and fluid intake may be reasonable in selected patients with VVS, unless contraindicated.
Evidence for the effectiveness of salt and fluid intake for patients with VVS is limited. Nonetheless, in patients with recurrent VVS and no clear contraindication, 
such as a history of hypertension, renal disease, heart failure, or cardiac dysfunction, it may be reasonable to encourage ingestion of 2–3 L of fluid per day and 
a total of 6–9 g (100–150 mmol) of salt per day, or about 1–2 heaping teaspoonfuls. The long-­term balance of risks and benefits of a strategy of increasing salt 
and water intake is unknown.
In selected patients with VVS, it may be reasonable to reduce or withdraw medications that cause hypotension when appropriate.
A careful examination of the patient’s history for medications that may lower blood pressure (hypotensive agents) should be performed. Care should be taken to 
withdraw or reduce medications only when safe to do so and in conjunction with the prescribing health care provider.
In patients with recurrent VVS, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor might be considered.
Serotonin has central neurophysiologic effects on blood pressure and heart rate and acutely induces syncope during tilt-­table 
testing.
Modified from Shen W-­K, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope: a report of the Ameri­
can College of Cardiology/American Heart (e84-­85). Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circula­
tion. 2017;136:e60–e122.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
114
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 7.7  Treatment for Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS)
A regular, structured, and progressive exercise program.
Acute intravenous infusion of up to 2 L of saline if short-­term clinical decompensation.
Patients with POTS need a multidisciplinary approach.
The consumption of up to 2–3 L of water and 10–12 g of NaCl daily may be considered.
Fludrocortisone or pyridostigmine.
Treatment with midodrine or low-­dose propranolol may be considered.
Those with prominent hyperadrenergic features are treated with clonidine or α-­methyldopa.
Drugs that block the norepinephrine reuptake transporter can worsen symptoms in patients with POTS.
Regular intravenous infusions of saline are not recommended in the absence of evidence, and chronic or repeated intravenous cannulation is potentially harmful.
Radiofrequency sinus node modification, surgical correction of a Chiari malformation type I, and balloon dilation or stenting of the jugular vein are not recommended 
for routine use in patients with POTS and are potentially harmful.
Modified from Sheldon RS, et al. 2015 Heart Rhythm Society expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of postural tachycardia 
syndrome, inappropriate sinus tachycardia and vasovagal syncope. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:e44.
TABLE 7.8  Primary Electrical Abnormalities: Features, ECG, and Treatment
Primary Electrical 
Abnormalities
Features
ECG
Treatment
LQTS: Romano-­Ward, Jervell–Lange-­
Nielsen, acquired
Familial genetic disorder
Ion channel variant
Presents in torsades de pointes
Romano-­Ward is MC inherited LQTS
Jervell–Lange-­Nielsen has congenital 
deafness
Prolonged QT measured from the onset 
of the Q wave to the end of the T 
wave in lead II
Varies with HR but >0.44 in men, >0.46 
in children and women for HR 50–90 
beats/min is prolonged
Torsades de pointes can occur
Can deteriorate from polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia to ventricular 
fibrillation
β Blocker therapy
Recommendations on exercise intensity 
by a cardiologist
ICD if β blockers fail
Brugada syndrome
Inherited autosomal dominant arrhyth­
mogenic syndrome characterized by 
life-­threatening ventricular arrhyth­
mias
Genetic variant in SCN5A and 13 other 
genes
ECG abnormalities are from repolariza­
tion and depolarization abnormalities
Coved-­type ST segment elevations in 
the right precordial leads
J wave amplitude ≥2 mm followed by a 
negative T wave
Placement of ICD
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
Owing to one or more re-­entrant path­
ways inducing SVT or atrial fibrillation
Up to 14% associated with malignant 
tachycardias
Malignant arrhythmias from short 
re-­entrant pathway repolarization or 
multiple pathways
Short PR interval
Delta waves present
Undergo EPT and ablation
Dilated cardiomyopathy: ventricular 
tachycardia/fibrillation
Cardiac dilation and systolic dysfunction
Inherited or acquired
Lamin AC gene variant a common cause 
of DCM and SCD
Marked LVH
Poor R wave progression
Left atrial enlargement
Right axis deviation
Permanent pacemaker and ICD place­
ment
Catecholamine-­exercise: ventricular 
tachycardia
Ventricular ectopy induced by exercise 
or emotional stress
Variant in gene that encodes Ca-­
mediated sarcoplasmic fibers
Lethal in 30–50% if left untreated
Pre-­exercise ECG is usually normal, 
stress testing recommended
ECG with exercise
Nonsustained wide ventricular tachy­
cardia
β Blocker therapy
Recommendations on exercise intensity 
by a cardiologist
ICD if β blockers fail
DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; EPT, electrophysiologic testing; HR, heart rate; ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator; LQTS, long QT syndrome; 
LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MC, most common; SCD, sudden cardiac death; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.
From Ellison S. Sudden cardiac death in adolescents. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2015;42:57–76.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
115
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
Primary cardiac conduction abnormalities that may result in 
syncope include Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome, long QT syn­
dromes, and catecholamine-­sensitive ventricular tachycardia. Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome is characterized by a short PR interval, 
pre-­excitation seen as a widened QRS duration, and a delta wave on the 
proximal portion of the QRS. The delta wave represents the presence of 
accessory electrical tissue from atria to ventricle, with rapid antegrade 
conduction causing excitation of ventricular tissue before atrioventric­
ular node–His bundle stimulation. If that pathway can conduct in the 
retrograde manner, a re-­entrant circuit is created, causing a narrow 
QRS complex tachycardia. This greatly shortens the diastolic ventric­
ular filling time and results in diminished left ventricular end-­diastolic 
volume, with subsequently decreased stroke volume and decreased car­
diac output. Although the tachycardia is rarely sufficiently fast to result 
in syncope, some children have profound hypotension and a rapid loss 
of consciousness. In adults, a similar mechanism results from atrial 
flutter or fibrillation if the ventricular response rate is fast.
Long QT syndromes are inherited (usually autosomal dominant) or 
acquired abnormalities in the electrical recovery (repolarization) of the 
heart (Fig. 7.3). Prolongation of the repolarization phase results in the 
risk of simultaneous depolarization, the “R-­on-­T” phenomenon, which 
causes disorganized ventricular electrical stimulation characterized 
by torsades de pointes (coarse ventricular tachycardia), a potentially 
lethal dysrhythmia (Fig. 7.4). There may be a family history of sudden 
cardiac death. Family studies with the same gene variant have demon­
strated that affected patients may not always have a long QT interval on 
ECG as defined for the syndrome, but an increased QT interval may 
become evident with exercise or during catecholamine infusion. Long 
QT syndromes may be responsible for some cases of sudden infant 
death syndrome and drowning. Although additional genetic forms have 
been described, most gene variants for prolonged QT involve either 
a potassium or sodium ion channel (see Table 7.10). There is some 
genotype-­phenotype correlation in LQT genes: LQT1 events are fre­
quently associated with stress, exercise, emotion, or swimming; LQT2 
events are associated with auditory triggers (alarm clocks); while LQT3 
events may be associated with sleep. Long QT syndromes may present 
as a syncopal episode, seizures, palpitations, or presyncope. Diagnosing 
long QT syndromes is based on clinical history and ECG findings of 
a prolonged rate-­corrected QT interval. Genetic testing may identify 
approximately 75% of patients. Acquired prolongation of the QT inter­
val is seen in electrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalemia) and with a vari­
ety of medications (Table 7.11). A drug history and toxicology screen 
may be warranted if there is any question of QT prolongation.
Patients who have undergone corrective or palliative surgery for 
congenital cardiac disease are at risk for both early-­ and late-­onset dys­
rhythmias that might result in syncope. Sinus node disease (in patients 
undergoing atrial surgery) may result in tachycardia-­bradycardia epi­
sodes that can be associated with hypotension. Ventricular dysrhythmias 
are particularly common after repair of tetralogy of Fallot, double-­outlet 
right ventricle, truncus arteriosus, and pulmonary atresia involving right 
ventriculotomy with subsequent ventricular scar formation.
Uncorrected structural heart disease is a relatively rare cause of a 
sudden decrease in cardiac output. However, hypertrophic cardio­
myopathies can result in obstruction of left ventricular outflow with 
resultant high transmural pressure and secondary cardiac ischemia, 
which can be fatal. This type of obstruction is exacerbated by high 
sympathetic tone, causing increased contractility, and is a frequent 
mechanism of syncope associated with exercise in competitive athletes. 
The presence of an outflow tract murmur in the setting of syncope, 
especially if there is a positive family history, warrants evaluation with 
both electrocardiography and echocardiography. Any condition that 
impedes left ventricular outflow (valvular aortic stenosis or subaortic 
stenosis), left ventricular inflow or filling (mitral stenosis or pericardial 
tamponade), or blood flow through the pulmonary vasculature (pri­
mary or secondary pulmonary hypertension) may result in syncope. 
In almost all cases, characteristic physical findings lead the clinician to 
the diagnosis. Pulmonary hypertension may be associated with cyano­
sis, in which case there is cerebral hypoxia resulting from right-­to-­left 
TABLE 7.9  Potential Causes of Sudden 
Death in Infants, Children, and Adolescents
SIDS and SIDS “Mimics”
SIDS
Long QT syndromes*
Inborn errors of metabolism
Child abuse
Myocarditis
Ductal-­dependent congenital heart disease
Corrected or Unoperated Congenital Heart Disease
Aortic stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of great vessels (postoperative atrial switch)
Mitral valve prolapse
Hypoplastic left-­heart syndrome
Eisenmenger syndrome
Coronary Arterial Disease
Anomalous origin*
Anomalous tract (tunneled)
Kawasaki disease
COVID-19
Periarteritis
Arterial dissection
Marfan syndrome (rupture of aorta)
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial Disease
Myocarditis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy*
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
Lyme carditis
Takotsubo syndrome
Conduction System Abnormality/Arrhythmia
Long QT syndromes*
Brugada syndrome
Proarrhythmic drugs
Pre-­excitation syndromes
Heart block
Commotio cordis
Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Heart tumor (myxoma, rhabdomyoma)
Miscellaneous
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary embolism
Heat stroke
Cocaine and other stimulant drugs or medications
Anorexia nervosa
Seizures
Electrolyte disturbances
SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
*Common.
From Van Hare GF. Sudden death. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. 
Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2262.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
116
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 7.10  Summary of Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Gene
Gene
Locus
Protein
Long QT Syndrome (LQTS)
Major LQTS Genes
KCNQ1 (LQT1)
11p15.5
IKs potassium channel α subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)
KCNH2 (LQT2)
7q35-­36
IKr potassium channel α subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)
SCN5A (LQT3)
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
Minor LQTS Genes (listed alphabetically)
AKAP9
7q21-­q22
Yotiao
CACNA1C
12p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
CALM1
14q32.11
Calmodulin 1
CALM2
2p21
Calmodulin 2
CALM3
19q13.2-­q13.3
Calmodulin 3
CAV3
3p25
Caveolin-­3
KCNE1
21q22.1
Potassium channel β subunit (MinK)
KCNE2
21q22.1
Potassium channel β subunit (MiRP1)
KCNJ5
11q24.3
Kir3.4 subunit of IKACH channel
SCN4B
11q23.3
Sodium channel β4 subunit
SNTA1
20q11.2
Syntrophin-­α1
Triadin Knockout (TKO) Syndrome
TRDN
6q22.31
Cardiac triadin
Andersen-­Tawil Syndrome (ATS)
KCNJ2 (ATS1)
17q23
IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)
Timothy Syndrome (TS)
CACNA1C
12p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
Cardiac-­Only Timothy Syndrome (COTS)
CACNA1C
12p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
Short QT Syndrome (SQTS)
KCNH2 (SQT1)
7q35-­36
IKr potassium channel α subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)
KCNQ1 (SQT2)
11p15.5
IKs potassium channel α subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)
KCNJ2 (SQT3)
17q23
IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)
CACNA1C (SQT4)
12p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
CACNB2 (SQT5)
10p12
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel β2 subunit
CACN2D1 (SQT6)
7q21-­q22
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 δ1 subunit
Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT)
RYR2 (CPVT1)
1q42.1-­q43
Ryanodine receptor 2
CASQ2 (CPVT2)
1p13.3
Calsequestrin 2
KCNJ2 (CPVT3)
17q23
IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)
CALM1
14q32.11
Calmodulin 1
CALM3
19q13.2-­q13.3
Calmodulin 3
TRDN
6q22.31
Cardiac triadin
Brugada Syndrome (BrS)
SCN5A (BrS1)
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
Minor BrS Genes (listed alphabetically)
ABCC9
12p12.1
ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9
CACNA1C
2p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
CACNA2D1
7q21-­q22
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 δ1 subunit
CACNB2
10p12
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel β2 subunit
FGF12
3q28
Fibroblast growth factor 12
GPD1L
3p22.3
Glycerol-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase 1–like
KCND3
1p13.2
Voltage-­gated potassium channel (Ito) subunit Kv4.3
KCNE3
11q13.4
Potassium channel β3 subunit (MiRP2)
KCNJ8
12p12.1
Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
117
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
TABLE 7.10  Summary of Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Gene—cont’d
Gene
Locus
Protein
HEY2
6q
Hes-­related family BHLH transcription factor with 
YRPW motif 2
PKP2
12p11
Plakophilin-­2
RANGRF
17p13.1
RAN guanine nucleotide release factor 1
SCN1B
19q13
Sodium channel β1
SCN2B
11q23
Sodium channel β2
SCN3B
11q24.1
Sodium channel β3
SCN10A
3p22.2
Sodium voltage-­gated channel α10 subunit (Nav1.8)
SLMAP
3p14.3
Sarcolemma-­associated protein
Early Repolarization Syndrome (ERS)
ABCC9
12p12.1
ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9
CACNA1C
2p13.3
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)
CACNA2D1
7q21-­q22
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 δ1 subunit
CACNB2
10p12
Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel β2 subunit
KCNJ8
12p12.1
Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1
SCN5A
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
SCN10A
3p22.2
Sodium voltage-­gated channel α10 subunit (Nav1.8)
Idiopathic Ventricular Fibrillation (IVF)
ANK2
4q25-­q27
Ankyrin B
CALM1
14q32.11
Calmodulin 1
DPP6
7q36
Dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­6
KCNJ8
12p12.1
Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1
RYR2
1q42.1-­q43
Ryanodine receptor 2
SCN3B
11q23
Sodium channel β3 subunit
SCN5A
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
Progressive Cardiac Conduction Disease/Defect (PCCD)
SCN5A
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
TRPM4
19q13.33
Transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily 
M, member 4
Sick Sinus Syndrome (SSS)
ANK2
4q25-­q27
Ankyrin B
HCN4
15q24-­q25
Hyperpolarization-­activated cyclic nucleotide–gated 
channel 4
MYH6
14q11.2
Myosin, heavy chain 6, cardiac muscle, α
SCN5A
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
“Ankyrin-­B Syndrome”
ANK2
4q25-­q27
Ankyrin B
Familial Atrial Fibrillation (FAF)
ANK2
4q25-­q27
Ankyrin B
GATA4
8p23.1-­p22
GATA-­binding protein 4
GATA5
20q13.33
GATA-­binding protein 5
GJA5
1q21
Connexin 40
KCNA5
12p13
IKur potassium channel (Kv1.5)
KCNE2
21q22.1
Potassium channel β subunit (MiRP1)
KCNH2
7q35-­36
IKr potassium channel α subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)
KCNJ2
17q23
IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)
KCNQ1
11p15.5
IKs potassium channel α subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)
NPPA
1p36
Atrial natriuretic peptide precursor A
NUP155
5p13
Nucleoporin 155 KD
SCN5A
3p21-­p24
Cardiac sodium channel α subunit (Nav1.5)
From Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease. 11th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:605–606, Table 33.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
118
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
shunting, as well as decreased left ventricular output resulting from 
poor transpulmonary flow and decreased left ventricular filling.
Other rare causes of cardiac syncope are thoracic masses and intra­
cardiac tumors or masses, coronary artery abnormalities, and inflam­
matory cardiac diseases (myocarditis). Masses or tumors, such as 
myxomas, fibromas, and rhabdomyomas, tend to produce paroxysmal 
symptoms, which are often associated with position changes, especially 
from the recumbent position. Coronary artery anomalies are usu­
ally not accompanied by signs of ischemia. Rather, the most common 
manifestation is syncope or sudden cardiac death from compression 
of the anomalous left main coronary artery as it courses between the 
pulmonary outflow and the aortic root (Fig. 7.5). This usually occurs 
in a competitive athlete whose hypertrophied heart responds to cat­
echolamine stimulation during activity and inadvertently compresses 
the anomalous coronary artery. Inflammatory conditions, such as heart 
block associated with Lyme disease and ventricular tachycardia associ­
ated with myocarditis or pericarditis, predispose to dysrhythmias.
Cardiac syncopal episodes can be accompanied by brief tonic-­
clonic seizure activity known as Stokes-­Adams syndrome. The seizure 
activity appears 10–20 seconds after the onset of asystole and is usually 
of short duration with no subsequent postictal phase. Many children 
with cardiac syncope are initially referred to a neurologist.
Sudden cardiac death is discussed with cardiac causes of syncope 
because cardiac causes of syncope may also produce sudden death 
(see Table 7.3). Sudden cardiac arrest or death is defined as the abrupt 
and unexpected loss of heart function. Structural causes include val­
vular aortic stenosis, coronary artery anomalies, cardiomyopathies, 
and myocarditis. Cardiac arrhythmias associated with sudden death 
include Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome and prolonged QT syn­
drome. A less common cause is commotio cordis resulting from non­
penetrating blunt trauma to the chest. Warning events or symptoms 
may not always be evident prior to sudden cardiac death; if it presents, 
patients may complain of episodes of dizziness, lightheadedness, pre­
syncope, syncope, dyspnea, or palpitations. Other relevant history may 
include fatigue, unexplained seizure, or chest pain. It is important for 
the physician to perform a detailed history and physical examination 
to look for warning signs of cardiovascular disease in the patient and 
family (Table 7.12). Key elements of the physical examination should 
include measurement of blood pressure and a complete cardiovascu­
lar exam with attention to heart rate, rhythm, murmurs, pulses, and 
features of possible hereditary disorders with recognizable phenotypes 
such as Marfan syndrome.
Predictors of a cardiac etiology of syncope versus a more benign 
etiology such as neurocardiogenic syncope include:
	1.	 Syncope associated with activity or while sitting or supine
	2.	 Family history of cardiac disease or sudden/unexplained cardiac 
death
	3.	 Physical examination consistent with cardiac disease
	4.	 Abnormal ECG
	5.	 Palpitations
NEUROLOGIC CAUSES OF SYNCOPE-­LIKE 
EPISODES
Primary neurologic causes of syncope are more unusual in otherwise 
healthy children and adolescents than in adults. Seizures must be con­
sidered if there is a history of an aural prodrome, focal or generalized 
tonic-­clonic activity, and a prolonged postictal phase of lethargy or con­
fusion (see Tables 7.4 and 7.5). Prolonged postevent lethargy is unusual 
with more common causes of syncope if the vital signs have returned 
to normal. Seizures are a common cause of loss of consciousness in 
the recumbent patient. Seizures are often accompanied by tachycar­
dia and normal or elevated blood pressure. A premonitory aura may 
herald vertebrobasilar vascular spasm, which appears to occur when 
syncope is with basilar type migraines. There may be a history of uni­
lateral visual changes; the loss of consciousness usually has a somewhat 
longer onset and duration. The patient frequently complains of head­
ache after regaining consciousness. Basilar type migraine or migraine 
affecting the vertebrobasilar circulation can cause dizziness, vertigo, 
Lead II
Fig. 7.2  Congenital complete atrioventricular (AV) block. The ventricular 
rate is regular at 53 beats/min. The atrial rate is somewhat variable, 
from 65 to 95 beats/min, and completely dissociated from the ventricle. 
The QRS morphology is normal, which is common in congenital com­
plete AV block. (From Van Hare GF. AV block. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton 
BF, St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2260.)
Fig. 7.3  An ECG showing a QT interval of 640 milliseconds in a patient with LQT1 syndrome, with the termi­
nal portion of the T wave merging with the P wave. (From Garan H. Ventricular arrhythmias. In: Goldman L, 
Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 25th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:373.)
Fig. 7.4  Episode of torsades de pointes in a patient with long QT syn­
drome. (From Van Hare GF. Sudden death. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, 
St. Geme JW III, Schor NF, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier; 2016:2262.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
119
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
ataxia, confusion, and headache. There is often a positive family his­
tory of migraines.
METABOLIC CAUSES OF SYNCOPE
Hypoglycemia should always be included as a cause of syncope, but 
it is rare in children and adolescents except in patients with insulin-­
dependent diabetes or inborn errors of glucose, glycogen, fatty acid 
metabolism, or adrenal insufficiency (see Chapter 57). With hypogly­
cemia, the patient feels weak, hungry, sweaty, agitated, and confused 
and eventually experiences altered mental status. Onset is gradual, and 
the patient remains hemodynamically stable, although tachycardia 
may be evident. Ingestion of oral hypoglycemic agents may exceed the 
body’s normal glucose homeostasis, resulting in hypoglycemia.
SYNCOPAL-­LIKE EPISODES IN INFANTS AND 
TODDLERS
Reflex asystolic syncope, also known as “pallid breath-­holding spells,” 
is often initiated in a toddler-­aged child with a minor stimulus (bump 
to the head). This is not true breath holding; the child becomes pale, 
loses tone, and may have asystole and on awakening red color returns 
to the child’s face. This may be an early predictor of vasovagal syncope 
in an older child.
Cyanotic breath-­holding spells are triggered by pain or frustration 
in a toddler-­aged infant. The child experiences a prolonged expiratory 
apnea and loses tone. Treatment is reassurance and iron supplementa­
tion if the serum ferritin level is low.
Infant hyperekplexia manifests with hypertonia, apnea, exagger­
ated startle response to unexpected stimuli (noise), and poststartle 
rigidity. Associated gene variants include GLRA1, SLC6A5, GLRB, 
GPHN, and ARHGEF9 (X-­linked). Most are autosomal dominant, but 
autosomal recessive and X-­linked inheritance is possible. Treatment 
includes clonazepam and placing the patient in a curled-­up position 
during an episode.
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder may manifest in the neonate 
and infant and is often triggered by defecation or by changes in tem­
perature, emotional distress, eating spicy foods, or drinking cold fluids 
in an older child (see Chapter 39). The manifestations include flush­
ing (occasionally Harlequin change), apnea, stiffening, and paroxys­
mal localized pain (jaw, perianal area). Gene variants in SCN9A cause 
this autosomal dominant disorder. The differential diagnosis includes 
erythromelalgia and hyperekplexia. Carbamazepine has been one 
effective medication to manage the neuropathic pain.
PSYCHIATRIC CAUSES OF SYNCOPE
Patients with a history of panic attacks may become syncopal second­
ary to hyperventilation. The mechanism is not completely understood 
but may involve the reaction of cerebral blood flow in response to 
hypocapnia and respiratory alkalosis. Tetany or paresthesias may be 
present in some patients. The history of the episode is critical, and 
witnesses are especially helpful. The patient frequently relates a feeling 
of suffocation, smothering, shortness of breath, or chest tightness. In 
TABLE 7.11  Drugs That Prolong the QT 
Interval and Produce Torsades de Pointes
Drugs Commonly 
Involved
Other Drugs
Disopyramide
Amiodarone
Dofetilide
Arsenic trioxide
Ibutilide
Cisapride
Procainamide
Quinidine
Sotalol
Bepridil
Calcium channel blockers: lidoflazine (not mar­
keted in the United States)
Anti-infective agents: clarithromycin, erythromy­
cin, halofantrine, pentamidine, quinoline-­class 
antibiotics, hydroxychloroquine
Antiemetic agents: domperidone, droperidol
Antipsychotic agents: chlorpromazine, haloperidol, 
mesoridazine, thioridazine, pimozide
Methadone
From Roden D. Drug-­induced prolongation of the QT interval. N Engl J 
Med. 2004;350:1013–1022.
Ao
Ao
PA
PA
Ant
Post
L
R
RCA
RCA
LCCA
LCCA
LAD
LAD
Normal
coronary 
anatomy
Anomalous left
coronary from the
right between the
 great arteries
Fig. 7.5  Coronary artery anomalies associated with sudden cardiac death. Ant, anterior; Ao, aorta; L, left; 
LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LCCA, left circumflex coronary artery; PA, pulmonary artery; 
Post, posterior; R, right; RCA, right coronary artery.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
120
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
retrospect, the patient may also admit to numbness and tingling of the 
extremities and visual changes. Hyperventilation and hypocapnia may 
be detected during a tilt-­table test by measuring end-­tidal co2.
A psychiatric cause of syncope (pseudosyncope) is a diagnosis 
of exclusion. The patient is usually an adolescent and frequently has 
episodes in the presence of others. The patient is unusually calm in 
describing the episodes and relates details that may indicate no loss 
of consciousness. During the episode, there are no associated hemo­
dynamic changes and no pallor, sweating, or respiratory changes. 
Typically, the patient falls without injury. The key is to define what sec­
ondary gain the patient attains through the disorder.
EVALUATION OF THE SYNCOPAL CHILD
History
The history of the event is the critical information for most patients 
(see Table 7.4). A detailed account of what the patient felt immedi­
ately before losing consciousness, what the patient was doing, what 
the posture or position was, how the patient looked, how long the 
episode lasted, and associated signs or symptoms direct the diagnos­
tic work-­up. A thorough and detailed family history is necessary to 
discover risk for sudden death, dysrhythmia, heart disease, seizures, 
and metabolic disorders. The medication history, including over-­the-­
counter, prescribed, and illicit drugs, as well as any accessible medica­
tion of other family members should be gathered.
Physical Examination
Any person who has a syncopal episode should undergo a thorough 
physical examination, with special attention to the cardiovascular and 
neurologic systems. The examination should include obtaining vital 
signs with the patient supine and after standing for 5–10 minutes. 
Upon careful auscultation, the presence of an outflow tract murmur 
radiating to the neck, an abnormally loud second heart sound, or the 
presence of a long decrescendo diastolic murmur at the apex leads to 
more involved diagnostic testing. A complete neurologic exam should 
be performed. In most cases, patients with a history of syncope have 
normal physical findings at the time of the examination.
Diagnostic Tests
Because the child or adolescent who has had a syncopal episode is often 
evaluated hours or days after the episode, testing serum glucose, electro­
lytes, or urine toxicology screening is usually of no value. The routine 
use of blood tests without an indication are of low diagnostic value. All 
patients presenting with syncope need an ECG (Fig. 7.6). The ECG should 
be inspected for the rhythm, with special attention to nonsinus rhythms 
and bradycardia. Measurements of the intervals should be performed 
manually regardless of any preprogrammed measurements printed on 
the ECG. Abnormalities of the PR, QRS, or QT/corrected QT (QTc) 
interval imply an underlying conduction abnormality. The P wave, QRS, 
and T wave amplitudes may indicate chamber enlargement or hyper­
trophy, each of which carries an increased risk for dysrhythmia. In the 
patient who also has a history of palpitations associated with syncope, 
long-­term cardiac monitoring, with or without a subsequent patient-­
activated cardiac event recorder monitor, may help capture the cardiac 
rhythm when the patient is symptomatic. If a heart murmur is appre­
ciated, if there is a family history of sudden death or cardiomyopathy, 
or if the ECG is at all questionable, a cardiology consultation should 
be obtained, and two-­dimensional, Doppler, and color-­flow echocardi­
ography should be performed. If the syncopal event is associated with 
exercise, echocardiography is critical; if the results are normal, a graded 
treadmill exercise stress test should be performed with full ECG and 
blood pressure monitoring. Patients with primary dysrhythmias may 
require cardiac catheterization and electrophysiologic testing. Patients 
suspected of having a congenital dysrhythmia syndrome or cardiomyop­
athy should undergo specific gene panel or exome genetic testing.
Patients exhibiting prolonged loss of consciousness, seizure activity, 
and a postictal phase of lethargy or confusion should be referred for 
neurologic consultation and EEG. Without this history, the reported 
positive yield of EEG is less than 1 in 300 studies. Likewise, neuroim­
aging studies generally have an exceptionally low yield in the absence 
of abnormality upon physical examination (see Fig. 7.6).
SUMMARY AND RED FLAGS
Hypotension, both supine and orthostatic, is a major red flag, as are 
associated palpitations, exertional symptoms, or chest pain (Tables 
7.13 and 7.14); participation in gym class or sports must be restricted 
until a complete diagnostic work-­up is completed. Additional red flags 
include syncope while supine, a positive family history of heart dis­
ease or sudden death, prolonged loss of consciousness, prolonged sei­
zures, prolonged postevent neurologic signs, and abrupt onset with no 
prodrome. Laboratory tests, except for the ECG, which is mandatory, 
TABLE 7.12  Pediatric Sudden Cardiac 
Death Risk Assessment*
Patient History Questions:
Tell Me About Any of These in Your Child … Yes or No
Has your child fainted or passed out during or after exercise, emotion, or 
startle?
Has your child ever had extreme shortness of breath and/or discomfort, pain, 
or pressure in their chest during exercise?
Has your child had extreme fatigue associated with exercise (different from 
other children)?
Has a doctor ever ordered a test for your child’s heart?
Has your child ever been diagnosed with an unexplained seizure disorder? Or 
exercise-­induced asthma not well controlled with medication?
Family History Questions:
Tell Me About Any of These in Your Family…
Are there any family members who had a sudden, unexpected, unexplained 
death before the age of 50 (including sudden infant death syndrome, car 
crash, drowning, others) or near drowning?
Are there any family members who died suddenly of “heart problems” before 
the age of 50?
Are there any family members who have had unexplained fainting or 
seizures?
Are there any relatives with certain conditions, such as:
Enlarged heart: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Heart rhythm problems: long QT syndrome
Short QT syndrome
Brugada syndrome
Catecholaminergic ventricular tachycardia
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
Marfan syndrome (aortic rupture)
Heart attack, age 50 or younger
Pacemaker or implanted defibrillator
Deaf at birth (congenital deafness)
Please Explain More About Any “Yes” Answers.
*Ask these questions (or have parents complete for your review) at 
periodic times during well-­child visits (neonatal, preschool, before or 
during middle school, and before or during high school).
From Campell R, Berger S, Ackerman M, et al. Policy statement pedi­
atric sudden cardiac arrest. AAP Pediatr. 2012;e1094–e1102.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
121
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
are generally of limited value unless guided by pertinent findings in 
the history and physical examination. The ECG allows screening for 
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome, heart block, and long QT syn­
drome as well as hypertrophic cardiomyopathies and myocarditis. The 
most common identifiable etiology in an otherwise healthy child or 
adolescent is neurocardiogenic syncope, usually a benign and transient 
condition.
VERTIGO
The characteristic description of vertigo is the illusion of motion usu­
ally described as the environment spinning or whirling. The perception 
of motion may be internal (“My head is [or eyes are] spinning”) or 
external (“The room is spinning or moving”). The sensation is usually 
rotatory, but it can be linear (“It feels like the swaying of a boat”).
Obtaining an accurate description from younger children is diffi­
cult. Using terms that the child may understand such as “sliding” or 
“swinging” may be helpful. The patient’s description is critical although 
potentially vague; further questioning may lead to the rather discrete 
differential diagnosis of vertigo.
The presence of associated symptoms may help locate the pathology 
to a central or peripheral cause of vertigo (Tables 7.15, 7.16, and 7.17). 
Fortunately, peripheral causes of vertigo are more common. Sponta­
neous rotary vertigo, nystagmus, and abnormal head positions are 
Perform ECG, orthostatic 
BPs ± urine HCG in 
adolescent females
Arrhythmias
Wolff-Parkinson-White
  syndrome
Long QT syndromes
Brugada syndrome
Obstructive lesions
Aortic stenosis
Pulmonic stenosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Coronary artery anomalies
(congenital, Kawasaki)
Other causes of myocardial
ischemia/infarction
Myocarditis/other
myocardial dysfunction
Pulmonary hypertension
Intracardiac mass or tumor
Subclavian steal syndrome
Vasovagal (postural reflex,
neurally mediated)
Situational syncope
Cough
Micturition
Defecation
Hair grooming
Stretching
Orthostatic hypotension
Hypovolemia
Related to medications
Postural orthostatic
tachycardia syndrome
Vasovagal (postural reflex,
neurally mediated)
Situational syncope
Cough
Micturition
Defecation
Hair grooming
Stretching
Orthostatic hypotension
Hypovolemia
Related to medications
Postural orthostatic
tachycardia syndrome
Breath-holding spells
Hysteria/conversion
Metabolic (hypoglycemia,
electrolyte disorders)
Anemia
Hyperventilation
Pregnancy
Anorexia nervosa
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Positive
HCG
Pregnancy
Abnormal
ECG
Refer to cardiology
for further evaluation
Suspect neurologic
disorder
Orthostatic
hypotension
Recurrent episodes
(>2 to 3)
Refer to cardiology
for consideration of
tilt test, other
evaluation
Obtain EEG,
neurology consult
Seizure disorder
Brain tumor
Migraine
Signs or symptoms
suggestive of
cardiac etiology
Normal
results
SYNCOPE
Perform H and P
Abnormal
orthostatic
blood pressures
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
Fig. 7.6  Syncope algorithm. BP, blood pressure; H, history; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; P, physical 
examination. (From Pomeranz A, Sabnis S, Busey SL, Kliegman RM, eds. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strate­
gies. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:59.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
122
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
symptoms associated more with peripheral causes of vertigo along with 
nausea, vomiting, sweating, faintness, and fright. Peripheral vertigo 
results in stimulation of the autonomic nervous system with resultant 
intense nausea, vomiting, pallor, and diaphoresis. If the vertigo occurs 
with abrupt changes in the position of the head, peripheral causes of 
vertigo should be suspected. Peripheral vertigo can be caused by the 
following: middle ear infections, paroxysmal positional vertigo, laby­
rinthitis, vestibular neuronitis, Ménière disease (rare in pediatrics), or 
trauma (see Table 7.16).
Patients suffering from acute ongoing peripheral vertigo appear 
very ill and very uncomfortable. Because middle ear infection can 
cause peripheral vertigo, some children seen with otitis media and 
vomiting may in fact have peripheral vertigo and secondary vomiting.
Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood is a common cause of 
episodes of vertigo in pediatrics. It is thought to be a precursor of 
future migraines. The episodes may be associated with imbalance 
and nystagmus. The child will have recurrent brief attacks of vertigo 
that resolve quickly. There is no associated headache. The episodes 
improve with age; however, later in life the patient may develop 
migraine headaches.
A more indolent course, a change in consciousness or behavior, or 
seizures may indicate a central origin of vertigo (see Table 7.17). Under­
lying causes of central vestibular dysfunction include acute vascular 
ischemic or thromboembolic events, acute demyelinating diseases, and 
pharmacologic vertigo (alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines). More 
indolent causes of vertigo include tumors of the brainstem or cerebel­
lum, chronic demyelinating diseases, or trauma (see Table 7.17).
Rare syndromes producing vertigo include Cogan syndrome (inter­
stitial keratitis, sensorineural hearing loss, Ménière-­like symptoms), 
Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome (uveomeningitis, sensorineural 
hearing loss), Susac syndrome (microangiopathy, stroke, visual loss, 
sensorineural hearing loss), relapsing polychondritis, and granuloma­
tosis with polyangiitis.
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH VERTIGO
History
A careful, detailed description of the prodrome and the actual symp­
toms, including timing, duration, associated symptoms, preceding 
infections (especially of the upper respiratory tract, such as otitis 
media or sinusitis), medications, and a history of trauma, must be doc­
umented. A past, personal, or family history of vertigo or any other 
neurologic condition is important.
Physical Examination
Special attention must be paid to the head, ears, eyes, nose, and throat 
examination. Good visualization of the tympanic membranes and of 
their mobility is necessary, along with testing both air and bony con­
duction with a tuning fork (Figs. 7.7 and 7.8). Visualization of the fundi 
is important. Testing of all the cranial nerves should be performed 
along with a complete neurologic exam.
The neurologic examination must include an evaluation of the gait, 
a Romberg test, and an assessment of the visual fields and visual acuity 
(Fig. 7.9). In most children and adolescents, the physical examination 
results are normal with only subtle findings when the symptoms are 
provoked.
The HINTS exam (Head Impulse, Nystagmus, Test of Skew) may 
help differentiate peripheral vs central causes of vertigo (Table 7.18).
Diagnostic Tests
The history and physical examination results direct the diagnostic 
work-­up and indicate which tests need to be performed. Imaging stud­
ies important in the work-­up of the vertiginous patient include MRI 
with visualization of the inner ear, the labyrinthine apparatus, the 
brainstem, and the cerebellum. If an infectious cause is suspected, it 
may be useful to perform a lumbar puncture if increased intracranial 
pressure is not suspected. In the setting of trauma, the simple use of the 
pneumatic otoscope may allow the examiner to perform a “fistula test,” 
reproducing or worsening the patient’s symptoms because of an abnor­
mal communication to the labyrinthine system. If hearing loss is a fea­
ture, audiometry and evoked response testing should be considered.
SUMMARY AND RED FLAGS
Vertigo is characterized by the perception of movement, particularly 
rotational movement, and can be a most distressing and incapacitating 
phenomenon. The history and examination should allow the examiner 
to distinguish between peripheral and central vestibular dysfunction.
In children and adolescents, peripheral vertigo is far more common 
than central vertigo. However, in certain at-­risk populations, such as 
children with sickle cell disease, hemophilia, or congenital heart dis­
ease (especially children with right-­to-­left shunts or mixing lesions) 
and children receiving anticoagulation therapy, the central causes 
resulting from hemorrhagic and thromboembolic phenomena must 
be considered. Chronicity, persistence, vertical nystagmus, and signs 
of increased intracranial pressure are red flags. Because the diagnosis 
of vertigo requires that the patient be able to articulate the perception 
TABLE 7.13  “Red Flags” in the Evaluation 
of Patients with Syncope
Syncope with activity or exercise or supine
Syncope not associated with prolonged standing
Syncope precipitated by loud noise or extreme emotion
Absence of presyncope or lightheadedness
Family history of syncope, drowning, sudden death, familial ventricular 
arrhythmia syndromes, cardiomyopathy
Syncope requiring CPR
Injury with syncope
Anemia
Chest pain
Dyspnea
Palpitations
History of cardiac surgery
History of Kawasaki disease
Implanted pacemaker
Abnormal physical examination
Murmur
Gallop rhythm
Loud and single second heart sound
Systolic click
Increased apical impulse (tachycardia)
Irregular rhythm
Hypo-­ or hypertension
Clubbing
Cyanosis
From Van Hare GF. Syncope. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme 
JW III, Schor NF, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2016:515.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
123
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
TABLE 7.14  Summary of Clinical Recommendations for Transient Loss of Consciousness
Topic
Recommendations
Initial assessment
Detailed history, especially from witnesses
Full clinical examination
12-­lead ECG
Uncomplicated faints
Suggestive features include:
Posture: occurrence during prolonged standing or previous similar episodes avoided by lying down Provoking factors, such 
as pain or a medical procedure
Prodromal symptoms, such as sweating or feeling warm or hot before TLoC
Further investigation and specialist referral are not needed.
Epilepsy
Suggestive features are a bitten tongue; head turning to one side during TLoC; no memory of abnormal behavior that occurred 
before, during, or after TLoC; unusual posturing; prolonged limb jerking; confusion after the event; or prodromal déjà vu or 
jamais vu.
If features of epilepsy are present, arrange for early review by an epilepsy specialist.
Do not arrange for EEG before neurologic assessment.
Note that brief seizure-­like activity often occurs during syncope, including uncomplicated faints.
Do not suspect epilepsy unless suggestive features are present. Arrange for cardiovascular assessment if the cause of TLoC is 
unclear.
Urgent specialist referral
Give immediate treatment for clinically urgent problems (such as complete AV block or severe bleeding).
Arrange for urgent specialist cardiovascular assessment for patients at risk for a severe adverse event (such as those with long 
QT interval, cardiac arrhythmia, or structural heart disease).
Further cardiovascular assessment
Focus on specific disorders that may cause TLoC, such as orthostatic hypotension, the carotid sinus syndrome, structural heart 
disease, or cardiac arrhythmia.
Assessment should include repeated history, clinical examination, and 12-­lead ECG.
For suspected cardiac arrhythmia or unexplained TLoC, use ambulatory ECG for further assessment:
Very frequent episodes: use 24-­ to 48-­hr Holter monitoring.
Moderately frequent episodes: use external event monitoring.
Infrequent episodes: use an implantable event recorder.
AV, atrioventricular; TLoC, transient loss of consciousness.
Modified from Cooper PN, et al. Synopsis of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence Guideline for management of transient loss of 
consciousness. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:543–549.
TABLE 7.15  Differences Between Peripheral and Central Vestibular Dysfunctions
Symptom/Sign
Peripheral
Central
Severity of vertigo
Marked
Often mild
Nausea and vomiting common
Nystagmus
Bilateral
Bilateral or unilateral
Unidirectional
Bidirectional or unidirectional
Rotatory/horizontal
May be vertical
Never vertical
Usually no change with visual fixation
Fast phase usually opposite to side of lesion
Improves with visual fixation
Begins within 2–10 sec
Begins immediately
Fatigues with time
Persistent
Habituates
Reproducibly repetitive
Direction of environmental spin
Toward fast phase of nystagmus
Variable
Direction of past pointing
Toward slow phase of nystagmus
Variable
Tinnitus/deafness
Often present
Usually absent
Examples
Labyrinthitis
Multiple sclerosis
Ménière disease
Vertebrobasilar ischemia (see Table 7.17)
Positional vertigo (see Table 7.16)
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:191.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
124
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 7.16  Peripheral Vestibulopathy
Syndrome
Usual Presentation
Typical Course
Hearing Loss?
Diagnosis
Benign paroxys­
mal positional 
vertigo
Paroxysmal, brief, purely positional vertigo
Often polyphasic illness with 
gradual improvement but 
intermittent brief recurrences 
for weeks/months
Does not cause ongoing severe 
vertigo
No
History
Nylen-­Bárány maneuvers
Vestibular neu­
ronitis
Acute-­onset, severe vertigo, sometimes 
after viral respiratory infection
Severe ongoing vertigo for 
many hours or a few days
Monophasic illness
Resolves spontaneously
No hearing loss
No
Clinical history
Normal hearing
Peripheral nystagmus
Rapid (hours–days) resolution without 
recurrence
Infectious labyrin­
thitis
Usually, mild vertigo accompanying obvious 
sinusitis, otitis media, or serous otitis
Resolves over several days with 
resolution of otitis/sinusitis
Very rarely: severe purulent 
labyrinthitis, mastoiditis, 
meningitis
No, unless conductive 
loss due to otitis 
associated
ENT examination: otitis media? serous 
otitis? sinusitis?
Toxic vestibulop­
athy
Vertigo and/or hearing loss associated with 
use of toxic drugs
Usually dose related and 
reversible after withdrawal or 
dose reduction of offending 
drug
Depends on drug, but 
sensorineural deaf­
ness is common with 
aminoglycosides, 
aspirin, loop diuretics, 
platinum; hearing is 
usually normal with 
alcohol and quinidine
Peripheral vertigo with or without 
hearing loss while/after patient takes 
vestibulotoxic drugs; most are revers­
ible with discontinuation of drug
Cervicogenic 
vestibulopathy
Brief positional vertigo, associated with 
head and neck movements
Usually recurrent, brief, nonde­
bilitating vertigo in patients 
with cervical spondylosis or 
other craniovertebral disease 
(rheumatoid arthritis, Klippel-­
Feil deformity)
No (but unrelated 
presbycusis common 
in this age group)
Typical history
Nylen-­Bárány maneuvers not consistent 
with benign positional vertigo
Exclude:
Vertebrobasilar ischemia
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
Cholesteatoma
Recurrent, often positional vertigo in 
patients with a history of chronic otitis, 
TM perforation, mastoiditis
Indolent progression of 
symptoms
Conductive
Usually visible (at superior border of 
tympanic membrane) on otoscope 
examination of ear
Otosclerosis
Progressive hearing loss, sometimes with 
intermittent vertigo
Indolent progressive hearing 
loss
Conductive
Family history
Audiometry
Post-­Traumatic
Basilar (temporal 
bone) fracture
Severe vertigo, often with profound hearing 
loss immediately after head trauma
Gradual (days–weeks) 
resolution of vertigo; hearing 
loss, facial nerve injury often 
permanent
Often: sensorineural
Radiograph: fracture
Hemotympanum?
CSF otorrhea?
Facial paresis?
Postconcussive
Ongoing, often mild/chronic vertigo after 
concussion, without fracture
Gradual resolution but often 
delayed for months–years
No
Persistent/chronic symptoms without 
evidence of other post-­traumatic 
syndromes
Cupulolithiasis
Classic benign positional vertigo, but after 
head trauma
Same as for benign positional 
vertigo
No
Clinical history
Nylen-­Bárány maneuvers
Exclude fistulas
Perilymphatic 
fistula
Trauma may be remote or indirect (swim­
ming, diving injuries)
Usually, positional vertigo, recurrent; or 
mild persistent vertigo
Post-­traumatic vertigo that 
does not improve over time
Often: mixed or senso­
rineural
Clinical history
Positive fistula test
Valsalva maneuver: symptoms worsen?
Whiplash
Positional vertigo, worse with neck 
extension or turning, after deceleration 
neck injury
Gradual but slow improvement 
with resolution of neck 
symptoms
Usually none
Clinical history
Exclude fractures and fistulas
Ossicular disrup­
tion
Hearing loss, acute vertigo, following 
head/facial trauma
Gradual (days) resolution of 
vertigo; hearing loss persists
Conductive
Clinical history
Audiometry
Exclude fistulas
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ENT, ear–nose–throat; TM, tympanic membrane.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:196–197.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
125
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
of movement, it is difficult to make this diagnosis in young children; 
the condition must be carefully distinguished from other movement 
impairments, especially disequilibrium.
DISEQUILIBRIUM
When a “dizzy” patient describes feeling unsteady on their feet, off bal­
ance, or uncoordinated, the patient is describing a disturbance in the 
body’s equilibrium system. The fundamental complaint is difficulty in 
walking, not from weakness but from a feeling of lack of control.
Walking is a complex activity. The constant integration of visual, 
vestibular, and proprioceptive afferent information regarding the 
changing spatial orientation is performed by using all levels of the 
central nervous system: the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, brainstem, 
spinal cord, and peripheral neuromuscular system. These spatial data 
are then utilized by the efferent system, producing both voluntary and 
involuntary movements and spatial adjustments (Fig. 7.10). Distur­
bances in any of these pathways can result in difficulty with locomotion.
Disequilibrium, therefore, may result from any perceptual distor­
tion of spatial orientation. Humans depend heavily on visual percep­
tion to orient themselves in space. Vestibulocochlear dysfunction can 
also severely impair a person’s ability to ambulate. Peripheral neuropa­
thies affecting proprioceptive function impair the ability of the central 
nervous system to accurately perceive the position of the limbs with 
regard to one another and to either the ground or the body. Disorders 
causing diffuse damage to the integrative mechanism or cortical or cer­
ebellar diseases can impair proprioception as well. Likewise, efferent 
motor disability produces impairment of locomotion by producing 
weakness or apraxias (Table 7.19).
The history is critical for patients complaining of dizziness or dif­
ficulty ambulating. For children, this includes a detailed developmen­
tal history, because the differential diagnosis varies significantly for 
TABLE 7.17  Central Vertigo
Cause
Clinical Clues
Diagnosis
Vertebrobasilar ischemia
Known (suspected) vascular disease: hypertensive, diabetic
Almost always accompanied by brainstem symptoms and signs: diplopia, 
dysarthria, dysesthesias, motor weakness
TIA: clinical history
Stroke: neurologic examination
CT scan may be unreliable
MRI more sensitive
Angiography?
Cerebellar hemorrhage
Hypertensive, anticoagulated, post-­traumatic
Sudden headache: diplopia, ataxia usually more prominent than vertigo
CT scan
Cerebellopontine angle tumors 
(acoustic neuroma)
Hearing loss, tinnitus much more prominent than vertigo
Mild disequilibrium
Early: normal neurologic examination, except sensorineural hearing loss
Later: cranial nerves V and VII abnormal; papilledema?
Audiometry: retrocochlear, sensorineural hearing loss
CT scan, MRI
Internal audiometry canal tomography
ENG, ABER
Multiple sclerosis
Optic neuritis
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Spastic paraparesis/incontinence
Vertigo first isolated symptom in only 10% of cases
Multiplicity of symptoms and signs dissociated in time 
and space
MRI scanning
CSF: oligoclonal bands
Drug toxicity
Alcohol, sedatives, tranquilizers, opiates, anticonvulsants
Discontinue drug
Basilar migraine
Vertigo part of headache syndrome
Usually positive family history
Clinical history
Vertiginous (temporal lobe) 
epilepsy
Vertigo as aura prior to loss of consciousness
Very rare
Clinical history
Exclude other diagnoses
EEG
Cranial neuropathy
Many types, all uncommon:
Herpes zoster: external ear/palate skin lesions and cranial nerve VIII 
symptoms
Postinfectious: after viral syndromes: polyneuritis and/or cerebellitis 
and/or encephalitis
Chronic meningitis: syphilis, tuberculosis, sarcoid, carcinomatous
Vasculitis: Cogan syndrome, polyangiitis with granulomatosis, tempo­
ral arteritis, syphilis
Head and neck carcinoma
Vascular compression syndromes
Others: heredofamilial disorders (Friedreich ataxia, spinocerebellar degeneration, olivopontocerebellar degeneration)
Cerebellar degeneration (alcohol, cancer)
Tumor of brainstem, cerebellum
Syrinx cervical cord
Post-­traumatic concussion
ABER, auditory brainstem-­evoked response; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ENG, electronystagmography; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:200.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
126
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
children who were walking and then stop and for those who do not 
achieve that milestone. For younger children, it may be very difficult 
to determine whether refusal or reluctance to walk is related to imbal­
ance, pain, or weakness. Nausea and vomiting are usually associated 
with vertigo but tend to be rare with disequilibrium. Nausea and vom­
iting may accompany a viral illness that results in an acute cerebellar 
ataxia and thus may precede the onset of disequilibrium. If nausea is 
simultaneous with the disequilibrium, drug or alcohol intoxication 
must be considered. Morning nausea or vomiting can be seen with 
increased intracranial pressure, as in hydrocephalus and posterior 
fossa tumors. Any history of head trauma, especially in toddlers, and 
any history of congenital heart disease with the potential for paradox­
ical embolization, including septic emboli resulting in brain abscess, 
must be considered.
It is important to distinguish acute intermittent ataxia from more 
chronic or progressive forms (Tables 7.20 and 7.21). Drugs and post­
viral cerebellitis are common causes of acute sudden-­onset ataxia. 
Varicella-­associated postinfectious acute cerebellar ataxia usually 
comes after the infection, but in rare instances, it may occur before 
or during chickenpox. Its nature is benign. Metabolic hereditary 
disorders may cause intermittent symptoms provoked by fever, as in 
maple syrup urine disease, ataxia-­telangiectasia, Hartnup disease, Ref­
sum disease, pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency, abetalipoproteinemia, 
biotinidase deficiency, and some enzyme deficiencies. These must be 
distinguished from hypothyroidism, demyelinating disorders, muscu­
lar dystrophies, and neoplasms of the posterior fossa, brainstem, and 
spinal cord. Paraneoplastic effects of neuroblastoma produce ataxia, 
opsoclonus, and myoclonus. The Miller Fisher variant of Guillain-­
Barre syndrome produces ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, and areflexia.
Progressive ataxias have a poorer prognosis. Age at onset can be 
used to distinguish some causes: Posterior fossa tumors and neuro­
blastoma generally occur within the first decade, Friedreich ataxia and 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy during the late first to second decades, 
and multiple sclerosis and diabetic peripheral neuropathy in the sec­
ond decade.
Observation of the child’s gait is an important component of the 
physical examination. Sufficient room should be found to allow the 
child to initiate walking, to proceed in a straight line for 10–20 paces, 
and to turn and return. The normal child, older than 2–3 years, initiates 
walking without hesitation and steps smoothly with a consistent stride 
length and height and a narrow base. The arms should swing freely and 
rhythmically, alternating with the feet, and there should be little sway 
in the trunk. When the child stops, there should be no hesitation again 
and no wavering or compensation.
One of the most common gait abnormalities in children is the wide-­
based gait. Careful observation of toddlers at various stages of develop­
ment familiarizes the observer with the transition from the wide-­based, 
lurching steps of a 12 month old to the smooth, sure, rhythmic stride 
of children older than 2–3 years. Excessive trunk sway is typical of 
cerebellar ataxia. Waddling tends to be caused by proximal muscle 
weakness with a forward-­leaning, stiff appearance. It is important to 
A
B
Fig. 7.7  The Rinne test. The tuning fork is first placed on the mastoid 
process (A). When the sound can no longer be heard, the tuning fork 
is placed in front of the external auditory meatus (B). Normally, air con­
duction is better than bone conduction. (From Swartz MH. Textbook of 
Physical Diagnosis: History and Examination. Philadelphia: WB Saun­
ders; 1989:175.)
A
B
Fig. 7.8  The Weber test. When a vibrating tuning fork is placed on the 
center of the forehead, the sound is normally heard in the center with­
out lateralization to either side (top). A, In the presence of a conductive 
hearing loss, the sound is heard on the side of the conductive loss. B, 
In the presence of a sensorineural loss, the sound is better heard on 
the opposite (unaffected) side. (From Swartz MH. Textbook of Phys­
ical Diagnosis: History and Examination. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1989:175.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
127
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
distinguish an unsteady gait with irregular steps from a limp or a sen­
sory deficit resulting in a high step with a slapping foot plant.
In a toddler, passive and active range of motion exercises should be 
performed to ensure the observer that there is no joint or muscle pain. 
Reflexes, including the Babinski sign, should be carefully tested. Test­
ing the sensory system in a toddler, especially proprioception, vibra­
tion, and two-­point discrimination, can be a challenge. The Romberg 
test may also be difficult for younger children.
Evaluation of the Patient with Disequilibrium
History
A detailed developmental history, especially for a younger child, is 
obtained. The family history should also be complete. The examiner 
should check for prodromal illnesses, especially viral in nature:
Is there any history of trauma?
What is the character of the disability?
Does the child feel unsteady standing, starting to walk, stopping, or 
turning?
How do the parents characterize the child’s gait?
Are there associated symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, pain, or vertigo?
Does the child take or have access to any medications or drugs?
Is the disequilibrium intermittent or constant?
Are there any other medical conditions?
Physical Examination
A thorough general physical examination should precede a very 
detailed neuromuscular examination. The presence of a goiter, cuta­
neous lesions of neurofibromatosis, or tuberous sclerosis may point to 
a diagnosis immediately. The neuromuscular examination should pro­
ceed from head to toe in an organized and systematic manner. Mus­
cle tone, bulk, and symmetry of the face, trunk, and extremities are 
important. Cranial nerves should be examined, as should the sensory 
system. During the motor examination, the physician should isolate 
muscle groups and joints by observing the gait more than once before 
assessing overall function. The Romberg test should be performed in 
all patients old enough to cooperate, as should the lateralizing cerebel­
lar tests, such as the finger-­to-­nose and rapid, alternating movements. 
A
B
Fig. 7.9  The Romberg test. The patient stands upright, feet together, 
arms at sides. The examiner should stand next to the patient. The test is 
performed in two stages: with the patient’s eyes open and then with the 
eyes closed. Even a normal person may experience mild subjective dis­
equilibrium and may “waver” with the eyes closed. Thus, the Romberg 
test can sometimes stimulate the feeling of disequilibrium. A, With the 
eyes open, the patient can stand unsupported without difficulty. B, With 
the eyes closed, the patient loses their balance. This test result suggests 
peripheral neuropathy or vestibular dysfunction or both. Cerebellar dis­
ease more often results in an inability to maintain posture with the eyes 
either open or closed. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:168.)
TABLE 7.18  Interpretation of the HINTS 
Exam
HINTS Exam 
Component
Peripheral Vertigo
Central 
Vertigo
Head Impulse Test (HIT)
Loss of eye fixation with 
head impulse; “positive” or 
“abnormal”
Intact vestibulo-­
ocular reflex; 
“negative” or 
“normal”
Nystagmus (N)
None or horizontal unidirec­
tional
Vertical, rotatory, 
or horizontal 
bidirectional
Test of Skew (TS)
No skew; “negative”
Skew; “positive”
From Quimby AE, Kwok ESH, Lelli D, et al. Usage of the HINTS exam 
and neuroimaging on the assessment of peripheral vertigo in the 
emergency department. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2018;47:54.
Efferent arc:
Muscles
Joints
Coordination
Afferent arc:
Vestibular
Visual
Proprioceptive
Integrative mechanisms:
Cerebellum
Cerebral cortex
Spinal cord
Fig. 7.10  The afferent, integrative, and efferent components of the 
equilibrium system. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:166.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
128
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 7.19  Disequilibrium
Cause
Clues
Gait/Romberg Test Result
Most Common
Multiple sensory deficits
Visual impairment?
Hearing/vestibular dysfunction?
Neuropathy?
Spondylosis/degenerative joint disease?
Neuropathy?
Weakness?
Timid: slow, short-­stepped, apprehensive
Remarkably improved with sensory assist (cane, 
companion)
Romberg: normal or sensory
Hyperventilation/anxiety disorders
Young, healthy, anxious patient with episodic “spells” of disequi­
librium
or
Constant, chronic, elusive disequilibrium with or without obvious 
medical/psychosocial stress
Usually normal gait
Romberg: normal
or
“Nonphysiologic”
Vestibular disorders
Chronic unilateral vestibulopathy may cause ongoing disequilibrium: 
Ménière disease, cholesteatoma, fistula, acoustic neuroma, drug-­
induced vestibulopathy
Usually normal gait
May veer to side of vestibular lesion
Romberg: sensory
Drug induced
Central nervous system agents: tranquilizers, barbiturates, seda­
tives, alcohol, H2 blockers, β blockers, calcium agents, indometh­
acin
Timid and/or ataxic gait
Romberg: normal or cerebellar
Vestibulotoxic agents: aspirin, loop diuretics, aminoglycosides, 
quinidine
Romberg: sensory or normal
Alcoholic
Heavy alcohol abuse may cause cerebellar and/or sensory degen­
eration
Nystagmus uncommon
Ataxic gait
Romberg: cerebellar or sensory
Painful ambulation
Arthritis?
Claudication?
Pain is limiting factor!
Limping?
Waddling?
Normal gait?
Romberg: usually normal
Fear of falling
Normal examination
No apraxia or ataxia
Rarely, phobic
Timid gait
Romberg: often cerebellar but fluctuates, inorganic
Less Common
Hypothyroidism
Weight gain or poor growth, cold intolerance, hoarseness, fatigue
Usually normal gait
Severe: ataxic gait
Hypoglycemia
Episodic
Romberg: usually normal
Apraxia
Usually diffuse cortical dysfunction or frontal lobe disease
Usually apraxic in execution of other skilled movements (e.g., 
combing hair, brushing teeth)
Apraxic gait
Romberg: normal
Peripheral disease
Diabetes, alcoholism, pernicious anemia
Only very severe (proprioceptive) neuropathy causes gait disorder
Sensory gait: footdrop and/or circus clown
Romberg: sensory
Cerebellar disease (nonalcoholic)
See text
Ataxic gait
Romberg: cerebellar
Spasticity
Multiple sclerosis, spinal cord tumor/trauma
Legs: weak, hyperreflexic, clonus
Often bowel/bladder dysfunction
Spastic, scissors gait
Romberg: often normal
Normal-­pressure hydrocephalus
Urinary incontinence
Cognitive impairment
Gait disturbance
Ataxic/apraxic
Hemiplegia
Prior cerebrovascular accident
Hemiparesis on neurologic examination
Hemiplegic gait
Romberg: often normal (if able to perform at all)
Proximal myopathy
Severe bilateral proximal leg weakness: hip disease, muscular 
dystrophy, myositis, etc.
Waddling gait
Romberg: normal
Somatic symptom disorder
Unpredictable, intermittent or bizarre
“Secondary gain”
Gait varies: sometimes normal, timid, limping, apraxic
Romberg: often cerebellar, but fluctuates, inorganic
CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:172–173.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
129
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
Attention to detail in the history and physical examination findings 
usually yields a diagnosis.
Diagnostic Tests
Testing for drugs/medications may be the most useful test for children 
with ataxia. Neuroimaging is indicated for acute ataxia when associated 
with focal findings on exam, increased intracranial pressure, a history 
of trauma, or altered mental status. Imaging is indicated for patients 
with findings concerning for an intracranial mass. Lumbar puncture 
should be performed for concern of infection or Guillain-­Barre syn­
drome. Metabolic tests and thyroid function tests are indicated by 
either history or physical findings. When weakness is associated with 
the disequilibrium, electromyography and nerve conduction studies 
may be indicated.
SUMMARY AND RED FLAGS
Ataxia can be seen in children at any age; it may portend serious patho­
logic processes, including posterior fossa tumors, leukodystrophies, 
metabolic disorders, and familial-­hereditary disorders. The history 
must be obtained carefully, with attention to developmental milestones, 
family history, specifics of prodromal illnesses, associated symptoms, 
and a description of the gait. The physical examination must also be 
detailed and methodical, with special emphasis on the neuromuscular 
examination. Imaging studies of the central nervous system are usually 
required, especially for younger children, in whom the possibility of 
neoplasms is the greatest.
LIGHTHEADEDNESS
Lightheadedness is the most difficult to characterize without using 
the term “dizzy.” The lightheaded patient’s description is usually vague 
and nonspecific. The key is to elicit an adequate description from the 
patient to rule out vertigo, disequilibrium, and presyncope. The differ­
ential diagnosis for lightheadedness is then rather short in comparison 
with the other “dizziness” conditions (Fig. 7.11). It is often difficult to 
distinguish lightheadedness from presyncope.
In the patient who complains of lightheadedness, voluntary hyper­
ventilation may reproduce the patient’s symptoms. Voluntary hyper­
ventilation in normal subjects produces a variety of symptoms (Table 
7.22). This test is predictive only if the patient’s symptoms are precisely 
reproduced and all other investigation results are negative.
Lightheadedness that is episodic frequently follows a pattern 
related to the underlying psychogenic disorder: phobic disorders, post-­
traumatic stress syndrome, panic attacks, and anxiety disorders. Such 
situational anxieties, phobias, or panic attacks may occur with or with­
out hyperventilation. Careful history taking is the key to recognizing 
the pattern. If the history is that of constant lightheadedness, the origin 
is almost always psychogenic. This is a somatization generally of anxi­
ety disorder or depression. The clinician must nonetheless remain cau­
tious with predictable episodes because postural episodes, drug-­related 
episodes, and perimenstrual episodes can follow a pattern and repre­
sent physiologic abnormalities that predispose to lightheadedness.
TABLE 7.20  Acute or Recurrent Ataxia
Brain tumor
Conversion reaction
Drug ingestion
Encephalitis (brainstem)
Genetic disorders
Dominant recurrent ataxia
Episodic ataxia type 1
Episodic ataxia type 2
Hartnup disease
Maple syrup urine disease
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Migraine
Basilar
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Postinfectious/immune
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Acute postinfectious cerebellitis (varicella)
Miller Fisher syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Myoclonic encephalopathy/neuroblastoma
Pseudoataxia (epileptic)
Trauma
Hematoma
Postconcussion
Vertebrobasilar occlusion
Vascular disorders
Cerebellar hemorrhage
Kawasaki disease
From Augustine E, Mink J. Movement disorders. In: Kliegman R, 
Stanton B, Schor N, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 19th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011:2053–2055.
TABLE 7.21  Chronic or Progressive Ataxia
Brain Tumors
Cerebellar astrocytoma
Cerebellar hemangioblastoma (von Hippel–Landau disease)
Ependymoma
Medulloblastoma
Supratentorial tumors
Congenital Malformations
Basilar impression
Cerebellar aplasias
Cerebellar hemisphere aplasia
Dandy-­Walker malformation
Vernal aplasia
Chiari malformation
Hereditary Ataxias
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Autosomal recessive inheritance
Abetalipoproteinemia
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Ataxia without oculomotor apraxia
Ataxia with episodic dystonia
Friedreich ataxia
Hartnup disease
Juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis
Juvenile sulfatide lipidoses
Maple syrup urine disease
Marinesco-­Sjögren syndrome
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Refsum disease (HSMN IV)
Respiratory chain disorders
X-­Linked Inheritance
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Leber optic neuropathy
With adult-­onset dementia
With deafness
With deafness and loss of vision
From Augustine E, Mink J. Movement disorders. In: Kliegman R, 
Stanton B, Schor N, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 19th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011:2053–2055.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
130
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
If the episodes of lightheadedness are unpredictable, the clinician 
is advised to consider a broader differential diagnosis. Severe ane­
mia, low cardiac output, thyroid disease, and medications may pro­
duce occasional lightheadedness. Of greater concern are episodes of 
lightheadedness associated with other symptoms, chest pain, seizures, 
confusion, and visual or auditory changes. Exertional lightheadedness 
must be pursued to rule out a cardiac dysrhythmia.
If hyperventilation reproduces the patient’s symptoms, it is not the 
diagnosis in and of itself. Hyperventilation is a feature of many psy­
chogenic syndromes and may be acute or chronic. Part of the perfor­
mance of the hyperventilation should be educating the patient to the 
feelings and the scenario leading to the hyperventilation reaction. Even 
young children can then be trained to regulate their breathing to avoid 
the symptoms. However, this does not address the underlying cause 
of the hyperventilation reaction; that requires patient, nonjudgmental, 
longer-­term counseling and careful categorization of the underlying 
disorder. The clinician should not hesitate to consult a psychiatrist to 
facilitate this process as well as treat the definitive psychogenic disorder.
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH 
LIGHTHEADEDNESS
History
The examiner should listen for descriptions suggesting vertigo, dis­
equilibrium, or presyncope and should establish whether there is any 
pattern to the occurrence of the feeling of lightheadedness. History 
should include associated symptoms, such as diaphoresis, hyperpnea, 
pallor or flushing, headache, and chest pain. After the more serious 
physiologic disorders are ruled out by history, physical examination, or 
diagnostic testing, psychogenic disorders should be pursued.
Physical Examination
After a thorough general physical examination including examination 
of the fundi, a full, detailed neurologic examination should be per­
formed. In addition to allowing primary cardiac, endocrine, or neu­
rologic disorders to be ruled out, the examination allows the clinician 
Dizzy?
Chronic,
constant
Acute,
episodic
Generalized anxiety
disorder
Depression
Hypochondriasis
Situational anxiety
Panic disorder
Phobic
With or
without
hyperventilation
LIGHTHEADED
USUALLY PSYCHOGENIC
BUT REMEMBER:
Vertigo?
Disequilibrium?
(Pre) syncope?
Severe anemia?
Low cardiac output?
Thyroid disease?
Drug induced?
Unpredictable
episodes
Cardiac symptoms:
arrhythmia?
Neurologic symptoms:
  transient ischemic
attack? seizure?
Ear symptoms:
vestibular?
Hypertension:
pheochromocytoma?
hyper-beta-adrenergic
slate?
Drug related?
Predictable
episodes
Exertional: cardiac?
Postural: orthostatic?
vestibular?
Postprandial
hypoglycemia?
Drug related:
alcohol, sedatives,
antihypertensive
withdrawal
Substance abuse
Perimenstrual:
premenstrual
syndrome?
Fig. 7.11  Evaluation for lightheadedness. (From Reilly BM. Practical 
Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1991:206.)
TABLE 7.22  Symptoms Associated with 
Hyperventilation
General
Fatigue
Diffuse weakness
Insomnia
Nightmares
Headache
“Feel cold”
Sweats
Cardiovascular
Palpitations
Tachycardia
Precordial pain
Raynaud phenomenon
Respiratory
Shortness of breath
Chest pain
Sighing respirations
Yawning
“Can’t get deep breath”
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
Unexplained cough
Dry mouth
Musculoskeletal
Muscle spasm
Tremors
Twitching
Tetany
Neurologic
Dizziness
Paresthesias (especially distal)
Unsteadiness
Impaired memory and/or concentration
Slurred speech
Blurred vision
Gastrointestinal
Globus hystericus
Mouth dryness
Dysphagia
Bloating
Belching/flatulence
Abdominal pain
Psychic
Tension
Anxiety
Depression
Apprehension
From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:208.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
131
CHAPTER 7  Syncope and Dizziness
to gain the confidence of the patient and demonstrates the physician’s 
concern about the patient’s complaints.
Diagnostic Tests
Diagnostic testing is directed by the history and physical examination 
findings. In the setting of lightheadedness, tests are generally done to 
rule out potentially serious cardiovascular and neurologic conditions.
SUMMARY AND RED FLAGS
Lightheadedness must be distinguished from vertigo, disequilibrium, 
and presyncope. Frequently, the patient’s description of the sensation 
is vague and uncertain. A pattern of the appearance of the symptoms 
may suggest an underlying cause. The coexistence of any other symp­
toms must be carefully sought. Physical findings are generally normal, 
including the neurologic examination; specific attention is given to cer­
ebellar, vestibular, and sensory function. Voluntary hyperventilation 
in the supine position frequently reproduces the patient’s lighthead­
edness. Hyperventilation may be acute or chronic and is a symptom 
itself, rarely a diagnosis.
Treatment must address the underlying psychogenic cause to be 
successful.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
131.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Alboni P, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Diagnostic value of history in 
patients with syncope with or without heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2001;37:1921–1928.
Johnsrude CL. Current approach to pediatric syncope. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2000;21:522–531.
Narchi H. The child who passes out. Pediatr Rev. 2000;21:384–388.
Paris Y, Toro-­Salazar OH, Gauthier NS, et al. Regional implementation of a 
pediatric cardiology syncope algorithm using SCAMPS methodology. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2016;5(2):e002931. https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.115.002931.
Post R, Dickerson L. Dizziness: a diagnostic approach. Am Fam Physician. 
2010;82:361–368.
Tanel RE. Putting the bite into the pediatric syncope evaluation. Pediatr Case 
Rev. 2001;1:3–18.
Willis J. Syncope. Pediatr Rev. 2000;21:201–204.
Syncope
Agarwal AK, Garg R, Sarkar P. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. 
Postgrad Med J. 2007;83:478–480.
Albassam OT, Redelmeier RJ, Shadowitz S, et al. Did this patient have cardiac 
syncope? The rational clinical examination systematic review. J Am Med 
Assoc. 2019;321(24):2448–2457.
Berger S, Dhala A, Friedberg D. Sudden cardiac death in infants, children, and 
adolescents. Pediatr Cardiol. 1999;46:221–234.
Bradley T, Dixon J, Easthope R. Unexplained fainting, near drowning and 
unusual seizures in childhood: screening for long QT syndrome in New 
Zealand families. N Z Med J. 1999;112:299–302.
Campell R, Berger S, Ackerman M, et al. Policy statement pediatric sudden 
cardiac arrest. Pediatrics. 2012:e1094–e1102.
Campuzano O, Sarquella-­Brugada G, Cesar S, et al. Genetics of inherited 
arrhythmias in pediatrics. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015;27:665–674.
Charlton NP, Pellegrino JL, Kule A, et al. 2019 American Heart Associa­
tion and American Red Cross focused update for first aid. Circulation. 
2019;140:e931–e938.
Coleman DK, Long B, Koyfman A. Clinical mimics: an emergency medicine-­
focused review of syncope mimics. J Emerg Med. 2018;54(1):81–89.
Dalal A, Czosek RJ, Kovach K, et al. Clinical presentation of pediatric patients 
at risk for sudden cardiac arrest. J Pediatr. 2016;177:191–196.
Dalal AS, Van Hare GF. Long QT syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III 
JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Philadelphia: Elsevi­
er; 2020:2443–2446. 21e.
DiMario Jr FJ. Prospective study of children with cyanotic and pallid breath-­
holding spells. Pediatrics. 2001;107:265–269.
Eirís-­Pual J, Rodríguez-­Nunez A, Fernandez-­Martínez N, et al. Usefulness 
of the head-­upright tilt test for distinguishing syncope and epilepsy in 
children. Epilepsia. 2001;42:709–713.
Ellison S. Sudden cardiac death in adolescents. Prim Care. 2015;42:57–76.
Jacob G, Costa F, Shannon JR, et al. The neuropathic postural tachycardia 
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1008–1014.
Kanjwal K, Calkins H. Syncope in children and adolescents. Cardiol Clin. 
2015;33:397–409.
Kouakam C, Vaksmann G, Pachy E, et al. Long-­term follow up of children and 
adolescents with syncope. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:1618–1625.
Lahat H, Eldar M, Levy-­Nissenbaum E, et al. Autosomal recessive catechol­
amine-­ or exercise-­induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Circula­
tion. 2001;103:2822–2827.
MacNeil E, Vashist S. Approach to syncope and altered mental status. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 2013;60:1083–1106.
Meadow MS, Guber K, Chokshi S, et al. The benefits of oral rehydration on 
orthostatic intolerance in children with postural tachycardia syndrome. J 
Pediatr. 2019;214:96–102.
Moodley M. Clinical approach to syncope in children. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 
2013;20:12–17.
Olshansky B, Sullivan RM. Inappropriate sinus tachycardia. J Am Col Cardiol. 
2013;61(8):793–801.
Pfammatter JP, Paul T. Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia in infancy and child­
hood. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:2067–2072.
Pomeranz A, Busey S, Sabnis S, et al., eds. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:58–61.
Priori SG, Napolitano C, Gioedano U, et al. Brugada syndrome and sudden 
cardiac death in children. Lancet. 2000;355:808–809.
Ritter S, Tani LY, Etheridge SP, et al. What is the yield of screening echocardi­
ography in pediatric syncope? Pediatrics. 2000;105:E58.
Roden D. Drug-­induced prolongation of the QT interval. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350:1013–1022.
Rodríguez-­Nunez A, Fernandez-­Cebrian S, Perez-­Munuzuri A, et al. Cerebral 
syncope in children. J Pediatr. 2000;136:542–544.
Salim MA, Ware LE, Barnard M, et al. Syncope recurrence in children: relation 
to tilt-­test results. Pediatrics. 1998;102:924–926.
Satish R. Postural tachycardia syndrome. Circulation. 2013;127:2336–2342.
Shalev Y, Gal R, Tchou PJ, et al. Echocardiographic demonstration of 
decreased left ventricular dimensions and vigorous myocardial con­
traction during syncope induced by head-­up tilt test. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1991;18:746–751.
Sheldon RS, et al. 2015 Heart Rhythm Society expert consensus statement 
on the diagnosis and treatment of postural tachycardia syndrome, 
inappropriate sinus tachycardia and vasovagal syncope. Heart Rhythm. 
2015;12(6):e41–e63.
Shen W-­K, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and 
management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122.
Shen W-­K, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for 
the evaluation and management of patients with syncope: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology / American Heart Association Task Force 
on Clinical Practice Guideline and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017.
Sutton R. Clinical classification of syncope. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2013;55:339–344.
Thilenius OG, Quinones JA, Husanyi TS, et al. Tilt test for diagnosis of unex­
plained syncope in pediatric patients. Pediatrics. 1991;87:334–338.
Tretter JT, Kavey RE. Distinguishing features of cardiac-­related syncope. J 
Pediatr. 2014;164:1240–1241.
Wang Y, Zhang C, Chen S, et al. Frequency domain indices of heart rate 
variability are useful for differentiating vasovagal syncope and postural 
tachycardia syndrome in children. J Pediatr. 2019;207:59–63.
Vertigo
Bertholon P, Karkas A. Otologic disorders causing dizziness, including surgery 
for vestibular disorders. Handb Clin Neurol. 2016;137(3rd Series):279–293.
Bower C, Cotton R. The spectrum of vertigo in children. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 1995;121:911–915.
Davitt M, Delvecchio MT, Aronoff SC. The differential diagnosis of vertigo in 
children – a systematic review of 2726 cases. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2017.
Dunn DW, Snyder H. Benign positional vertigo of childhood. Am J Dis Child. 
1976;176:1099.
Froehling DA, Bowen JM, Mohr DN, et al. The canalith repositioning proce­
dure for the treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: a random­
ized trial. Mayo Clin Proc. 2000;75:695–700.
Hotson JR. Clinical detection of acute vestibulocerebellar disorders. West J 
Med. 1984;140:910–913.
Jahn K. Vertigo and dizziness in children. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. 
Vol. 137 (3rd series) Neuro-­Otology. Furman JM and Lempert T, eds. 2016 
Elsevier B.V.
Katsarkas A, Kirkham TH. Paroxysmal positional vertigo: a study of 255 cases. 
J Otolaryngol. 1978;7:320–330.
Weisleder P, Fife TD. Dizziness and headache: a common association in chil­
dren and adolescents. J Child Neurol. 2001;16:727–730.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
131.e2
Disequilibrium
DeAngelis C. Ataxia. Pediatr Rev. 1995;16:114–115.
Dinolfo EA, Adam HM. Evaluation of ataxia. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22:177–178.
Dreyfus PM, Oshtory M, Gardner ED, et al. Cerebellar ataxia: anatomical, 
physiological and clinical implications. West J Med. 1978;128:499–511.
Kinast M, Levin HS, Rothner AD, et al. Cerebellar ataxia, opsoclonus and 
occult neural crest tumor. Am J Dis Child. 1980;134:1057–1059.
Mink J. Movement disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, Blum 
NJ, et al. eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:2882–2896. 21e.
Whelan H, et al. Evaluation of the child with acute ataxia: a systematic review. 
Pediatr Neurol. 2013;49e:15-e24.
Lightheadedness
Magarian GJ. Hyperventilation syndromes: infrequently recognized common 
expressions of anxiety and stress. Medicine (Baltimore). 1982;61:219–236.
Naschitz JE, Hardoff D, Bystritzki I, et al. The role of the capnography head-­up 
tilt test in the diagnosis of syncope in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 
1998;101:E6.
Tiwari S, Bakris GL. Psychogenic vertigo: a review. Postgrad Med. 1981;70:69–77.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
