Chapter Title One Line
Chapter Author
550
Headaches are classified as primary or secondary. Primary headaches 
are benign, are not caused by underlying disease or structural prob­
lems, and include migraines, tension-type headaches (TTHs), and the 
trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs). Migraines and TTHs are the 
most common primary headaches in children and can have less dis­
tinct features in children than they do in adults (Table 34.1). While pri­
mary headaches may cause significant pain and disability, they are not 
intrinsically dangerous. Secondary headaches are caused by an under­
lying disease, such as infection, tumor, intracranial hemorrhage, or a 
vascular disorder, and may indicate an innocuous etiology or portend 
a serious illness. Most headaches in children are primary headaches 
or harmless secondary headaches. History and physical examination 
guide the diagnosis of primary headache disorders, assess the degree 
of headache-­related disability, and reveal information that may prompt 
evaluation for secondary headaches. Each subsequent visit allows for 
assessment of the response to therapy and consideration of secondary 
headaches, the causes of which may confer significant morbidity and in 
rare cases may be life threatening.
HISTORY
The specific headache diagnosis is determined by the headache pheno­
type, which is defined in terms of laterality, location (Figs. 34.1, 34.2, 
and 34.3), timing, frequency, duration, quality, severity, associated 
symptoms, and alleviating and aggravating factors. In most cases, a 
single phenotypic headache is present. If the patient has more than one 
type of headache, the clinician must obtain a specific history for each 
type. Ideally, the history should be obtained from the child, parent, and 
any other caregivers, including teachers. Even a young child should be 
given the opportunity to describe the symptoms experienced with each 
headache episode and may use drawings to do this.
The laterality and location of the pain should be established (see 
Figs. 34.1, 34.2, and 34.3). If the pain is unilateral, it should be noted 
whether the pain is always on one side or if the side varies. The loca­
tion may be restricted or more widely distributed; if the location var­
ies from one episode to another, this should be noted as well. Unusual 
locations in pediatrics may include the occipital region. This location 
should raise index of suspicion for intracranial pathology if there are 
abnormal neurologic findings or the headache does not meet criteria 
for a primary headache disorder.
The timing, frequency, and duration of headaches should be 
described, as the temporal patterns of headaches are useful in creating 
a differential diagnosis, identifying the need for work-­up, and classify­
ing the type of headache. The temporal categories of headache include 
acute, acute recurrent, chronic nonprogressive, and chronic progres­
sive (Table 34.2).
The severity of a headache does not necessarily correlate with the 
seriousness of its etiology. Pain caused by brain tumors may initially 
be mild, whereas the pain of TTHs may be excruciating. Pain is sub­
jective and may be influenced by age, culture, duration, and previous 
encounters with medical care, leading some patients to unintention­
ally minimize or exaggerate their pain; as such, pain alone should not 
be used to narrow the differential diagnosis. An exception to this prin­
ciple is the thunderclap headache, in which the onset of pain is sud­
den, reaches maximum severity within seconds, and is often described 
by patients as the worst headache they have ever had. Such headaches 
may indicate subarachnoid hemorrhage, arterial dissection, or venous 
sinus thrombosis, among other causes (Table 34.3). Numerical scales, 
or visual scales for younger children, are helpful for quantifying pain 
and determining the efficacy of treatment. In older patients, descrip­
tive phrases, such as mild, moderate, severe, and excruciating, may 
suffice.
Associated symptoms such as hemiparesis, ataxia, visual loss, dip­
lopia, scotomata, vertigo, seizure-­like activity, confusion, mood or 
behavioral changes, autonomic symptoms, and hemisensory occur­
rences may suggest neurologic dysfunction or a migraine-­related 
aura. Any history of fevers, syncope, nausea, vomiting, and appetite 
changes should also be ascertained. Special note should be made if the 
pain awakens the patient from sleep, is present upon awakening in the 
morning, or worsens when recumbent; these findings may indicate 
increased intracranial pressure. Events associated with the onset or 
aggravation of headaches, such as trauma, intake of particular foods, or 
physical exertion, may provide insight into the etiology of headaches, 
as well as potential triggers to avoid.
Alleviation via rest or positional changes should be noted, as 
should the response of the headaches to medications. A thorough 
medication history is essential for diagnosing analgesic overuse head­
aches and headaches caused by medication side effects. The use of 
over-­the-­counter medication and prescription medications, including 
medications that have not been prescribed for the patient, should be 
delineated, as well as the use of any supplements or traditional rem­
edies. Both primary and secondary headaches may respond to medi­
cations and such a response is not diagnostic of any specific headache 
disorder. For example, relief of an acute headache by triptans is not 
Headaches
Sara M. Lauck and Sandra Gage
34
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
551
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
diagnostic of migraine, as triptans may also be effective for other causes 
of headache.
In patients with recurring headaches, the history may be clari­
fied by keeping a headache diary, which can additionally determine 
headache patterns, identify triggers, aid diagnosis, and assess the 
efficacy of therapy (Table 34.4). A headache diary may also assist 
in determining the degree of disability caused by the headache. 
Disability evaluation may be augmented by school attendance and 
performance records. Headaches that improve with the onset of the 
summer school holiday may suggest that a child is struggling aca­
demically or is being bullied at school. In younger children, where 
detailed personal descriptions of pain may be more difficult to 
obtain and record in a diary, videos of the headache episodes may 
aid diagnosis.
The past medical history may reveal a risk for potentially serious 
causes of secondary headaches that require prompt evaluation, such 
as sickle cell disease, thyroid disorders, parathyroid dysfunction, 
malignancy, hypercoagulability, hypertension, immunodeficiency, 
congenital heart disease, autoimmune disorders, and arteriovenous 
malformations. Allergic rhinitis and other atopic disorders are also 
associated with headaches. Infantile colic, benign paroxysmal tor­
ticollis, cyclic vomiting syndrome, and benign paroxysmal vertigo 
are considered episodic syndromes that may be associated with 
migraine and may precede the development of typical migraine 
symptoms later in life. In females, a menstrual history should be 
obtained, including details of the cycle and the timing of head­
aches with respect to the menstrual cycle. A history of secondary 
TABLE 34.1  Differential Diagnosis of Headache
Headache Type
Genetics
Epidemiology
Characteristic Features
Length
Accompanying Symptoms
Migraine headache
Complex genetics 
but usually a family 
history
More frequent in 
women
Unilateral, bilateral; throbbing; 
moderate to severe; worsens 
with activity
Hours to days
Photophobia, phonophobia, nausea 
and/or vomiting
Tension-­type headache
Usually a family 
history
Equal frequency in 
men and women
Tight bandlike pain; bilateral; 
pain may be mild to moderate; 
improves with activity
Hours to days
No nausea or vomiting; small amount 
of light or sound sensitivity, but 
not both
Cluster headache
May have a family 
history
More frequent in 
men
Unilateral severe pain in the 
face
Minutes to hours
Ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, rhinorrhea, 
eyelid edema, tearing
Paroxysmal hemicrania
Usually no family 
history
More frequent in 
women
Unilateral pain in the face
Minutes
Ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, rhinorrhea, 
eyelid edema, tearing; responds to 
indomethacin
Short unilateral headache 
with conjunctival 
injection, tearing
No family history
More frequent in 
men
Unilateral eye pain; orbit pain
Typically 4 min 
or less
Conjunctival injection, tearing
Hemicrania continua
No family history
More frequent in 
women
Unilateral continuous headache 
with episodic stabbing pains
Continuous
Ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, rhinorrhea, 
eyelid edema, tearing
From Digre KB. Headaches and other head pain. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 25th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016, Table 398-­2.
A
“Hatband”
distribution
Occipital
distribution
B
Fig. 34.1  Common location of migraine (A) and tension (B) headaches. 
Of note, some tension headaches may be unilateral, while migraines 
may occur in the same distribution (including bilateral) as tension head­
aches. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Ocular disease
Frontal sinusitis
Temporomandibular syndrome
Temporal arteritis
Tension headache
Migraine
Cluster
Ocular disease
Maxillary sinusitis
Dental infection
Allergic/vasomotor rhinitis
Nasopharyngeal tumor
Trigeminal neuralgia
Migraine
Cluster
Fig. 34.2  Periorbital headache. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in 
Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
552
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
amenorrhea could suggest pituitary or other central nervous system 
neoplasms.
The family history should be probed for any genetic predisposi­
tion to migraines, aneurysms, other vascular malformations, early-­
onset strokes, or brain neoplasms. A negative family history for 
primary headaches should cause the clinician to be more cautious in 
assigning the diagnosis of a primary headache disorder. Social history 
should investigate for psychosocial factors that may influence or be 
influenced by headaches, such as school performance, the relation­
ships between family members, recent changes in social structure, 
and substance abuse in the patient or the family. The provider should 
also screen for indications of neglect or abuse. Detailed psychologic 
evaluation with screening for symptoms of depression and anxiety 
may be indicated.
Some historical components are classic features of primary 
headaches, while others are concerning for secondary headaches 
TABLE 34.2  Four Temporal Patterns of 
Childhood Headache
Acute: Single episode of pain without a history of such episodes. The 
“first and worst” headache raises concerns for aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage in adults but is commonly due to febrile illness related to upper 
respiratory tract infection in children. Regardless, more ominous causes of 
acute headache (hemorrhage, meningitis, tumor) must be considered.
Acute recurrent: Pattern of attacks of pain separated by symptom-­free 
intervals. Primary headache syndromes, such as migraine or tension-­type 
headache, usually cause this pattern. Recurrent headaches are occasionally 
due to specific epilepsy syndromes (benign occipital epilepsy), substance 
abuse, or recurrent trauma.
Chronic progressive: Implies a gradually increasing frequency and severity 
of headache. The pathologic correlate is increasing ICP. Causes of this 
pattern include pseudotumor cerebri, brain tumor, hydrocephalus, chronic 
meningitis, brain abscess, and subdural collections.
Chronic nonprogressive or chronic daily: Pattern of frequent or constant 
headache. Chronic daily headache generally is defined as >3-­mo history of 
>15 headaches/mo, with headaches lasting >4 hr. Affected patients have 
normal neurologic examinations; psychologic factors and anxiety about 
possible underlying organic causes are common.
From Huang Schiller J, Shellhaas RA. Headache and migraine. In: 
Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 8th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:686.
Periorbital or
frontotemporal
location is usual
Tears and
nasal stuffiness,
often unilateral,
accompany the 
headache
Duration is
usually brief
(1 hour)
Fig. 34.3  Cluster headache. (From Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in 
Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
TABLE 34.3  Main and Rare Causes of 
Thunderclap Headache
Main Causes
Rare Causes
Vascular Disorders
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Intracerebral hemorrhage
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Spontaneous intracranial 
hypotension
Cervical artery dissection
Pituitary apoplexy, arteritis, angiitis
Unruptured vascular malformation, 
aneurysm
Arterial hypertension
Cerebral segmental vasoconstriction
Nonvascular Disorders
Greater occipital neuralgia
Intermittent hydrocephalus by colloid cyst
Infections
Meningitis, encephalitis
Erve virus (European Nairovirus)
Sinusitis
Primary Headache Disorders
Migraine
Primary thunderclap headache
Primary exertional headache
Primary cough headache
Cluster headache
Tension headache, new daily persistent 
headache
From Linn FHH. Primary thunderclap headache. In: Aminoff MJ, 
ed. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol. 97. New York: Elsevier; 
2010:473–481.
TABLE 34.4  The Headache Diary for 
Recurring Headaches*
Date
Time of onset
Time of resolution
Maximum level of pain (mild, moderate, or severe or according to a visual or 
numerical pain scale)
Triggers:
Sleep
Foods†
Activities
Medications
Modifiers:
Response to position changes or Valsalva maneuver
Medications used (dose, response)
Other modifiers
Additional symptoms
*If more than one type of headache exists, the types should be defined 
and labeled, and separate data should be recorded for each type.
†Foods are believed to be less associated with triggering migraines than 
previously.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
553
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
(Table 34.5). Throughout the history, the clinician should constantly 
assess for warning signs of serious and sometimes life-­threatening 
causes of secondary headache. The identification of any of these red-­
flag symptoms should cause concern and lead promptly to further 
investigation.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Abnormalities in the examination may provide clues to the underly­
ing etiology of secondary headaches, and red flags may identify spe­
cific diagnoses of concern (Table 34.6). Vital signs assessment may 
reveal elevated blood pressure, which may be the cause of headache, 
signal increased intracranial pressure, or herald an underlying renal 
abnormality. Fever may be a sign of an infectious or inflammatory 
process. Growth parameters, including height, weight, body mass 
index, and head circumference, should be obtained. Poor weight 
gain may indicate an underlying chronic illness associated with 
headaches, such as celiac disease, respiratory disorders, neurofibro­
matosis type 1, or neglect. Obesity should alert the clinician to assess 
for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea or idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH). Enlarged head circumference associated with 
signs of headache or other evidence of increased intracranial pres­
sure warrants alarm.
The general examination starts with assessment of mental status 
and overall level of distress. The head and neck examination should 
assess specifically for nasal congestion, sinus tenderness, and signs 
of allergic rhinitis, such as boggy nasal turbinates. Frontal bone 
tenderness could be an early sign of Pott puffy tumor, a complica­
tion of frontal sinusitis. Tenderness over the mandibular condyle in 
children with dental malocclusion, or jaw crepitus in patients with 
arthritis, may indicate temporomandibular joint dysfunction as a 
cause of headache. Thorough lymphatic, respiratory, cardiac, and 
abdominal examinations should also be completed. Genitourinary 
examination should include pubertal stage, as headaches may be 
associated with endocrine disorders. Skin should be evaluated for 
petechiae, atopic or vasculitis findings, and lesions associated with 
neurocutaneous syndromes such as neurofibromatosis or tuberous 
sclerosis. Signs of trauma should be noted. Neurologic examination 
should be detailed and include assessments of mental status, cra­
nial nerves, auditory function, sensation, motor strength, reflexes, 
gait, coordination, and speech. Whenever possible, a thorough oph­
thalmologic examination should be undertaken, including visual 
acuity testing and a funduscopic evaluation for papilledema (Fig. 
34.4). In a young child, much of the neurologic examination is com­
pleted through observation or engaging the child in play to elicit 
TABLE 34.5  History-­Related Red Flags for 
Secondary Headaches
Quality:
“Thunderclap” rapid-­onset headache or the “worst headache of my life”
Recent worsening in severity or frequency
Change in quality
New-­onset symptoms consistent with cluster headache
Location:
Unilateral without alteration of sides
Chronic or recurrent occipital headache
Timing:
Awakens from sleep
Occurs in morning or causes morning vomiting
Acute or chronic progressive pattern
Positional or activity-­related variations:
Worsened in the recumbent position or when bending over
Headache experienced or worsened with cough or the Valsalva maneuver
Associated neurologic history:
Neurologic dysfunction other than typical aura
Altered sensorium during headache
Sensory deficits or changes in vision, gait, or coordination
Other focal neurologic deficits
Seizures or syncope
Decreased visual acuity
Mental status changes (e.g., confusion or disorientation)
Regression in fine or gross motor developmental skills
Decline in cognition or school performance
Change in mood, behavior, or personality
Associated general history:
Vomiting without nausea and morning/fasting nausea or vomiting
Polyuria or polydipsia
Preschool or younger age
History of head trauma
Neck pain
Medical comorbidities
History of ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Certain medications
Signs of systemic or localized head/neck infection
Negative family history of primary headache disorders
TABLE 34.6  Physical Examination Red 
Flags for Secondary Headaches
Abnormal vital signs:
Hypertension
Growth failure
Increased head circumference or bulging fontanel
Fever
Meningeal signs with or without fever
Evidence of cranial trauma
Cranial bruit
Frontal bony tenderness
Macrocephaly
Abnormal ophthalmologic findings:
Papilledema
Abnormal ocular movements
Squinting
Pathologic pupillary response
Visual field defects
Abnormal neurologic findings:
Impaired mental status
Cranial nerve palsy
Ataxia
Abnormal gait
Abnormal coordination
Abnormal reflexes
Asymmetric motor or sensory examination
Hemiparesis
Developmental regression
Precocious, delayed, or arrested puberty
Skin findings:
Café-­au-­lait or ash leaf macules
Petechiae or purpura
Facial hemangioma
Malar rash
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
554
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
findings. A complete ophthalmologic evaluation may be limited by 
lack of cooperation or comprehension. If the clinician is unable to 
complete or interpret the neurologic and ophthalmologic assess­
ments, the support of a neurologist and an ophthalmologist may 
be required. If the results of examination suggest a structural brain 
lesion or increased intracranial pressure, neuroimaging is warranted 
(Table 34.7). However, many causes of headache, including some 
serious diseases early in their course, do not present with abnor­
mal findings on physical examination or have fluctuating abnormal 
findings (Table 34.8). A single normal physical examination does 
not exclude pathology; thus, periodic reassessments are essential if 
headache persists.
NEUROIMAGING
Most children do not require neuroimaging for headaches, and it is 
rarely indicated in children with recurrent headaches and a normal 
neurologic and ophthalmologic exam. Neuroimaging should be con­
sidered when the headache history or symptomatic progression is 
incompatible with a primary headache disorder or if there is no fam­
ily history of primary headache disorder. Furthermore, neuroimaging 
in the assessment of headaches in children is indicated when the fol­
lowing features are present: abnormal neurologic exam or historical 
findings; new onset of afebrile seizures or alteration in seizure type 
or frequency; new severe headache; change in frequency or severity 
of headaches; headache consistent with increased intracranial pres­
sure; association of headache with cough or bending over; concerning 
past medical history components, including trauma or presence of a 
ventriculoperitoneal shunt; and age younger than 6 years (Table 34.9). 
In specific cases, neuroimaging may be considered when there is his­
tory of a brain tumor in the family, fear by the patient or the parents of 
underlying pathology, or inability to obtain an accurate physical exam­
ination due to lack of patient cooperation.
MRI and CT are the neuroimaging modalities to consider (Table 
34.10). CT remains the most sensitive and rapid method for detecting 
acute intracranial bleeding and is preferred in emergency situations 
or when MRI is contraindicated or unavailable. MRI is otherwise the 
preferred imaging modality, offering superior visualization of soft tis­
sue contrast and gray-­to-­white matter differentiation without expos­
ing the patient to the ionizing radiation associated with CT scanning. 
While gadolinium contrast for MRI is considered safe, it is not usu­
ally necessary. An MRI contrast study should be considered when 
there is concern for infection or if the noncontrast study is abnormal. 
MRI may involve the need for sedation, particularly in younger chil­
dren. Normal neuroimaging and a single normal neurologic exam­
ination should not give complete reassurance. Follow-­up assessment 
of ongoing symptoms or for changes in the physical examination 
remains necessary.
LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS
Routine blood work is not indicated when history suggests a pri­
mary headache disorder and physical and neurologic examinations 
are normal. Findings in the history, physical examination, or neu­
roimaging that dictate directed laboratory evaluation are listed in 
Table 34.11.
B
C
A
E
F
D
Fig. 34.4  Stages of papilledema (Frisen scale). A, Stage 0: normal optic disc. B, Stage 1: very early papill­
edema with obscuration of the nasal border of the disc only, without elevation of the disc borders. C, Stage 
2: early papilledema showing obscuration of all borders, elevation of the nasal border, and a complete peri­
papillary halo. D, Stage 3: moderate papilledema with elevation of all borders, increased diameter of the optic 
nerve head, obscuration of vessels at the disc margin, and a peripapillary halo with finger-­like extensions. E, 
Stage 4: marked papilledema characterized by elevation of the entire nerve head and total obscuration of a 
segment of a major blood vessel on the disc. F, Stage 5: severe papilledema with obscuration of all vessels 
and obliteration of the optic cup. Note also the nerve fiber layer hemorrhages and macular exudate. (A–C 
courtesy Dr. Deborah Friedman; D–F courtesy Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
555
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
CLASSIFICATION OF HEADACHES
Headaches are classified broadly as primary or secondary. The acuity 
or chronicity of the headache helps to guide the development of the 
differential diagnosis (Fig. 34.5).
Primary Headaches
There are three categories of primary headaches: TTH, migraine head­
ache, and the TACs. TTH and migraine are the most common head­
ache types in children and adolescents.
Tension-­Type Headaches
TTHs are common in pediatrics with a broad prevalence range 
reported. These headaches have a typical pattern. Patients awaken 
TABLE 34.7  Headache Disorders 
Associated with Neurologic Signs
Headache
Pain Profile
Neurologic Sign
Complicated 
migraine
AR
Hemiparesis, aphasia, paresthesia, 
hemianopia
Migraine with 
brainstem aura
AR
Dysarthria, vertigo, tinnitus, 
hypoacusis, diplopia, ataxia, 
decreased level of consciousness
Acute confusional 
migraine
AR
Alteration in migraine sensorium, 
stupor, agitation, fugue state
Vasculitis
CP, AR
Seizure, changes in sensorium
Brain neoplasm or 
mass
CP
Papilledema, focal deficit
Hydrocephalus
CP, AR
Papilledema, bilateral sixth nerve 
palsies, increased motor tone, 
impaired upward gaze and 
Parinaud syndrome
Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension
CP
Papilledema, constricted visual 
fields, enlarged blind spot
Subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, 
ruptured aneurysm
A
Changes in sensorium, focal 
neurologic signs, meningismus
Subdural or epidural 
hemorrhage
CP
Focal neurologic signs, papilledema, 
changes in sensorium
Sagittal sinus 
thrombosis
A
Papilledema, focal neurologic 
deficits, changes in sensorium, 
seizures
Meningitis, 
encephalitis
A
Focal neurologic deficits, changes in 
sensorium, seizures
Optic neuritis
A
Papillitis, decreased visual acuity, 
afferent pupillary defect
A, acute; AR, acute recurrent; CP, chronic progressive.
TABLE 34.8  Headache Disorders with No 
Neurologic Signs
Headache Disorder
Pain Profile
Tension-­type headache
CN, AR
Migraine without aura
AR, CN
Cluster headache
AR
Hypertension, uncomplicated
AR, CN
Fever
A
Anoxia
A
Medication overuse
CN
Caffeine withdrawal
A, AR
Early hydrocephalus or brain mass
CP
Cough headache, uncomplicated
AR
Meningitis, uncomplicated
A
Sinusitis, dental or pharyngeal abscess
AR
Temporomandibular joint syndrome
CN
Postconcussive syndrome
CN
Conversion disorder
CN
A, acute; AR, acute recurrent; CN, chronic nonprogressive; CP, chronic 
progressive.
TABLE 34.9  Reasons to Obtain 
Neuroimaging in a Child with Headache
Abnormal neurologic findings on examination including papilledema
History of abnormal or focal neurologic symptoms
New onset of afebrile seizures or alteration in seizure type or frequency
Recent onset of severe headache
New headache or change in pattern/severity of previously stable headache
Symptoms concerning for increased intracranial pressure such as headache:
 • Occurring in the morning
 • Worse in recumbent position
 • Waking the child from sleep
 • Associated with morning vomiting
Cough headache or headache when bending over
Atypical auras with presumed migraine headache
Headache consistent with trigeminal autonomic cephalgia
Recent or remote trauma
Medical comorbidities such as ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Young age (less than 6 yr) or inability to describe headache
Incompatibility of headache with primary headache disorder
Lack of family history of primary headache disorder
TABLE 34.10  Neuroimaging Modalities
Advantages of MRI
Most vascular malformations are detected
Accurate detection of tumors in temporal lobes and posterior fossa, and 
small tumors that obstruct CSF flow (e.g., quadrigeminal plate and third 
ventricular)
Paranasal sinuses usually included in the examination without special 
request
More sensitive for detecting transependymal CSF in cases of borderline 
hydrocephalus
Diagnostic for Chiari malformations
Magnetic resonance angiography can detect many aneurysms
Magnetic resonance venography can detect cortical vein and dural sinus 
thrombosis
Advantages of CT
Can rapidly diagnose intracranial bleed
Shorter imaging time, important in evaluating critically ill patients
May be used in patients with pacemakers, metal implants (surgical clips), 
and cosmetic tattoos (MRI may turn off pacemakers and dislodge the clips; 
tattoos distort the image)
Less expensive and easier access than MRI
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
feeling well, with pain beginning gradually and escalating throughout 
the day. Pain is constant, squeezing, nonpulsatile, and located in a band 
extending from the front of the head, across the temples, and toward the 
occiput or neck. Photophobia and phonophobia may accompany these 
headaches but are not a constant feature; patients with TTH typically 
do not experience both photophobia and phonophobia in the context 
of a single episode. Unlike migraine headaches, routine physical activ­
ity does not tend to influence the severity of the headache. In patients 
with long-­standing pain, the headaches may assume characteristics of 
migraines; indeed, TTHs often accompany other headache disorders.
TTHs are classified by the International Classification of Headache 
Disorders-­3 (ICHD-­3) as either episodic or chronic. Both episodic and 
chronic TTHs are further classified as having associated pericranial ten­
derness or as lacking such tenderness. This tenderness is typically present 
between headaches and increases during episodes. Episodic tension-­
type headache (acute recurrent) is categorized as either infrequent or 
frequent. Infrequent episodic TTH is defined as 10 or more episodes 
total, occurring less than once per month on average. Frequent episodic 
TTH is defined as 10 or more episodes total, occurring on 1–14 days per 
month on average for over 3 months. Individual episodes of either may 
last from 30 minutes to as long as a week and have at least two of the 
following features: (1) bilateral location, (2) pressing or tightening (non­
pulsating) quality, (3) mild or moderate intensity, and (4) not aggravated 
by routine physical activity such as walking or climbing stairs. Nausea 
or vomiting must be absent; if present, migraine should be considered. 
Either photophobia or phonophobia may be present; if both are present 
simultaneously, migraine should be considered. Chronic tension-­type 
headaches are defined as headaches occurring at least 15 days a month 
for over 3 months, with features otherwise similar to episodic TTHs.
Psychosocial history may uncover the cause of the headache. Adjust­
ment disorders and depression may be either the underlying causes or 
reactions to chronic pain. Sleep disturbances, school absences, and 
chronic analgesic use are common. In some highly motivated and suc­
cessful children, the headaches may be a reaction to the stress associ­
ated with achievement. In this instance, school attendance is usually 
perfect, and the patient continues to achieve in all realms. However, 
some patients with chronic TTH may lack a contributory psychosocial 
history, and the severe subtypes of TTH are now thought to have a 
neurobiologic foundation.
Patients with TTHs have normal neurologic and physical findings, 
except for possible tenderness along the affected muscles. These mus­
cles often feel tight, and palpation may trigger the pain. Laboratory 
tests are not required in the evaluation of TTHs.
Migraine Headaches
The diagnosis of migraine headache is typically based on the histori­
cal description of episodes. Migraine and migraine variants occur in 
early childhood but with an unknown prevalence, as diagnostic cri­
teria for migraine are often insufficient in young children and infants 
(Table 34.12). Several features distinguish migraine in children from 
adult migraine. In children, the headaches are shorter, ranging from 
2 to 72 hours, and pain tends to be frontotemporal rather than unilat­
eral. Vomiting and abdominal pain are more common in children than 
in adults, and while photophobia and phonophobia may be present 
in children, they may need to be deduced by behavior changes rather 
than by child report. Thus, 5-­ to 10-­year-­old children may present with 
bilateral frontal headaches and associated abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, and a desire to sleep. Unilateral 
temporal headache location develops in late adolescence, with onset of 
aura typically in middle school. A family history of migraines is com­
mon, with reports of up to 90% of pediatric patients having a first-­ or 
second-­degree relative with recurrent headaches.
The prevalence of migraine headaches increases with age through­
out childhood and is higher in females following the onset of puberty. 
While the diagnosis of migraine is typically made later in childhood, 
a careful retrospective history of infancy and early childhood events 
may reveal early episodic symptoms consistent with migraine, includ­
ing pallor, vomiting, fussiness, and sleepiness occurring outside the 
context of concurrent illnesses. Furthermore, benign paroxysmal 
torticollis, cyclic vomiting syndrome, and benign paroxysmal vertigo 
are episodic syndromes that may be associated with the diagnosis of 
migraines later in life.
Certain exposures trigger migraine attacks in susceptible patients. 
Precipitants include hunger, dehydration, heat or weather changes, 
exertion, sleep deprivation or irregularity, substance exposures or 
withdrawal, and psychologic triggers. Food triggers are now thought to 
be less common than previously believed. In postmenarchal females, 
migraines may cluster around particular phases of the menstrual cycle.
Migraines are categorized based on the presence or absence of an 
associated aura. Migraine without aura is the most common migraine 
phenotype in pediatric patients.
Migraine without aura. Criteria assist in the diagnosis of migraine 
without aura and are based on the number and duration of episodes, as 
well as symptoms and associated findings (Table 34.13). Children may 
have shorter-­duration headaches. The pain onset is typically gradual 
and is dull and constant. At times, though, the pain of an episode may 
be sudden and severe, prompting concern for a thunderclap headache. 
More typically, pain increases in severity over the course of an 
individual episode and becomes throbbing. As the headache proceeds, 
the pain may generalize to the entire cranium. Intense nausea often 
accompanies migraines, with occasional vomiting. Skin pallor is 
a common finding. Nasal congestion and tearing may be present. 
Because most patients are sensitive to motion, light, and noise during 
TABLE 34.11  Potentially Useful Tests and 
Studies in Children with Headaches
Laboratory Test
Possible Cause of Headache
CBC
Infection (elevated white blood 
cell count); bleeding diathesis 
(thrombocytopenia); anemia
CSF examination with opening 
pressure
Infection, vasculitis, pseudotumor 
cerebri, subarachnoid hemorrhage 
after CT is normal
Toxicology assays
Substance abuse, possible toxin 
exposure, carbon monoxide
Hypercoagulation panel
Unexplained venous sinus thrombosis
ESR, ANA, ANCA
Vasculitis
Genetic tests
Familial hemiplegic migraine, MELAS, 
CADASIL, CARASIL
EEG
Seizure disorder
Electrolytes, ECG, UA
Hypertension, renal disease
VP shunt radiographic series
Malfunctioning VP shunt
Blood glucose
Hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia
Serum calcium
Hyperparathyroidism
ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibod­
ies; CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcor­
tical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal 
recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalop­
athy; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyop­
athy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; VP, ventriculoperitoneal.
556
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
HEADACHE
Headache Pattern
Abnormal
neurologic exam
Migraine without
aura
Meningitis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Vasculitis
Encephalitis
  Infectious
  Acute disseminated
    encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Autoimmune
Posttraumatic
  postconcussion
  headache
Intracranial hemorrhage
Other head or neck injury
Migraine with
aura
Tumor
Abscess
Hydrocephalus
Cyst
Vascular disorders
  Intracranial hemorrhage
  Stroke
  Arteriovenous
    malformation
  Other intracranial
    vascular disorders
Chiari malformation
Optic neuritis
Low CSF pressure
    (s/p lumbar puncture)
Encephalitis
Viral or bacterial
  illness
Meningismus
Abscess (tonsillar,
  retropharyngeal)
Sinusitis
Dental abscess
Other infection (ENT/
  cranial structures) 
Tension-type headache
Cluster headaches and
  other TACs
Primary exertional
  headache
Toxic effect of substances
  or their withdrawal
    Caffeine
    Cocaine
    Food additives
Hypoxia
Hypercarbia
Cold stimulus (ice cream
  headache)
Other cranial neuralgias
Hypertensive crises
Severe acute
History of recent trauma
See next page for
Recurrent and
Chronic Headaches
Features suggestive
of migraine present
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Abnormal neurologic
exam
OR
History of neurologic
symptoms
Yes
Yes
Fever present
Consider neuroimaging
if negative family
history for migraine
Perform
neuroimaging
Perform LP*
Meningeal signs
OR
Altered mental
status present
Normal
results
Abnormal
results
Abnormal
results
Normal
results
A
Perform head
CT or MRI, ±cervical
  spine films
Fig. 34.5  A–B, Decision-­making algorithm in the assessment of headache. The temporal pattern of the head­
ache must be clarified. Each pattern (acute, acute recurrent, chronic progressive, chronic nonprogressive) has 
its own differential diagnosis. *Delay LP if signs of increased intracranial pressure but treat and image first. 
CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ENT, ear, nose, and throat; LP; lumbar puncture; s/p, 
status post; TAC, trigeminal autonomic cephalgia. (From Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pediatric 
Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:185–186.)
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
558
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
a migraine attack, they search for a dark and quiet place to sleep. The 
patient usually awakens within hours feeling fatigued but pain free.
Migraine with aura. In migraine with aura, the headache is 
preceded by sensory signs or symptoms termed an aura, which 
is caused by vasoconstriction and diminished blood flow to the 
affected region of the brain (Table 34.14). In migraine with typical 
aura (Table 34.15), the aura is visual and may consist of blurred 
vision, spreading scintillating scotomata, flashing lights, zigzag lines, 
and hemianopia. These features typically last less than 60 minutes. 
Less classic visual disturbances may occur in children. Sensory auras 
are less common than visual auras and may consist of numbness or 
tingling.
Aura should not be confused with a prodrome, which may include 
anxiety, fatigue, hunger, thirst, nausea or depression. A prodrome may 
last many hours before a migraine, while an aura usually lasts less than 
60 minutes.
Further types of migraine with aura are classified by the specific 
aura symptoms.
Migraine with brainstem aura (Table 34.16), previously known as 
basilar artery migraine, has aura limited to brainstem symptoms such as 
dysarthria and ataxia. In some patients, the headache may be a minor 
component of the syndrome. Visual changes may also occur and may 
include vivid visual images. Vertigo and tinnitus are less common symp­
toms. Diplopia, vertigo, and vomiting should prompt evaluation for a 
posterior fossa abnormality, such as a mass or a vascular malformation.
Hemiplegic migraine has an aura that consists of motor weakness and 
visual, sensory, and/or speech/language symptoms that are fully revers­
ible. Both familial and sporadic forms have been described. The familial 
HEADACHE
(continued)
Acute recurrent
Migraine with aura
Third ventricle cyst
Cluster headaches
  and other TACs
Vasculitis
Childhood periodic
  syndromes (migraine
  precursors)
Migraine with or
without aura
B
Chronic migraine
Chronic tension headache
New daily persistent
  headache
Idiopathic intracranial
  hypertension
Caffeine withdrawal
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Other toxic effect of substances
  or their withdrawal
Temporomandibular
  joint syndrome
Analgesic rebound
Infection/abscess
Chronic post-traumatic/
  postconcussion
  headache
Vasculitis
  Primary CNS angiitis
    of childhood
Infection-related
Conversion disorder
Hypoxia
Occipital neuralgia
Chiari malformation
Tumor
Hydrocephalus
Idiopathic intracranial
  hypertension
Subdural or epidural
  hemorrhage
Aneurysmal leakage/rupture
Arteriovenous malformation
Abscess
Cyst (arachnoid,
    epidermoid, dermoid,
    third ventricle)
Chiari malformation type 1
Chronic nonprogressive
Chronic
progressive
Features suggestive
of migraine present
Yes
Yes
No
No
Perform CT
or MRI
Abnormal neurologic exam
OR
History of neurologic symptoms
Consider CT
or MRI
Tension-type headache
Toxic effect of substances
  or their withdrawal
    Caffeine
    Cocaine
    Food additives
Craniofacial abscess/
  infection (sinus, dental)
Refractive errors
  (uncorrected
  or miscorrected)
Primary exertional
  headache
Seizure; associated
  headache
Occipital neuralgia 
Fig. 34.5, cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
559
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
hemiplegic migraine is an autosomal dominant disorder with genetic vari­
ants described in three separate genes: CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A.
Retinal migraine involves monocular visual disturbances that are 
fully reversible. This migraine subtype is extremely rare, and other 
causes of the vision disturbance should be investigated prior to desig­
nating this diagnosis (see Chapter 43).
The episodic syndromes that may be associated with migraines, pre­
viously termed childhood periodic syndromes, are a group of potentially 
related symptoms that occur with increased frequency in children with 
migraine. The hallmark of these symptoms is the recurrent episodic nature 
of the events. These include gastrointestinal-­related symptoms (recurrent 
gastrointestinal disturbance, cyclic vomiting syndrome, and abdominal 
migraine), benign paroxysmal vertigo, and benign paroxysmal torticollis.
Acute confusional migraine and Alice in Wonderland syndrome are 
headache conditions that occur primarily in children. Acute confusional 
migraine, which can be triggered by minor head trauma or have no pre­
cipitating event, usually converts to typical migraine with age. Episodes 
consist of alteration in consciousness, which may include lethargy, agi­
tation, and dysphagia. Attacks last a few hours, with the child eventually 
falling asleep. The child awakens without memory of the incident. Alice 
in Wonderland syndrome is characterized by perceptual disturbances in 
which the sense of proportion or distance, particularly with respect to 
the body, is distorted. While in adults this syndrome is associated with 
migraine episodes, Epstein-­Barr virus infection seems to be the most 
common trigger in children. Migraine mimics are noted in Table 34.17.
Complications of migraine. Status migrainosus is defined as a 
migraine headache that lasts over 72 hours with debilitating pain or 
associated symptoms. Diagnosis is based on a propensity for previous 
prolonged migraine attacks. Some patients have an aura that lasts 
longer than 1 week, termed persistent aura without infarction. 
Conversely, when an aura symptom persists for greater than an hour 
and neuroimaging demonstrates associated ischemic infarction, 
migrainous infarction is diagnosed. Patients can also have migraine 
aura-­triggered seizures that occur during or within 1 hour of a migraine 
with aura.
TABLE 34.12  Migraine Variants
Migraine with or without aura
Acephalic migraine (aura without headache)
Familial (CACNA1A, ATP1A, SCN1A) or sporadic hemiplegic migraine
Basilar migraine (ataxia, deafness, tinnitus, vertigo, syncope)
Acute confusional migraine
Vestibular migraine
Paroxysmal torticollis (infants)*
Benign paroxysmal vertigo (infants)*
Transient global amnesia
Abdominal migraine
Retinal (monocular vision loss)
Migralepsy (migraine triggered by seizures)
Cluster migraine
Icepick headache
Migraine strokes
*Episodic syndrome that may be associated with migraine.
TABLE 34.13  Migraine Without Aura
	A.	 At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B–D
	B.	 Headache attacks lasting 4–72 hr (untreated or unsuccessfully treated)
	C.	 Headache has at least two of the following four characteristics:
	
1.	 Unilateral location
	
2.	 Pulsating quality
	
3.	 Moderate or severe pain intensity
	
4.	 Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity (e.g., 
walking or climbing stairs)
	D.	 During headache at least one of the following:
	
1.	 Nausea and/or vomiting
	
2.	 Photophobia and phonophobia
	E.	 Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
ICHD-­3, International Classification of Headache Disorders-­3.
Arnold M, Headache Classification Committee of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). The international classification of headache 
disorders, 3e. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):19.
TABLE 34.15  Migraine with Typical Aura
	A.	 At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B and C
	B.	 Aura consisting of visual, sensory, and/or speech/language symptoms, 
each fully reversible, but no motor, brainstem, or retinal symptoms
	C.	 At least three of the following six characteristics:
	
1.	 At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over 5 or more min
	
2.	 Two or more aura symptoms occur in succession
	
3.	 Each individual aura symptom lasts 5–60 min
	
4.	 At least one aura symptom is unilateral
	
5.	 At least one aura symptom is positive (e.g., scintillations or 
paresthesia)
	
6.	 The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 min, by headache
	D.	 Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
ICHD-­3, International Classification of Headache Disorders-­3.
Arnold M, Headache Classification Committee of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). The international classification of headache 
disorders, 3e. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):20–21.
TABLE 34.14  Migraine Auras
Visual
Blurred vision
Zig-­zag lines
Scotoma (field deficits)
Scintillations
Black dots
Kaleidoscope
Micropsia, macropsia
Metamorphopsia (Alice in Wonderland)
Basilar
Dysarthria
Vertigo
Tinnitus
Hearing loss
Diplopia
Bilateral vision symptoms
Ataxia
Depressed level of consciousness
Bilateral paresthesias
Other
Cheiro-oral syndrome*
Attention loss (poor concentration)
Confusion
Amnesia
Agitation
Aphasia (expressive, receptive)
*Migrating paresthesia: hand to arm to face to lips to tongue.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
560
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
Trigeminal Autonomic Cephalgias
Trigeminal autonomic cephalgia is rare in children under 7 years of 
age but has been reported in a child as young as 3 months. Onset typ­
ically occurs during adolescence or adulthood. Cluster headaches and 
paroxysmal hemicranias are types of TAC (see Table 34.1).
Cluster headache. Cluster headaches are characterized by episodes 
of pain interspersed between long periods of remission (Table 34.18). 
Prevalence in childhood is estimated to be between 0.03% and 0.1%; the 
disorder is more common in males. Pain is unilateral and localized to the 
orbital, supraorbital, and/or temporal region. The pain begins suddenly and 
rapidly increases to an excruciating level. Cluster headaches may be as short 
as 15 minutes or may last as long as 3 hours; episodes tend to be shorter and 
less frequent in children. Associated findings include ipsilateral conjunctival 
injection and/or lacrimation, nasal symptoms, eyelid edema, sweating, 
miosis, and/or ptosis. Children may have less prominent autonomic features 
than adults and are most likely to experience lacrimation, conjunctival 
injection, and nasal discharge. A patient may find it impossible to rest 
and become agitated and restless during an attack, which is in contrast to 
migraines, during which the patient becomes quiet and withdraws to a 
dark, cool room for sleep. However, restlessness may not be as severe or 
characterizable in children, so observation of behavior is very important.
Cluster headache is categorized as either episodic or chronic. Episodic 
cluster headaches occur in a series that may last for a week to months, 
separated by remission periods of months to years, whereas chronic clus­
ter headaches are defined as occurring for at least 1 year without such a 
remission period or with remission periods that last <3 months. Cluster 
headaches are more common in individuals who smoke tobacco.
Paroxysmal Hemicrania
Paroxysmal hemicrania is characterized by shorter cluster head­
ache–like attacks, lasting 2–30 minutes, though they can be lon­
ger in children. Although the disorder usually begins in adulthood, 
chronic paroxysmal hemicrania may affect older children and 
adolescents. Patients have at least five attacks a day, and the pain 
may awaken the patient from sleep. Children can have facial pallor 
instead of flushing. This headache typically responds dramatically 
TABLE 34.16  Migraine with 
Brainstem Aura
	A.	 At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B and C
	B.	 Aura consisting of visual, sensory, and/or speech/language symptoms, 
each fully reversible, but no motor or retinal symptoms
	C.	 At least three of the following six characteristics:
	
1.	 At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over 5 or more min
	
2.	 Two or more aura symptoms occur in succession
	
3.	 Each individual aura symptom lasts 5–60 min
	
4.	 At least one aura symptom is unilateral
	
5.	 At least one aura symptom is positive (e.g., scintillations or paresthesia)
	
6.	 The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 min, by headache
	D.	 Aura with at least two of the following fully reversible brainstem symptoms:
	
1.	 Dysarthria (must be distinguished from aphasia)
	
2.	 Vertigo (must be distinguished from dizziness)
	
3.	 Tinnitus
	
4.	 Hypoacusis
	
5.	 Diplopia
	
6.	 Ataxia not attributable to sensory deficit
	
7.	 Decreased level of consciousness (GCS ≤13)
	
a.	 Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
ICHD-­3, International Classification of Headache Disorders-­3.
Arnold M, Headache Classification Committee of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). The international classification of headache 
disorders, 3e. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):20–22.
TABLE 34.17  Migraine Mimics and 
Secondary Migraine
Trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs)
Cluster headache
Hemicrania continua
Short-­lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with or without 
conjunctival tearing (injection) (SUNCT/SUNA)
Ophthalmoplegic (CN III, IV, VI) migraine
Arterial dissection
Vasculitis/vasculopathies
Giant cell arteritis
Moyamoya
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) (NOTCH 3)
Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) (HTRA1)
SLE
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Primary CNS vasculitis
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
MELAS
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri)
Occipital epilepsy
Sudden vision loss
Transient ischemic attack
Acute glaucoma
Sinusitis with intracranial extension
Epilepsy with aura
Transient headache and neurologic deficits with CSF lymphocytosis (HaNDL)
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (ATP1A3)
Fabry disease
CN, cranial nerve; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal 
fluid; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis 
and strokelike episodes; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
TABLE 34.18  Cluster Headache
	A.	 At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B–D
	B.	 Severe or very severe unilateral orbital, supraorbital, and/or temporal 
pain lasting 15–180 min (when untreated)*
	C.	 Either or both of the following:
	
1.	 At least one of the following symptoms or signs, ipsilateral to the 
headache:
	
a.	 Conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation
	
b.	 Nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhea
	
c.	 Eyelid edema
	
d.	 Forehead and facial sweating
	
e.	 Miosis and/or ptosis
	
2.	 A sense of restlessness or agitation
	D.	 Occurring with a frequency between one every other day and eight per 
day†
	E.	 Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
*During part, but less than half, of the active time course of cluster head­
ache, attacks may be less severe and/or of shorter or longer duration.
†During part, but less than half, of the active time course of cluster 
headache, attacks may be less frequent.
ICHD-­3, International Classification of Headache Disorders-­3.
Arnold M, Headache Classification Committee of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). The international classification of headache 
disorders, 3e. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):41–42.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
561
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
to indomethacin therapy. Relief of symptoms occurs within a few 
days of beginning the medication. Other nonsteroidal antiinflam­
matory drugs (NSAIDs) are of no benefit. Because the symptoms 
of chronic paroxysmal hemicrania are similar to those of vascular 
malformations of the brain, a neuroimaging study should be per­
formed to rule out malformation before the diagnosis of chronic 
paroxysmal hemicrania is made.
Secondary Headaches
Headache Associated with Trauma
Acute headache. If a child presents with a headache after trauma 
and has abnormal neurologic signs or symptoms, noncontrast CT of 
the head should be obtained emergently to assess for subarachnoid, 
subdural, or epidural intracranial bleed. Cervical spine radiographs 
should be obtained if cervical injury is suspected. If the child has focal 
neurologic deficits indicating possible vascular injury, MRI is indicated, 
potentially with magnetic resonance (MR) angiography.
Persistent headache. Headaches may occur as part of the 
postconcussive or post-­traumatic syndrome. The headache is generally 
constant and may have qualities of both chronic tension-­type and 
migraine headaches. For example, some patients may have nausea, 
vomiting, and visual auras. Other features of this syndrome are fatigue, 
dizziness, vertigo, poor memory, decreased reaction times, and inability 
to concentrate. The neurologic findings are usually normal. Symptoms 
begin within a week of the head injury and may persist for years. About 
70% of patients recover within a year, but 15% are still symptomatic 
after 3 years. Post-­traumatic headache is considered acute if duration 
is <3 months and chronic if >3 months. The pathophysiology of this 
syndrome is unknown. Postconcussive syndrome is more common 
in persons with a history of psychologic or psychosomatic illness. A 
neuroimaging study may be necessary to exclude the rare possibility of a 
chronic subdural hematoma. Trauma may also lead to the development 
of primary headaches such as migraines.
Headaches Associated with Vascular Disorders
Acute ischemic stroke (see Chapter 37). Headache is a feature of 
up to 30% of acute ischemic strokes. More commonly experienced 
symptoms are focal neurologic deficits such as weakness of the limbs 
and face or speech abnormalities; as such, every child presenting with 
a focal neurologic deficit must undergo evaluation for stroke. CT 
imaging can show mature acute ischemic stroke; however, cerebral 
diffusion-­weighted MRI is needed to identify early and small infarcts. 
MR angiography can diagnose vascular occlusion and suggest possible 
arteriopathy. The headache in acute ischemic stroke is typically of 
moderate intensity and otherwise lacks consistent features, though 
may occasionally present as a thunderclap headache. Similar headaches 
may also accompany transient ischemic attacks.
Aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations. Arterial aneurysms 
may be congenital (berry) or caused by an infectious process (mycotic). 
Rupture of an arterial aneurysm is rare in children. The rupture produces 
an excruciating headache, known as a thunderclap headache. Patients 
will often describe the pain as the worst headache of their lives. The 
pain is acute in onset and associated with nuchal rigidity, emesis, and 
changes in sensorium. The neurologic examination findings may be 
nonfocal. Noncontrast CT or MRI and an MR angiogram of the head 
(neck if arterial dissection is suspected) are indicated. CT scan reveals 
blood in the cisterns and meninges in 85% of cases. If the CT scan shows 
no pathologic process, a lumbar puncture (LP) is necessary in all patients 
thought to have a ruptured aneurysm. The spinal fluid in a ruptured 
aneurysm is bloody, xanthochromic, or both. In half of the cases, patients 
report having previous headaches before having the headache associated 
with the rupture. These earlier headaches may be caused by leakage of 
blood from the aneurysm. If the clinician suspects a leaking or ruptured 
aneurysm, rapid neurologic and neurosurgical care are mandatory. 
Arteriovenous malformations may produce similar manifestations.
Venous thrombosis. Cerebral sinovenous thrombosis can present 
with progressive headache. Additional signs and symptoms can include 
papilledema, sixth cranial nerve palsy with associated diplopia, focal 
deficits, seizures, lethargy, and confusion. Prothrombotic states, certain 
systemic diseases, and head and neck infections (such as meningitis 
and mastoiditis) and disorders are risk factors for development of 
cerebral sinus venous thrombosis. Contrast CT venography or MRI 
venography should be obtained to assess for filling defects, with MRI 
offering better assessment of parenchyma.
Vascular dissection. Vascular dissection may present with a 
headache that precedes ischemic symptom development by hours 
to days. These headaches are typically persistent, nonthrobbing, and 
unilateral but may be throbbing, thunderclap, and steadily worsening. 
Infection, coughing, vomiting, and connective tissue disorders such as 
Ehlers-­Danlos disease are risk factors. MRI with angiography of the 
head and neck is required for diagnosis.
Vasculitis. Vasculitis is an important cause of headaches in adults; 
in children, headache is rarely the only presenting manifestation of this 
disorder and is instead a less frequent associated finding. Because of 
the increased risk of systemic hypertension in patients with vasculitis, 
it is important to include a blood pressure measurement as part of 
the complete history and physical examination. When systemic lupus 
erythematosus and mixed connective tissue disorders affect the central 
nervous system, children may present with seizures and mental status 
changes. These symptoms may occur with or without headaches.
Genetic disorders. Patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, 
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes (MELAS) may have recurrent 
migraine episodes and/or acute headache with associated neurologic 
deficits and/or seizures. MELAS is characterized by strokelike episodes, 
most commonly in the posterior temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes, 
as well as lactic acidosis, ragged red fibers on muscle biopsy, and at least 
two of the following: seizures, dementia, recurrent migraine headache, 
and vomiting. MELAS is associated with myopathy, short stature, hearing 
deficits, ophthalmologic problems, learning disabilities, hemiparesis, 
cardiac problems, and diabetes. Molecular genetic testing is available to 
identify pathogenic variants in mitochondrial genes associated with the 
disorder: Over 80% of confirmed cases are related to pathogenic variants 
in MT-­TL1; another 10% of confirmed cases are related to pathogenic 
variants in MT-­ND5; pathogenic variants in over a dozen additional 
mitochondrial genes can cause the syndrome as well. Migraines are also 
common in a variety of other mitochondrial disorders.
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a mitochondrial dis­
order that may present with headaches. Most patients develop symptoms 
in late adolescence or adulthood, though earlier onset is possible and 
the disorder should be considered in children with subcortical infarcts, 
migraines, and multifocal T2/fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) hyperintensities in the deep white matter. CADASIL is inher­
ited in an autosomal dominant fashion and may lead to early stroke or 
dementia; a suggestive family history should increase suspicion. Patho­
genic variants in NOTCH3 are diagnostic; molecular genetic testing is 
available. Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) is due to pathologic 
variants in HTRA1. Associated features include alopecia and spondylosis.
Headaches Associated with Nonvascular 
Intracranial Disorders
Secondary headaches may be due to a variety of nonvascular intracra­
nial pathology, including increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
562
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
decreased CSF pressure, intracranial masses, Chiari type I malforma­
tions, and seizures.
Disorders associated with increased CSF pressure. Idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension (IIH), formally called pseudotumor 
cerebri, is most commonly seen in obese postmenarchal females, 
but can occur in prepubertal children. IIH is defined as a new 
or significantly worsening headache, with associated elevated 
cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure (>250 mm H2O or in obese 
children >280 mm H2O), that does not meet criteria for another 
headache diagnosis and has no identifiable cause. Pain is typically 
worse when recumbent and improves to a degree when upright or 
standing. The associated headache either develops or worsens with 
the IIH or leads to its diagnosis and is associated with pulsatile 
tinnitus and/or papilledema.
Secondary intracranial hypertension may be caused by medication 
or a variety of medical conditions, including obstructive, toxic, metabolic, 
infectious, or hormonal causes. History and physical examination will 
guide whether neuroimaging is indicated (see Table 34.9) and whether 
evaluation for nonobstructive secondary causes is indicated (Table 
34.19). If papilledema is present, neuroimaging should be obtained prior 
to lumbar puncture to evaluate for other causes of intracranial hyperten­
sion, such as a tumor or hydrocephalus. MRI with venography should 
also be considered in patients who are at risk for venous thrombosis or in 
those whose presentation does not fit the typical idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension profile (e.g., males, prepubertal children, and nonobese 
females), in order to assess for dural sinus thrombosis. In IIH, MRI can 
show empty sella turcica, distention of the perioptic subarachnoid space, 
flattening of the posterior sclerae, protrusion of the optic nerve papillae 
into the vitreous, and transverse cerebral venous sinus stenosis.
All patients with IIH should be monitored closely with special atten­
tion to ocular findings, as they are at risk for development of perma­
nent visual impairment secondary to the development of optic atrophy.
TABLE 34.19  Secondary Intracranial Hypertension Without an Obstructive Lesion on MRI
Hematologic Disorders
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Aplastic anemia
Sickle cell disease
Polycythemia
Bone marrow transplantation and associated treatments
Prothrombotic states
Fanconi anemia
Infections
Acute sinusitis
Otitis media (lateral sinus thrombosis)
Mastoiditis
Tonsillitis
Measles
Roseola
Varicella, recurrent varicella-­zoster virus infection
Lyme disease
HIV or associated treatment complications
Drug-­Related
Tetracyclines
Sulfonamides
Nalidixic acid
Fluoroquinolones
Corticosteroid therapy and withdrawal
Nitrofurantoin
Cytarabine
Cyclosporine
Phenytoin
Mesalamine
Isotretinoin
Amiodarone
Oral contraceptive pills/implants
Renal Disorders
Nephrotic syndrome
Chronic renal insufficiency
Post–renal transplantation
Peritoneal dialysis
Nutritional Disorders
Hypovitaminosis A
Vitamin A intoxication
Hyperalimentation in malnourished patient
Vitamin D–dependent rickets
Connective Tissue Disorders
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Behçet disease
Endocrine Disorders
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism/hyperparathyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Addison disease
Recombinant growth hormone
Other Conditions
Dural sinus thrombosis
Obesity (in pubertal patients)
Superior vena cava syndrome
Sleep apnea
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Turner syndrome
Galactosemia
Atrial septal defect repair
Möbius syndrome
Sarcoidosis
From Parker A. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson 
Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3237.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
563
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
Hydrocephalus usually causes a generalized headache. Slowly 
developing hydrocephalus initially causes mild pain, whereas rap­
idly developing hydrocephalus causes severe pain. Most patients with 
hydrocephalus have morning headaches that lessen after they arise, 
though pain may also be constant. Physical examination reveals signs 
of increased intracranial pressure, such as papilledema or tenderness of 
the neck. Papilledema is usually absent in children with an open fon­
tanel. Macrocephaly is present in young children with unfused cranial 
sutures and in those with long-­standing hydrocephalus. Other signs of 
hydrocephalus are a bulging fontanel and widened cranial sutures. The 
head growth chart is especially important in the evaluation of children 
with hydrocephalus. Head growth is abnormal if the plot of sequential 
head circumferences crosses percentile lines.
Cough headaches are intermittent headaches caused by transient 
increases in intracranial pressure resulting from activities that ele­
vate intrathoracic pressure, such as exertion, coughing, or bending. 
The pain is maximum and severe at the onset of the activity and then 
resolves in seconds. Patients are usually asymptomatic between events. 
Cough headaches, which are much shorter than exercise-­induced vas­
cular headaches, may be caused by both benign and life-­threatening 
conditions. Structural causes of cough headache include brain tumors, 
cysts, and Chiari malformations. The results of the physical examina­
tion are usually normal, even when structural lesions cause this syn­
drome. In children, subtentorial tumors account for more than 50% of 
space-­occupying lesions; cough headaches are a cause for concern and 
warrant an MRI.
Disorders associated with decreased CSF pressure. Intracranial 
hypotension may occur from a tear in the dura caused by trauma, 
surgery, or lumbar puncture. The etiology of the headache is due to 
traction on the dura and vessels at the base of the brain. The headache 
associated with intracranial hypotension typically improves while the 
patient is recumbent and worsens upon sitting or standing.
The most common cause of a headache from intracranial hypoten­
sion is a persistent CSF leak following lumbar puncture. Risk factors 
for post–lumbar puncture headache include the use of large-­bore spi­
nal needles and multiple attempts at obtaining CSF. Patients describe 
a severe headache within seconds after assuming an upright position. 
The headache disappears soon after the patient lies down. Other causes 
of low-­pressure headaches include CSF leaks from fractures or tumors 
at the base of the skull.
Intracranial masses. Brain neoplasms are the second most 
common type of childhood malignancy, though the overall incidence 
is low. As such, tumor is an infrequent cause of headache in children. 
The mechanisms by which tumors produce headaches include 
hydrocephalus from obstruction of CSF flow or direct traction on 
dural or vascular structures. Headaches caused by hydrocephalus may 
develop rapidly, whereas traction on dural or vascular structures from 
tumor growth causes a slow and progressive headache. At the time of 
presentation, most patients with tumors or hydrocephalus have chronic 
and progressive headaches, with a history of increasing frequency and 
severity of pain over time.
Headache secondary to a tumor may or may not be localized to the 
tumor site. Patients with posterior fossa tumors usually have occipital 
pain, but if hydrocephalus is also present, the pain may be generalized. 
Headache secondary to tumor typically demonstrates a slow increase 
in the severity and frequency of painful episodes; initially, pain may 
be mild, and over-­the-­counter analgesics provide adequate pain relief. 
However, it is important to note that many patients with brain tumors 
have no particular pattern to their headaches. Patients with brain 
tumors near the optic chiasm may have visual disturbances, galactor­
rhea, or other endocrine abnormalities. Diplopia may be present if the 
third or sixth cranial nerve is compressed; ptosis may also be present. 
Other historical features concerning for intracranial neoplasm include 
changes in school performance, reported motor or balance distur­
bances, personality or behavior changes, or seizures.
Physical examination often reveals abnormal findings, including 
papilledema and neurologic deficits. Focal neurologic findings may 
include eye movement abnormalities, anisocoria, facial weakness, pto­
sis, swallowing difficulties, hemiparesis, sensory deficits, cranial nerve 
deficits, altered mental status, and ataxia. Papilledema may be absent 
in children with posterior fossa tumors (with or without hydrocepha­
lus) or in children with open fontanels. Nonlateralizing signs include 
increased motor tone as well as third and sixth nerve palsies. Increased 
motor tone may not be a constant finding and may manifest as tran­
sient shivering.
Parinaud syndrome is the triad of upward-­gaze paresis, poor pupil­
lary reaction to light, and retraction nystagmus on convergence, and is 
seen in patients with hydrocephalus or tumors in the pineal region. The 
presence of Parinaud syndrome always warrants neuroimaging.
Increased intracranial pressure secondary to hydrocephalus and/
or a brain tumor should be suspected in any child with chronic pro­
gressive headaches, abnormal neurologic examination findings, nuchal 
rigidity, or abnormal head growth. Patients with these signs and symp­
toms should undergo neuroimaging (see Table 34.9).
Intracranial cysts are classified as arachnoid, epidermoid, or der­
moid. Slow-­growing cysts often produce headache patterns similar to 
those of neoplasms. Epidermoid and dermoid cysts may have sinus 
tracts that communicate with the skin. Rarely, cysts may rupture and 
result in increased intracranial pressure and resultant headache. If 
these cysts become infected, their clinical manifestations resemble that 
of a brain abscess.
A colloid cyst of the third ventricle is a potentially life-­threatening 
cause of headache. With changes in position, this cyst functions as a 
ball valve and intermittently impedes the flow of CSF. This obstruc­
tion causes transient increases in intracranial pressure. During some 
episodes of obstruction, the patient may be asymptomatic. At other 
times, symptoms may be severe and include debilitating thunderclap 
headaches, neurologic posturing, coma, and even death. The intracra­
nial pressure returns to normal when position is changed or when the 
increased CSF pressure overcomes the obstruction. Physical findings 
are normal between events. MRI confirms diagnosis. Treatment con­
sists of CSF diversion or removal of the cyst.
Chiari I malformations. Chiari I malformation may present with 
headaches (often occipital and neck) that worsen with cough and 
Valsalva maneuvers, and may be associated with radicular extremity 
pain. Patients presenting with this pattern of findings require 
neuroimaging.
Headaches associated with epileptic seizures. Headache may be 
a preictal phenomenon in patients with focal epilepsy syndromes or a 
consequence of an epileptic seizure. Postictal headaches tend to remit 
within hours of the cessation of seizure activity but may last as long 
as 72 hours. Headache occurring as an ictal phenomenon in partial 
seizures remits with, or soon after, the cessation of seizure activity.
Headaches Related to Substances
Medication-­overuse headaches. A thorough medication history 
is essential, as many analgesics may be associated with overuse 
headaches. All classes of headache medications can paradoxically cause 
headaches that may be worse on waking and exacerbated by activity. 
Acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, triptans, 
ergot alkaloids, and opiates can be culprits. The diagnostic criteria for 
medication-­overuse headaches include the following: (1) headache 
occurring on 15 days per month in a patient with a pre-­existing 
headache disorder and (2) regular overuse of the medication taken 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
564
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
for acute and/or symptomatic treatment of headache for >3 months. 
Stopping the medication improves the symptoms.
Caffeine withdrawal headaches. The threshold for withdrawal 
for each person is variable, but when caffeine is ingested in sufficient 
quantities for prolonged periods, sudden withdrawal may lead to 
vascular headaches. In the most common scenario, consumption 
occurs on weekdays, and because of schedule differences, the 
caffeinated beverage is not consumed on the weekend. This syndrome 
is easily diagnosed by history or using a headache diary.
Other substance exposure headaches. Carbon monoxide 
poisoning should be suspected in any child with chronic headaches, 
as even mild exposure may cause headache and nausea. The diagnosis 
is difficult to confirm with an arterial hemoglobin carbon monoxide 
(HbCO) level because the half-­life of HbCO in room air is only 4 hours. 
Hence, the level may be normal only a few hours after exposure. One 
way of diagnosing and treating this condition is by removing the cause 
of the exposure. Example sources of carbon monoxide exposure include 
heavy urban traffic in which the patient is a car passenger, methylene 
dichloride paint strippers, kerosene space heaters, a gasoline engine 
running in an attached garage, cigarette smoking, and faulty home 
furnaces. Typically, co-­inhabitants have similar symptoms. Patients 
exposed to carbon monoxide may have behavioral and neurologic 
findings days to months later.
Other substance exposures may also lead to headaches. Ingestion 
of alcohol may lead to headache either during or after consumption. 
Use of cocaine causes headaches through various mechanisms, includ­
ing hypertension, vasoconstriction, hypersensitivity vasculitis, and 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Elevations in serum lead levels may cause 
headache (lead encephalopathy).
Headaches Associated with Infections
Infectious causes of headache are common and are typically benign, 
with the most common etiology being a viral upper respiratory tract 
infection. However, serious and life-­threatening infections may present 
with headache.
Meningitis and meningoencephalitis may present with a headache 
that is acute in onset and generalized. Fever, nuchal rigidity, alteration 
in sensorium, and abnormal neurologic findings may be present as well. 
Children presenting with this constellation of findings require an emer­
gent lumbar puncture with cell counts and differential, glucose and pro­
tein quantification with a simultaneous determination of serum glucose, 
Gram stain, bacterial culture, and any indicated viral studies based on 
history, physical findings, or local epidemiology.
The child with a brain abscess may present with progressive neuro­
logic dysfunction and may deteriorate quickly. Brain abscess should be 
considered in any child with a right-­to-­left cardiac shunt, chronic mucosal 
surface infections (sinus, otitis, dental), endocarditis, and a recent onset of 
persistent, chronic headaches. These patients may present with focal neu­
rologic findings and signs of increased intracranial pressure rather than 
fever and nuchal rigidity. Neuroimaging should be considered prior to 
lumbar puncture, due to risk of herniation with space-­occupying lesions.
Headache may accompany infections of the eye and orbit. The signs 
and symptoms of periorbital cellulitis are periorbital redness and ten­
derness, whereas in orbital cellulitis, the patient may also have che­
mosis, proptosis, ophthalmoplegia, painful extraocular movements, 
and change in visual acuity. Inflammation of the eye and orbit usually 
causes localized pain.
The headache associated with sinusitis may be acute or chronic. When 
the frontal or maxillary sinuses are involved, pain is frontal or orbital in 
location. When the ethmoid or sphenoid sinuses are infected, the headache 
may be frontal or occipital. Signs and symptoms of sinusitis include puru­
lent rhinorrhea, halitosis, cough, tenderness to palpation over the sinuses 
or teeth, and fever. A prior history of allergic rhinitis or sinusitis may be 
present. The diagnosis of acute bacterial sinusitis in pediatric patients may 
be made if symptoms of nasal discharge or daytime cough persist without 
improvement for more than 10 days, clinical course worsens or new symp­
toms develop after initial symptoms improve, or symptoms are severe at 
onset with fever of or above 39°C and purulent nasal discharge for at least 
3 days. Imaging studies are not required to confirm a diagnosis of sinusitis. 
However, contrast CT of the head, sinuses, and orbits should be obtained if 
there are signs of orbital cellulitis, altered mental status, or severe headache 
associated with sinusitis.
Dental abscesses may produce headaches that are aching or 
stabbing, and may occur as a complication of dental caries, tooth 
extractions, or root canal procedures. Physical examination may be 
normal or may reveal gingival swelling, redness, purulence, or pain. 
Palpating each tooth individually with a tongue blade may reveal the 
specific source of pain.
Headaches and/or Facial Pain Related to Dysfunction of 
Extracranial Structures (Table 34.20)
Asthenopia or eye strain may be a cause of headache and mild, dull, ach­
ing discomfort of the eyes. Because it is due to muscle strain that occurs 
while trying to correct visual acuity, it is not present on awakening and 
worsens with prolonged visual duties. Referral to an ophthalmologist 
should be made if asthenopia is suspected. Physical examination is oth­
erwise normal. Abnormal extraocular movements should prompt neu­
roimaging to evaluate for possible intracranial lesions.
A corneal abrasion should be suspected in the irritable infant and 
in the patient with excruciating eye pain. Diagnosis is made by fluores­
cein examination of the cornea. Corneal irritation, keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca, and recurrent erosion syndrome may present with recurrent eye 
pain that must be differentiated from cluster headaches.
Optic neuritis (inflammation of the optic nerve) often causes ipsi­
lateral retro-­orbital pain. Optic neuritis may occur as a single entity, or 
it may be part of the manifestation of multiple sclerosis. This disorder 
is rare in children but is more common in adolescents. The ophthal­
mologic examination reveals papillitis, an afferent pupillary defect, 
and decreased visual acuity. Often, the findings are normal except for 
decreased visual acuity. A neuroimaging study should be performed to 
fully evaluate the orbit and optic nerve and to evaluate for the presence 
of other demyelinating lesions more consistent with multiple sclerosis.
Malocclusion of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) may cause 
chronic headaches. The pain is localized to the side of the affected joint. 
Some patients report constant pain, whereas others have pain only with 
jaw movement. An identifying “click” occurs when the patient opens 
the mouth. Full depression of the mandible may be limited in range. 
Not every person with a click has TMJ syndrome, and not everyone 
with TMJ syndrome has headaches. Gum chewing may exacerbate the 
pain associated with TMJ syndrome. In patients without TMJ syn­
drome, gum chewing may cause headaches through overuse of the 
temporalis muscles. Patients with symptomatic TMJ syndrome often 
find relief with the use of an occlusal splint worn during sleep.
Disorders Affecting Homeostasis
Headaches triggered by fasting may occur in individuals with or with­
out primary headache disorders. Children may fast due to dieting or 
irregular schedules; skipping breakfast before school is associated with 
increased headache frequency in adolescents. These headaches may 
occur within 1 hour but generally take 12 hours to develop. A thorough 
diet history reveals prolonged fasting as the etiology of the headache.
Anoxia and hypoxia (<70 mm Hg) may produce headaches 
through dilatation of cerebral arteries, which in turn causes an increase 
in cerebral blood flow. Headaches are typically bifrontal, throbbing, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
565
CHAPTER 34  Headaches
and worse with exertion, straining, or supine positioning. In children 
with illnesses that predispose them to hypoxia (chronic lung disease, 
obstructive sleep apnea), treatment should be directed at alleviating the 
source of the hypoxia. High altitudes may also lead to an acute hypoxic 
state. Hypercapnia (levels >50 mm Hg) may also cause throbbing head­
aches. For nocturnal or morning headaches, in addition to neuroimag­
ing, polysomnography should be considered to assess for obstructive 
sleep apnea.
Systemic hypertension, both acute and chronic, may be associ­
ated with headaches. The pain is related to altered regulation of cere­
bral blood flow. Acute hypertension typically occurs in a child with 
underlying renal disease due to poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 
renal failure, or collagen vascular disease. Although hypertension is an 
uncommon cause of headaches in children, the diagnosis of hyperten­
sion is straightforward, and treatment of the hypertension alleviates 
the headaches. Headaches may be part of malignant hypertension 
syndrome, in which retinal exudates and microscopic hematuria are 
usually present. Severe hypertension may also cause intracerebral 
hemorrhage.
Psychologic Factors
There is a high rate of comorbid psychiatric diagnoses in children with 
primary headaches, of which anxiety and depression are the most com­
mon. Primary headaches are more commonly seen in children with a 
history of psychiatric disorders. Anxiety and mood disorders are also 
comorbidities associated with TTHs, especially when chronic, and psy­
chosocial stress may trigger these headaches. Consequently, screening 
for mental health symptoms and psychosocial stressors should occur 
in conjunction with the medical history. History should also aim to 
determine child coping skills, family relationships, and parental reac­
tions to pain.
Conversion disorder may manifest as headaches. Headaches asso­
ciated with conversion disorder are very difficult to diagnose and treat 
appropriately. The frequency and severity of these headaches increase 
without lasting relief from any pharmacologic or physical therapy. 
Some patients appear as if they are in pain, whereas others look per­
fectly normal despite claiming to be in considerable pain. Secondary 
TTH pain may occur, which further complicates the diagnosis. The 
neurologic findings in conversion disorder are normal.
The two goals in approaching conversion disorder headaches are 
(1) to convince the family that there is no physical cause for these head­
aches and (2) to uncover the origin of the conversion disorder. The 
physician with a pre-­established rapport with the family is clearly at an 
advantage in convincing the family that no physical cause exists for the 
headaches. The origins of a conversion disorder are difficult to uncover 
and require the finesse of an experienced therapist. Psychologic inter­
vention is essential, not only to identify the source of the problem but 
also to offer appropriate counseling.
TABLE 34.20  Chronic Facial Pain: Differential Diagnosis
Orbital Pain
Ocular disease
Migraine
Cluster headache
Sinusitis
Orbital cellulitis
Tolosa-­Hunt syndrome
Intracranial aneurysm
Cavernous sinus disease (mass, aneurysm)
Giant cell arteritis
Neoplasm
Graves disease
Neoplasm, frontal lobe
Trigeminal neuralgia
Postherpetic neuralgia
Zoster
Ear/Periauricular Pain
Chronic external otitis
Relapsing polychondritis
Cholesteatoma
TMJ syndrome
Migraine
Carotidynia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
Thyroiditis
Muscle contraction
Carotid aneurysm
Cervical spine disease
Neoplasm
Zoster
Nasal/Cheek Pain
Sinusitis
Facial cellulitis
Neoplasm (nasopharynx, sinus)
Vasomotor rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis
Trigeminal neuralgia
Midline granuloma
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
TMJ syndrome
Dental disease
Postherpetic neuralgia
Atypical odontalgia
Cluster headache
Poorly Localized/Vague
Sinus disease
TMJ syndrome
Depression
Conversion reaction
Neoplasm
Muscle contraction
Dental/Jaw Pain
Toothache
TMJ syndrome
Sinusitis
Neoplasm
Trigeminal neuralgia
Parotid disease
Atypical odontalgia
Postherpetic neuralgia
TMJ, temporomandibular joint.
Modified from Reilly BM. Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:106.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
566
SECTION 7  Neurosensory Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Headaches are a common cause of morbidity and health care utiliza­
tion in children. Most children who present with headaches will have 
a benign secondary headache or the primary headache disorders of 
TTH or migraine. However, the clinician must always consider condi­
tions associated with significant morbidity or mortality in the evalua­
tion of each patient with a headache. A thorough history and physical 
examination are the best tools to aid in determining which patients 
have a serious and life-­threatening cause for their headaches. Certain 
symptoms and signs should be considered red flags and prompt further 
evaluation (see Tables 34.5 and 34.6). Blood pressure and fundoscopic 
exams are essential. Indications for neuroimaging are shown in Table 
34.9. In the evaluation of the patient with headache, a single normal 
neurologic examination or one normal neuroimaging study should 
not provide complete reassurance. If headache persists, children 
require continued follow-­up and ongoing comprehensive assessments, 
including detailed general physical and neurologic examinations. 
Maintenance of a headache diary for patients with frequent or chronic 
headaches may be invaluable in determining the diagnosis and assess­
ing the response to therapy. Assessment of headaches requires a strong 
patient-­physician relationship to provide continued review of associ­
ated symptoms, ongoing assessments, appropriate evaluation, consid­
eration of psychosocial factors, and reassurance when indicated.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
566.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abend N, Younkin D, Lewis D. Secondary headaches in children and 
adolescents. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2010;17:123–133.
Abu-­Arafeh I, Howells R. Primary headaches in children under the age of 7 
years. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2014;18:401.
Abu-­Arafeh I, Macleod S. Serious neurological disorders in children with 
chronic headache. Arch Dis Child. 2005;90(9):937–940.
Abu-­Arafeh I, Razak S, Sivaraman B, et al. Prevalence of headache and 
migraine in children and adolescents: a systematic review of population-­
based studies. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2010;52(12):1088–1097.
Alexiou GA, Argyropoulou MI. Neuroimaging in childhood headache: a 
systemic review. Pediatr Radiol. 2013;43:777–784.
Angus-­Leppan H. Migraine: mimics, borderlands and chameleons. Pract 
Neurol. 2013;13:308–318.
Annequin D, Tourniaire B, Massiou H. Migraine and headache in childhood 
and adolescence. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:617–631.
Anttila P, Metsahonkala L, Sillanpaa M. Long-­term trends in the incidence of 
headache in Finnish schoolchildren. Pediatrics. 2006;117(6):e1197–e1201.
Arnold M. Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache 
Society (IHS). The international classification of headache disorders, 3rd 
ed. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):1–211.
Bear JJ, Gelfand AA, Goadsby PJ, et al. Occipital headaches and neuroimaging 
in children. Neurology. 2017;89(5):469–474.
Broasky J, Kair K, Shoshany T, et al. Benign paroxysmal migraine variants 
of infancy and childhood: transitions and clinical features. Eur J Paediatr 
Neurol. 2018;22:667–673.
Caviness V, Ebinger F. Headache in pediatric practice. In: Handbook of 
Clinical Neurology. Vol. 112 (3rd Series) Pediatric Neurology. Part II. 2013; 
Chapter 86:827–­838.
Dao JM, Qubty W. Headache diagnosis in children and adolescents. Curr Pain 
Headache Rep. 2018;22:17.
Dlamini N, deVeber GA. Pediatric stroke. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3209–3218.
Dodock DW. Migraine. Lancet. 2018;391:1315–1326.
Genizi J, et al. Occipital headaches in children: are they a red flag? J Child 
Neurol. 2017;32(11):942–946.
Goncalves D, Meireles J, Richa R, et al. Syndrome of transient headache and 
neurologic deficits with cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis (HaNDL): a 
pediatric case report. J Child Neurol. 2012;28(12):1661–1663.
Gupta SN, Gupta VS, Borad N. Spectrum migraine variants and beyond: the 
individual syndromes in children. Brain Dev. 2016;38:10–26.
Hayes LL, Palasis S, et al., Expert Panel on Pediatric Imaging. ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria® headache—child. J Am Coll Radiol. 
2018;15(5S):S78–S90.
Hersey AD, Kabbouche MA, O’Brien HL, et al. Headaches. In: Kliegman RM, 
St. Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3128–3140.
How CH, Chan WSD. Headaches in children. Singapore Med J. 
2014;55(3):128–131.
Irwin SL, Gelfand AA. Occipital headaches and neuroimaging in children. 
Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2018;22(9):59.
Johnston MV. Encephalopathies: mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy 
lactic acidosis and stroke-­like episodes. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3175.
Kandemir G, Hesapcioglu ST, Kurt ANC. What are the psychosocial factors 
associated with migraine in the child? Comorbid psychiatric disorders, 
family functioning, parenting style, or Mom’s psychiatric symptoms? J 
Child Neurol. 2018;33(2):174–181.
Kaniecki R. Headache assessment and management. J Am Med Assoc. 
2003;289:1430–1433.
Klein J, Koch T. Headache in children. Pediatr Rev. 2020;41(4):159–171.
Lewis DW. Headaches in children and adolescents. Am Fam Physician. 
2002;65:625–632.
Lewis DW, Ashwal S, Dahl G, et al. Practice parameter: evaluation of children 
and adolescents with recurrent headaches: report of the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Practice 
Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology. 2002;59:490–498.
Lewis DW, Qureshi F. Acute headache in children and adolescents presenting 
to the emergency department. Headache. 2000;40(3):200–203.
Linder SL, Winner P. Pediatric headache. Med Clin North Am. 2001;85:1037–1053.
Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM. Headache and migraine. In: Marcdante KJ, ed. 
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:685–687.
Mastria G, Mancini V, Viganò A, et al. Alice in Wonderland syndrome: a 
clinical and pathophysiological review. BioMed Res Int. 2016;2016:8243145.
McConnell B, Duffield T, Hall T, et al. Post-­traumatic headache after pediatric 
traumatic brain injury: prevalence, risk factors, and association with 
neurocognitive outcomes. J Child Neurol. 2020;35(1):63–70.
Özge A, Faedda N, Abu-­Arafeh I, et al. Experts’ opinion about the primary 
headache diagnostic criteria of the ICHD–­3rd edition beta in children and 
adolescents. J Headache Pain. 2017;18(1):109.
Ozge A, Termine C, Antonaci F, et al. Overview of diagnosis and management 
of paediatric headache. Part I: diagnosis. J Headache Pain. 2011;12:13–23.
Pacheva IH, Ivanov IS. Migraine variants – occurrence in pediatric neurology 
practice. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2013;115:1775–1783.
Papetti L, Capuano A. Headache as an emergency in children and adolescents. 
Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2015;19:3.
Parisi P, Papetti L, Spalice A, et al. Tension-­type headache in paediatric age. 
Acta Paediatr. 2011;100(4):491–495.
Parker A. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri). In: 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:3236–3238.
Pektezel MY, Konuskan B, Sonmez FM, et al. Pediatric headache and 
neuroimaging: experience of two tertiary centers. Childs Nerv Syst. 
2020;36:173–177.
Raucci U, Della Vecchia N, Ossella C, et al. Management of childhood 
headache in the emergency department. Review of the literature. Front 
Neurol. 2019;10:886.
Romanello S, Spiri D, Marcuzzi E, et al. Association between childhood migraine 
and history of infantile colic. J Am Med Assoc. 2013;309:1607–1612.
Roser T, Bonfert M, Ebinger F, et al. Primary versus secondary headache 
in children: a frequent diagnostic challenge in clinical routine. 
Neuropediatrics. 2013;44:34–39.
Rothner AD. Evaluation of headache. In: Winner P, Rothner AD, eds. Headache 
in Children and Adolescents. Hamilton, Ontario: BC Decker; 2001.
Russell MB, Ducros A. Sporadic and familial hemiplegic migraine: 
pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical characteristics, diagnosis, and 
management. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:457–470.
Senior K. New understanding into the mechanics of migraine. Lancet. 
2002;359:500.
Seshia SS, Abu-­Arafeh I, Hershey AD. Tension-­type headache in children: the 
Cinderella of headache disorders! Can J Neurol Sci. 2009;36(6):687–695.
Silbert PL, Mokri B, Schievink WI. Headache and neck pain in spontaneous 
internal carotid and vertebral artery dissections. Neurology. 2005;45:1517–
1522.
Singhi S, Jacobs H, Gladstein J. Pediatric headache: where have we been and 
where do we need to be? Headache. 2014;54:817–829.
Stafstrom C, Rostasy K, Minster A. The usefulness of children’s drawings in the 
diagnosis of headache. Pediatrics. 2002;109(3):460–472.
Steiner TJ, Fontebasso M. Headache. BMJ. 2002;325:881–886.
Torres-­Ferrus M, Vila-­Sala C, Quintana M, et al. Headache, comorbidities 
and lifestyle in an adolescent population (the TEENs study). Cephalalgia. 
2019;39(1):91–99.
Vaz I. Probable trigeminal autonomic cephalgia in 3-­month-­old infant. Dev 
Med Child Neurol. 2009;52(4):400–440.
Wald ER, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management 
of acute bacterial sinusitis in children aged 1 to 18 years. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(1):e262–e280.
Youssef PE, Mack KJ. Episodic and chronic migraine in children. Dev Med 
Child Neurol. 2019;62:34–41.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
