99
A brief resolved unexplained event (BRUE) is a term used to describe 
events occurring in infants younger than 1 year of age that are charac­
terized by the observer as “brief” (lasting <1 minute but typically <20–
30 seconds) and “resolved” (meaning the patient returned to baseline 
state of health after the event) and with a reassuring history, physical 
examination, and vital signs at the time of clinical evaluation by trained 
medical providers (Table 6.1). A BRUE is diagnosed only when there is 
no explanation for a qualifying event after conducting an appropriate 
history and physical examination.
DEFINITION
The term BRUE (pronounced “brew”) is defined as an event lasting 
<1 minute in an infant younger than 1 year of age that is associated 
with at least one of the following: cyanosis or pallor; absent, decreased, 
or irregular breathing; marked change in muscle tone (hypertonia 
or hypotonia); and altered level of responsiveness. BRUE occurs in a 
patient who was asymptomatic prior to the event, at the time of exam­
ination is well-­appearing and has returned to baseline level of func­
tion, and after evaluation has no condition that could explain the event 
(see Table 6.1). It was introduced as a replacement for the term ALTE 
(apparent life-­threatening event).
The definition of ALTE presented challenges due to the subjectiv­
ity and vagueness of the described symptoms. This made it difficult to 
standardize the care of these patients, due to possible causation by a 
wide range of disorders. In addition, it relied on the subjective report of 
the observer rather than on pathophysiology and implied the event was 
“life-­threatening” when it generally was not. The term BRUE serves to 
remove the “life-­threatening” label, more narrowly define the event, 
and better reflect the transient nature and lack of a clear cause.
In development of the BRUE clinical practice guideline, a sys­
tematic review of ALTE literature that allowed for the identification 
of BRUEs found two subsets of BRUE patients based on their risk for 
adverse outcomes. Those at lower risk are defined as >60 days old, ges­
tational age ≥32 weeks and postconceptual age ≥45 weeks, no prior 
BRUEs and not occurring in a cluster, event duration <1 minute, no 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation administered by a trained medical pro­
vider, and no concerning historical features or physical exam findings. 
These patients can likely be managed in the outpatient setting without 
need for extensive evaluation (Fig. 6.1). Any patient not meeting these 
criteria are classified as higher risk for adverse outcomes.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Because the term BRUE was introduced in 2016, the incidence of these 
events is not well known. Prior to the introduction of the term BRUE, 
the exact incidence of ALTEs was also unclear, due to the subjectivity 
of the definition and the probability that not all children with ALTE 
presented for evaluation. Reported figures may have underestimated 
the true incidence as studies may not have included those cases where 
the underlying cause was ultimately identified. Various studies estimate 
the incidence of ALTE to be between 0.46 and 2.46/1,000 live births, 
accounting for 0.6–1% of all emergency department visits by patients 
younger than 1 year and 2% of pediatric hospitalizations. Studies 
attempting to identify BRUE patients among those classified as ALTE 
found that less than half met the criteria for BRUE. The mortality rates 
reported to be associated with ALTE vary widely depending on the 
definition and the population. However, review of these prior studies 
focused on the outcomes of patients who met the criteria for BRUE did 
not identify deaths or significant morbidities in that population.
ETIOLOGY
By definition BRUEs are unexplained events with no identifiable 
underlying cause. It is important for providers presented with a sus­
pected BRUE to consider additional diagnoses that may present sim­
ilarly. Based on broad symptomatology, the differential diagnosis for 
BRUEs is large (Table 6.2). Comorbid conditions are frequently identi­
fied, but it can be challenging to identify true causation. Thus, caution 
must be used when implicating a specific diagnosis as the true cause of 
an event. Prior literature reported that a suspected diagnosis was found 
in approximately 50% of patients presenting with an ALTE. These diag­
noses encompass a wide range of etiologies and systems and should 
also be considered as alternative etiologies for patients presenting with 
a BRUE.
The most commonly cited alternative diagnoses include gastro­
esophageal reflux (GER), seizures, and lower respiratory tract infec­
tions. However, numerous less common but potentially dangerous 
and/or treatable conditions can also present similarly (see Table 6.2). 
These need to be carefully considered to provide prompt lifesaving 
or outcome-­altering treatment. A thorough and thoughtful history 
and physical examination are extremely important in the evaluation 
of a patient with a BRUE, as they provide essential clues to help nar­
row the differential and perform risk stratification. It is often helpful 
to consider the differential diagnosis by a systems-­based approach, 
considering both common and rare but concerning diagnoses in 
each category. Key systems-­based historical and physical examina­
tion findings may help discriminate among possible etiologies (see 
Table 6.2).
CLINICAL EVALUATION
History
The most important diagnostic tool in the evaluation of a BRUE is 
a thorough history elicited from the caretaker who observed the 
episode. History taking should start with open-­ended questions to 
Apparent Life-­Threatening Event/
Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
Amanda Rogers and Sandra Gage
6
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
100
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
obtain the story from the caretaker, followed by specific questions 
geared at characterizing certain key aspects of the episode. The his­
tory should focus on the activities and behaviors preceding the event, 
characteristics of the episode itself, interventions performed and 
their effect, and postepisode events and behavior. A comprehensive 
past medical history, social history, and family history should also 
be obtained for identifying clues that may aid in narrowing the focus 
of the investigation. Information essential to a complete history is 
outlined in Table 6.3. Key historical findings by system can be useful 
in narrowing the differential (see Table 6.2).
The patient’s activities and behaviors immediately preceding the 
episode are important to consider and may provide clues to the diag­
nosis. Key associations include those with sleep, feeding, crying, cough, 
and emesis. The location and position of the child prior to the event 
should also be noted, such as placement in a car seat, on a soft or firm 
surface, prone or supine, and with or without surrounding blankets or 
pillows.
Key characteristics of the actual event include color change, respira­
tory effort, change in tone or movements, and level of alertness at onset 
and during the episode. Careful review of these signs and symptoms 
TABLE 6.1  BRUE Definition and Factors for Inclusion and Exclusion of BRUE Diagnosis
Includes
Excludes
Brief
Duration <1 min; typically 20–30 sec
Duration ≥1 min
Resolved
Patient returned to their baseline state of health after the event
At the time of medical evaluation:
Normal vital signs
Fever or recent fever
Normal appearance
Tachypnea, bradypnea, apnea
Tachycardia or bradycardia
Hypotension, hypertension, or hemodynamic instability
Mental status changes, somnolence, lethargy
Hypotonia or hypertonia
Vomiting
Bruising, petechiae, or other signs of injury/trauma
Abnormal weight, growth, or head circumference
Noisy breathing (stridor, stertor, wheezing)
Repeat event(s)
Unexplained
Not explained by an identifiable medical condition
Event consistent with GER, swallow dysfunction, nasal congestion, etc.
History or physical examination concerning for child abuse, congenital 
airway abnormality, etc.
Event Characterization
Cyanosis or pallor
Central cyanosis: blue or purple coloration of face, gums, trunk
Acrocyanosis or perioral cyanosis
Central pallor: pale coloration of face or trunk
Rubor
Absent, decreased, or 
irregular breathing
Central apnea
Periodic breathing of the newborn
Obstructive apnea
Breath-­holding spell
Mixed obstructive apnea
Marked change in tone 
(hyper-­ or hypotonia)
Hypertonia
Hypotonia
Hypertonia associated with crying, choking, or gagging due to GER or 
feeding problems
Tone changes associated with breath-­holding spell
Tonic eye deviation or nystagmus
Tonic-­clonic seizure activity
Infantile spasms
Altered responsive­
ness
Loss of consciousness
Mental status change
Loss of consciousness associated with breath-­holding spell
Postictal phase due to seizure
Lethargy
Somnolence
BRUE, brief resolved unexplained event; GER, gastroesophageal reflux.
From Tieder JS, Bonkowsky JL, Etzel RA, et al. Brief resolved unexplained events (formerly apparent life-threatening events) and evaluation of 
­lower-risk infants. Pediatrics. 2016;137(5):e20160590 (Table 1).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
101
CHAPTER 6  Apparent Life-­Threatening Event/Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
aids in the identification and classification of a BRUE, and they are 
important clues to potential alternative diagnoses.
Color: The specifics of any change in color should be clearly noted, 
and the hue of the change is significant. Unlike in the term ALTE where 
any change of color was considered, BRUE more precisely defines con­
cerning color change as episodes of cyanosis or pallor. Episodes of 
rubor are not consistent with a BRUE, because they are common in 
healthy infants. The location of the change should also be noted, such 
as central cyanosis versus peripheral acrocyanosis, as the latter may be 
consistent with normal changes in perfusion.
Change in breathing: The term BRUE expands the respiratory 
criteria for ALTE beyond apnea to include absent breathing, dimin­
ished breathing, and other breathing irregularities. If apnea is noted, 
the duration of respiratory cessation aids in the determination of true 
pathologic apnea. Apnea is defined as cessation in breathing that is 
prolonged (>20 seconds) or associated with cyanosis, marked pallor or 
hypotonia, or bradycardia. The degree of respiratory effort noted assists 
in differentiating central versus obstructive processes. Central apnea 
with no respiratory effort may suggest underlying neurologic, cardiac, 
metabolic, or infectious causes, while obstructive processes include 
GER, respiratory tract infections, foreign body, suffocation, or airway 
anatomic anomalies.
Tone: It is important to determine if tone was increased or decreased 
during or after the event. If abnormal movements were identified, it 
should be noted if the movements were generalized or localized to a 
certain part of the body and the timing. The ability to suppress any 
abnormal movements should be documented, as this makes conditions 
such as seizure less likely.
Altered level of responsiveness: Specific note of the level of respon­
siveness is another criterion under the BRUE definition and is signif­
icant to note as it can be associated with episodic but serious cardiac, 
respiratory, metabolic, or neurologic events.
Of note, if the event was noted to consist primarily of choking or 
gagging without any of the other features listed earlier, unlike in the 
former ALTE definition, this would not be included within the current 
definition of BRUE. Choking and gagging usually indicate easily iden­
tifiable common diagnoses such as GER or respiratory infections and 
therefore are not considered a BRUE.
Additional history should include any interventions performed, by 
whom, and the effects of the interventions. The need for resuscitation, 
especially when performed by health care providers, has been associ­
ated with more severe and significant underlying etiologies and classi­
fies the event as a higher-­risk BRUE. Obtaining a direct history from 
any emergency personnel who may have been involved with the case 
is important.
Postepisode behavior should be carefully documented. Level of 
alertness following the event and time until return to normal behavior 
are also of particular importance.
Regarding past medical history, it is essential to note the birth his­
tory including gestational age, any prior similar episodes, preceding 
Age >60 days
Born ≥32 weeks’ gestation and
  postconception age ≥45 weeks
No CPR by trained medical provider
Event lasted <1 min
First event
No concerning history or exam features
History and physical
Lower-risk patient
Higher-risk patient
Individualized management
Yes
No
Risk stratification
Individualized management
Cyanosis or pallor
Absent, decreased, or irregular breathing
Marked change in tone (hyper- or hypotonia)
Altered level of responsiveness
Infant (<1 year old) with a brief, resolved,
unexplained event (BRUE)
Additional symptoms
Abnormal vital signs
Explanation for event identified
Exclusion criteria: CHD, epilepsy,
  metabolic disease, neurologic
  abnormality
Not a BRUE if:
Management recommendation
Provide reassurance and educate family
Offer CPR training resources
Consider brief observation of infant in ED
  on continuous pulse oximetry
Consider ECG and pertussis testing
Further testing is generally not indicated
Figure 6.1  Algorithm for diagnosis, risk stratification, and management of a brief resolved unexplained event 
(BRUE). CHD, congenital heart disease; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department. (From The 
Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland], ed. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2020.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
102
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
TABLE 6.2  Differential Diagnosis and System-­Based Approach to BRUEs
Diagnostic 
Categories
Common and/or Concerning 
Causes to Consider
Suggestive Historical 
Findings
Suggestive Physical 
Examination Findings
Testing to Consider
Gastrointestinal
GER
Intussusception
Volvulus
Swallowing abnormalities
Coughing, vomiting, choking, 
gasping
Feeding difficulties
Recent preceding feed
Irritability following feeds
Milk in mouth/nose
Bilious emesis
Pulling legs to chest
Bloody/mucousy stool
Lethargy following event
Gastric contents in the nose and 
mouth
Abdominal distention
Abdominal tenderness
Upper GI to assess for anatomic 
anomalies
Swallow evaluation
Abdominal ultrasound or pH 
probe
Infectious
Upper and lower respiratory tract 
infection (RSV, pertussis, pneumo­
nia)
Bacteremia
Meningitis
Urinary tract infection
Preceding URI symptoms
Multiple events on the day of 
presentation
Sick exposures
Foul-­smelling urine
Fever/hypothermia
Lethargy
Ill appearance
Coryza
Cough
Wheeze
Tachypnea
NP swab for RSV, pertussis, 
COVID-­19
Chest radiograph
CBC and blood culture
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and 
culture
Urinalysis and culture
Neurologic
Seizures
Breath-­holding spells
Congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome
Neuromuscular disorders
Congenital malformations of the brain 
and brainstem
Malignancy
Intracranial hemorrhage
Multiple events
Loss of consciousness
Change in tone
Abnormal muscular movements
Eye deviation
Preceding triggers
Papilledema
Abnormal muscular movements
Hypertonicity or flaccidity
Abnormal reflexes
Micro-­ or macrocephaly
Dysmorphic features
Ptosis
Bulging fontanel
EEG
Neuroimaging
Respiratory/ENT
Apnea of prematurity
Apnea of infancy
Periodic breathing
Airway anomaly
Aspiration
Foreign body
Obstructive sleep apnea
Prematurity
Foreign body
Aspiration
Noisy breathing
Wheezing
Stridor
Crackles
Rhonchi
Tachypnea
Chest radiograph
Neck radiograph
Laryngoscopy
Bronchoscopy
Esophagoscopy
Polysomnography
Child maltreatment
Nonaccidental head trauma
Smothering
Poisoning
Factitious syndrome (formerly Mun­
chausen syndrome) by proxy
Multiple events
Unexplained vomiting or 
irritability
Recurrent events
Historical discrepancies
Family history of unexplained 
death, BRUEs, SIDS, or ALTEs
Single witness of event
Delay in seeking care
Bruising (especially in a nonmo­
bile child)
Ear trauma, hemotympanum
Acute abdomen
Painful extremities
Oral bleeding/trauma
Frenulum tears
Unexplained irritability
Retinal hemorrhages
Depressed mental status
Skeletal survey
CT of the head
Dilated funduscopic exam­
ination
Toxicology screen
Cardiac
Dysrhythmia (prolonged QT syndrome, 
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome)
Cardiomyopathy
Congenital heart disease
Myocarditis
Abrupt onset
Feeding difficulties
Failure to thrive
Diaphoresis
Prematurity
Abnormal heart rate/rhythm
Murmur
Decreased femoral pulses
Four-­extremity blood pressure
Pre-­ and postductal oxygen 
saturation measurements
ECG
Echocardiogram
Serum electrolytes, calcium, 
magnesium
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
103
CHAPTER 6  Apparent Life-­Threatening Event/Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
illnesses, and known medical conditions. Family history should also be 
obtained with a focus on the presence of BRUEs, ALTEs, sudden infant 
death syndrome (SIDS), early deaths, and metabolic or neurologic dis­
orders in first-­ or second-­degree family members. Social factors to con­
sider include a full list of caregivers, siblings, and other children in the 
home; illness exposures; medications in the home; exposure to smoke; 
or prior Child Protective Services involvement.
Major factors suggestive of risk for future adverse events and/or a 
serious underlying diagnosis include age, prematurity, multiple events, 
and the need for CPR by trained medical providers. Prematurity is a 
frequently noted risk factor for a BRUE/ALTE, perhaps due in part 
to the preterm infants’ immature respiratory centers, arousal mech­
anisms, and airway reflexes. The risk is increased for infants born at 
<32 weeks’ gestation, and the risk decreases once they reach 45 weeks’ 
postconception age. A history of multiple events raises the concern for 
serious underlying pathology and progression of future events. With a 
history of multiple events over days to months, the concern for child 
maltreatment, seizures, intracranial pathology, and inborn errors of 
metabolism increases. Multiple events occurring over the course of the 
day of presentation escalate concern for serious infections and child 
maltreatment.
Physical Examination
One of the diagnostic challenges of the evaluation of a child with a 
BRUE is that the patient has returned to their baseline state of health 
after the event and has a reassuring physical examination and vital signs 
when evaluated by a trained medical provider. Infants should undergo 
a complete head-­to-­toe examination fully unclothed, including vital 
signs with pulse oximetry, growth parameters with head circumfer­
ence, and complete ear, nose, throat, cardiac, respiratory, abdominal, 
neurologic, musculoskeletal, and skin examinations to note any abnor­
malities or clues to suggest an alternative diagnosis.
Abnormalities noted on the presenting examination may indicate 
various possible diagnoses and should prompt additional evaluation 
for the suggested etiology (see Table 6.2). Particular attention should 
be paid to the child’s general appearance for dysmorphic features that 
might suggest an underlying genetic or metabolic syndrome. Abnor­
mal growth parameters may identify failure to thrive, which can be 
suggestive of pathologic reflux, cardiac disease, or metabolic disorders. 
Signs of trauma, including retinal hemorrhages, unexplained bruising, 
or evidence of oral pharyngeal trauma (torn frenulum), suggestive 
of child maltreatment should also be noted. A full neurologic exam­
ination may raise concern for an intracranial bleed or mass requiring 
prompt attention.
Diagnostic Evaluation
A comprehensive history is essential both in performing a risk stratifi­
cation to determine if the event would be classified as higher or lower 
risk and in identifying indications of potential alternative diagnoses.
For patients identified as lower risk, laboratory studies, imaging 
studies, and other diagnostic procedures are unlikely to be useful or 
necessary (see Fig. 6.1). Low-­risk patients should not be admitted to 
the hospital solely for cardiorespiratory monitoring or undergo exten­
sive evaluations. Two evaluations that are recommended for consid­
eration in the lower-­risk population include an ECG and pertussis in 
conjunction with brief monitoring on a continuous pulse oximeter 
with serial exams. ECGs may be useful in identifying channelopa­
thies, ventricular pre-­excitation, cardiomyopathy, or other heart dis­
ease. Although the incidence of these is low, the benefit of identifying 
a patient at risk of sudden cardiac death may outweigh the cost and 
risk of potential false positives leading to additional evaluation. Pertus­
sis and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) have been reported to cause 
BRUE-­like events with gasping, color change, and apnea and may not 
have associated fever or respiratory symptoms particularly when pres­
ent in young infants.
When evaluating patients presenting with a higher-­risk BRUE, it is 
often difficult to determine the degree to which diagnostic work-­up is 
indicated, especially in well-­appearing infants with a nonspecific his­
tory and physical examination. A potential framework for the approach 
to evaluation of a higher-­risk BRUE suggests consideration of the fol­
lowing: continuous pulse oximetry monitoring for at least 4 hours; 
consultation with a social worker; a bedside feeding evaluation; ECG; 
laboratory studies including consideration of a rapid viral respiratory 
panel and pertussis testing, hematocrit, blood glucose, bicarbonate or 
venous blood gas, and lactate; consultation with a child abuse expert; 
head imaging with CT or MRI, and skeletal survey if concerned for 
child maltreatment; and then additional consultation and evaluation as 
indicated based on the clinical context. The level of evidence varies for 
each of these recommendations and the clinical context should be care­
fully considered when approaching the evaluation of a BRUE. Prior 
data from the ALTE literature suggests that in approximately 20% of 
patients the history and physical examination alone yield the cause; in 
TABLE 6.2  Differential Diagnosis and System-­Based Approach to BRUEs—cont’d
Diagnostic 
Categories
Common and/or Concerning 
Causes to Consider
Suggestive Historical 
Findings
Suggestive Physical 
Examination Findings
Testing to Consider
Metabolic/genetic
Inborn errors of metabolism
Electrolyte abnormalities
Genetic syndromes including those 
with craniofacial malformations
Severe initial event
Multiple events
Event associated with period of 
stress or fasting
Developmental delay
Associated anomalies
Failure to thrive
Severe/frequent illnesses
Family history of a BRUE, 
ALTE, consanguinity, seizure 
disorder, or SIDS
Dysmorphic features
Microcephaly
Hepatomegaly
Serum electrolytes; glucose, 
calcium, and magnesium 
levels
Lactate
Ammonia
Pyruvate
Urine organic and serum amino 
acids
Newborn screen
ALTE, apparent life-­threatening event; BRUE, brief resolved unexplained event; ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GER, gastroesophageal reflux; GI, gastro­
intestinal; NP, nasopharyngeal; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome; URI, upper respiratory infection.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
104
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
about 50% of patients, a likely diagnosis is suspected from the history 
and physical examination and is subsequently confirmed by diagnos­
tic testing. Diagnostic testing alone yields an etiology in approximately 
15% of patients. When testing is performed, it is most successful when 
done in a focused and targeted manner geared toward diagnoses sug­
gested by the history and physical examination, specifically addressing 
concerning features identified.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS BY SYSTEM
Gastrointestinal
A variety of gastrointestinal (GI) etiologies can mimic a BRUE on pre­
sentation, including GER, intussusception, and volvulus.
GER is one of the most commonly cited comorbid conditions in 
patients presenting with concerning events. Some infants will present 
with overt symptoms such as coughing, choking, and laryngospasm 
following regurgitation. Others may present without visible regurgi­
tation but rather with posturing including arching of the back, torsion 
of the neck, and lifting up of the chin. This phenomenon, known as 
Sandifer syndrome, can be frightening to the observer and is often 
confused with seizure activity. Historical findings that should raise 
the index of suspicion for GER include a history of frequent reflux, 
the event being immediately preceded by a feeding, poor weight gain, 
irritability following a feed, or gastric contents noted in the infant’s 
nose or mouth during the episode. However, one must be careful when 
attributing the event to GER. Approximately 50% of all normal infants 
younger than 3 months of age experience daily regurgitation, and tem­
poral association does not necessarily equate with causation. Although 
GER may occasionally cause apneic episodes, GER also occurs very 
commonly in most healthy infants without any sequelae. It is therefore 
important not to let a history of GER in an infant presenting with a 
BRUE preclude the consideration of other underlying causes.
Although less common, additional GI pathology can present sim­
ilar to a BRUE, including conditions such as intussusception or vol­
vulus. Patients who present with these conditions will typically have 
additional historical and examination findings to suggest their under­
lying etiology. Patients with intussusception can have sudden and 
severe abdominal pain demonstrated by inconsolable crying and draw­
ing up of the legs to the abdomen. The classic presentation of intussus­
ception is the triad of abdominal pain, a sausage-­shaped abdominal 
mass, and currant-­jelly stool. However, this classic triad is frequently 
not seen at presentation. Some infants present solely with lethargy or 
altered consciousness. Similarly, infants with volvulus can present with 
sudden-­onset abdominal pain accompanied by emesis. Volvulus is a 
medical emergency, which can lead to bowel necrosis and death. Oro­
pharyngeal dysphagia is another consideration. This dysfunctional 
coordination of the suck, swallow, and breathe mechanism is common 
when infants are first learning to feed and can be associated with aspi­
ration, laryngeal food penetration, or nasopharyngeal reflux. This eti­
ology should be considered if there are symptoms of choking, gagging, 
or color change with feeds; prolonged feeds; or pooling of feeds in the 
mouth.
Obtaining a careful feeding history is critical in the evaluation of 
potential GI etiologies for patients presenting with a suspected BRUE, 
but most studies do not support routine testing for GER in these 
patients. Because there is a high prevalence of GER in infants, it is 
expected that a high number of these patients will have positive GER 
testing. When testing is considered, it is important to understand the 
utility of various modalities. Upper gastrointestinal fluoroscopy is fre­
quently performed. Although this can be useful in identifying under­
lying anatomic anomalies that can lead to concerning events, it should 
TABLE 6.3  Important Historical Features in 
the Evaluation of a Possible BRUE
Prior to Event
Condition of child
Awake vs asleep
Location of child
Prone vs supine, in crib/car seat, with pillows, blankets
Activity
Feeding, crying
During Event
Respiratory effort
None, shallow, gasping, increased
Duration of respiratory pauses
Color
Pallor, red, cyanotic
Peripheral, whole body, circumoral
Tone/movement
Rigid, tonic-­clonic, decreased, floppy
Focal vs diffuse
Ability to suppress movements
Level of conscious­
ness
Alert, interactive, sleepy, nonresponsive
Duration
Time until normal breathing, normal tone, normal 
behavior
Detailed history of caregiver actions during event to aid 
in defining time course
Associated symp­
toms
Vomiting, sputum production, blood in mouth/nose, 
eye rolling
Postevent
Condition
Back to baseline, sleepy, postictal, crying
If altered after event, duration of time until back to 
baseline
Interventions
What was per­
formed
Gentle stimulation, blowing in face, mouth-­to-­mouth, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Who performed 
intervention
Medical professional vs caregiver
Response to inter­
vention
Resolution of event vs self-­resolving
Duration of inter­
vention
How long was intervention performed
Medical History
History of present 
illness
Preceding illnesses, fever, rash, irritability, sick 
contacts
Past medical history Prenatal exposures, gestational age, birth trauma
Any medical problems, prior medical conditions, prior 
hospitalizations
Developmental delay
Medications
Feeding history
Gagging, coughing with feeds, poor weight gain
Family history
Neurologic problems
Cardiac arrhythmias
Sudden death, childhood deaths, ALTEs, BRUEs
Neonatal problems
Consanguinity
Social history
Home situation
Caregivers
Smoke exposure
Medications in the home
Prior Child Protective Services involvement
ALTE, apparent life-­threatening event; BRUE, brief resolved unexplained 
event.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
105
CHAPTER 6  Apparent Life-­Threatening Event/Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
not be used to delineate GER as the cause for the event. This study 
frequently demonstrates regurgitation in normal infants, and a positive 
finding on the study does not necessarily indicate that GER was the 
cause of the inciting event. Although typically not indicated, if further 
GER testing is desired, esophageal pH analysis via a pH probe could 
be considered to help demonstrate a causal link by correlating low 
pH findings with documented apnea on concurrent cardiorespiratory 
monitoring (see Chapter 15).
Infectious Disease
Various infectious etiologies can mimic a BRUE on presentation, 
ranging from common illnesses caused by respiratory viruses to less 
common but serious infections such as bacteremia and meningitis. A 
history of multiple events on the day of presentation is often associated 
with an infectious etiology. Additional historical clues include recent 
fever, irritability, altered level of arousal, cough, or coryza. Physical 
examination findings may confirm the suspicion of an infectious eti­
ology, while hypothermia and ill appearance at presentation exclude 
the event from being characterized as a BRUE and should lead to con­
cern for more serious infectious etiologies. Of note, fever and typical 
infectious symptoms may be absent in younger infants with immature 
immunologic and neurologic systems. Prematurity, complicated birth 
history, or prior antibiotic administration should raise concerns for 
potential infectious etiologies.
Viral respiratory infections can present with findings similar 
to that of a BRUE, particularly in young infants. In this population, 
apnea may be the presenting symptom of viral lower respiratory tract 
infections, with the telling symptoms of coryza and cough delayed by 
hours to days. In particular, pertussis and infection caused by RSV are 
commonly reported conditions associated with apnea in young infants. 
Suspicion of respiratory infection must remain high, especially during 
peak respiratory illness periods, or if there is a history of recent expo­
sure. Influenza and coronavirus should also be considered. Neonates 
with pertussis may present with or develop few other symptoms, so 
a careful history of potential exposure is essential for early diagnosis. 
Although uncommon in infants with pertussis, the development of a 
staccato cough with posttussive emesis, or a classic “whoop,” should 
prompt treatment while awaiting appropriate testing.
Although the incidence of bacteremia or meningitis is low in 
patients presenting with BRUE-­like events, the morbidity and mortal­
ity of these diagnoses are such that they should always be considered. 
A history of irritability and/or altered level of arousal may suggest 
these and other serious infections. Paradoxical irritability (crying when 
held) suggests soft tissue or bone infection or a fracture. Examination 
findings of concern include ill appearance, fever, hypothermia, leth­
argy, nuchal rigidity, and poor peripheral perfusion. Prompt action is 
required for the evaluation and treatment of these infants.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) have also been shown to be a 
potential cause of BRUE-­like events. The infection can lead to cardio­
respiratory compromise, which can manifest as apnea, color change, 
altered levels of consciousness, or change in muscle tone. The major­
ity of patients with UTIs significant enough to cause those symptoms 
will be ill-­appearing at presentation. Therefore, most studies indicate 
that urinalysis and urine culture can be reserved for infants who are 
febrile, are ill-­appearing, or have other clinical symptoms consistent 
with a UTI.
Neurologic
Neurologic disorders that can present similar to a BRUE include sei­
zure, breath-­holding spells, congenital central hypoventilation syn­
drome (Ondine’s curse), metabolic encephalopathies, and brain or 
brainstem abnormalities.
The most common identifiable neurologic disorder associated with 
these symptoms is seizure, with a rate of up to 25%. Factors that sup­
port the diagnosis of seizure include a history of loss of consciousness, 
poor tone, unresponsiveness, eye deviation, or rhythmic movements 
that are not able to be suppressed. A history of choking is typically 
absent in those presenting with seizure. Lack of this historical fact 
should raise the suspicion for seizure in the differential.
Breath-­holding spells have been reported to present to medical 
attention with a BRUE-­like event. These are typically divided into two 
types: cyanotic and pallid. In cyanotic breath-­holding spells, there is 
usually an emotional trigger such as anger or frustration. The infants 
cry, then become silent and hold their breath in expiration with sub­
sequent cyanosis. This can then be followed by limpness and possible 
loss of consciousness. Pallid breath-­holding spells are less common 
and are typically triggered by pain or fright. The child may gasp, then 
lose consciousness and become pale, diaphoretic, and limp. This can 
be followed by a period of increased tone and clonic movements. To 
determine if the event is consistent with a breath-­holding spell, it is 
important to obtain a stepwise history of the event, including any emo­
tional or painful precipitant.
Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a rare 
but important cause of BRUE-­like events. This is classically character­
ized by near-­adequate ventilation while awake but significant hypoven­
tilation while asleep. Most patients with CCHS present at ≤1 month of 
age; however, late-­onset central hypoventilation syndrome (LOCHS) 
may present up to age 10 years. In addition to hypoventilation, there 
may be associated autonomic dysfunctions or other manifestations 
(Table 6.4). Infants with no prior history of sleep-­related hypoventila­
tion may become apneic after a triggering event such as an upper respi­
ratory tract infection, sedation, or endotracheal intubation. PHOX2B 
gene polyalanine repeat expansion mutations (PARMs) are responsible 
for ∼90% of affected patients in this autosomal dominant disorder. The 
differential diagnosis of the central hypoventilation seen in CCHS and 
LOCHS includes Prader Willi syndrome, Chiari I or II malformations, 
familial dysautonomia, congenital myasthenia, congenital myopathy, 
mitochondrial defects (Leigh syndrome), and ROHHAD (rapid-­onset 
obesity, hypoventilation, and hypothalamic and autonomic dysfunc­
tion). An approach to the evaluation of hypoventilation is noted in 
Figure 6.2.
Additional rare, but potentially life-­threatening, neurologic disor­
ders to consider include brain tumors, neuromuscular disorders, meta­
bolic encephalopathies, and malformations of the brain and brainstem. 
Examiners should therefore pay particular attention to any focal weak­
ness, cranial nerve abnormalities, or signs of increased intracranial 
pressure, including papilledema and Cushing triad (bradycardia, respi­
ratory irregularities, and hypertension).
Given the relatively high incidence of seizures in infants presenting 
with a suspected BRUE, some diagnostic algorithms recommend EEGs 
as part of the initial investigation. However, at only 15%, the sensitivity 
of EEGs in diagnosing future epilepsy is poor. Since infants who go 
on to develop epilepsy will likely have recurrent events, most experts 
recommend that EEGs be reserved for those patients with recurrent 
events or history or physical examination findings specifically con­
cerning for seizures. In patients with suspected seizures, evaluation of 
serum electrolytes may also be beneficial to identify possible derange­
ments including hypo-­ or hypernatremia, hypocalcemia, or hypoglyce­
mia. If specific electrolyte abnormalities are identified, further work-­up 
should be undertaken to determine underlying pathology.
Neuroimaging may be considered in patients presenting with a 
BRUE. Current evidence does not support routine neuroimaging 
for asymptomatic infants with a BRUE-­like presentation given the 
low diagnostic yield, high cost, and sedation or radiation concerns. 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
106
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
However, neuroimaging must be considered in the infant with an 
abnormal neurologic examination, recurrent events, or a clinical con­
cern for seizure, child maltreatment, metabolic encephalopathies, or 
tumor.
Airway/Pulmonary
Infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract are common causes 
of BRUE-­like events, but other respiratory etiologies have been cited as 
well. These include apnea of prematurity and infancy, periodic breath­
ing, and airway abnormalities.
The most common cause of apnea in preterm infants is apnea of 
prematurity. It occurs in virtually all infants born at <28 weeks’ gesta­
tion, and the frequency is indirectly proportional to the gestational age. 
Apnea of prematurity is thought to be due to immature respiratory con­
trol in premature infants and typically presents with either central or 
mixed (central and obstructive) apnea. Following the perinatal period, 
it is a diagnosis of exclusion and should be considered only after other 
etiologies have been ruled out. The apneic events typically begin within 
the first week of life, and as such, symptom onset after that time should 
stimulate consideration of other causes. Apnea of prematurity typically 
resolves by 37–40 weeks’ postconceptual age in infants delivered at ≥28 
weeks but can persist later in infants delivered prior to 28 weeks.
Apnea of infancy (AOI) refers to apnea that develops in neonates 
older than 37 weeks’ postconception. The etiology is unknown. It is 
reserved for cases when a cause is not identified and is typically seen as 
a diagnosis of exclusion.
Periodic breathing is a common entity that is often confused by par­
ents as a BRUE. Periodic breathing is defined as three or more respira­
tory pauses of >3 seconds’ duration within a 20-­second portion of the 
breathing cycle. Sometimes several pauses occur, one after the other, 
followed by a set of short, rapid respirations before the respiratory 
rhythm is restored. Importantly, no associated change in color, tone, 
or heart rate and no prolonged respiratory pauses (>20 seconds) are 
reported in association with periodic breathing. A clear history of the 
event is essential in differentiating true apnea from periodic breathing. 
Video of concerning events can prove very helpful. If determined to 
be periodic breathing, it is a benign entity and does not require any 
additional work-­up or intervention.
Less common respiratory etiologies to consider include ana­
tomic airway abnormalities such as anomalies of the pharynx 
(adenotonsillar hypertrophy), the larynx (laryngomalacia, edema, 
subglottic ductal cyst, subglottic stenosis), or the trachea (tracheo­
malacia, aberrant innominate artery). A history of associated respi­
ratory distress, obstructive apnea, positional symptoms, or noisy 
breathing, or physical examination findings such as stridor should 
raise the index of suspicion for these otolaryngologic etiologies. 
Aspiration can also present with features similar to a BRUE and can 
be the result of a foreign body, neurologic abnormalities leading to 
swallowing dysfunction, or anatomic disorders such as cleft palate or 
tracheoesophageal fistula.
Chest and neck radiographs can be beneficial in assessing for signs 
of airway abnormalities or radiopaque foreign bodies. If there is high 
concern for anatomic abnormalities, evaluation by direct laryngoscopy, 
bronchoscopy, and/or esophagoscopy could be considered. However, 
in patients who are well-­appearing without clinical concern for airway 
anomalies, the yield for these tests is low. Polysomnography can be 
useful in differentiating between central versus obstructive processes 
(see Fig. 6.2). This may be a consideration in patients with prematu­
rity, noisy breathing, or recurrent/severe events when obstruction in 
suspected.
Child Maltreatment
Child maltreatment should always be considered in infants presenting 
with BRUE-­like symptoms (see Chapter 30). Possible etiologies include 
head trauma (direct injury or repetitive shaking), smothering, toxic 
ingestions, and factitious syndrome (formerly Munchausen syndrome) 
by proxy.
Concerning historical facts include unexplained vomiting or 
irritability, recurrent events, historical discrepancies (history is 
confusing, varies among caregivers, changes over the course of the 
evaluation), or a family history of BRUEs, ALTEs, SIDS, or unex­
plained death. There is a higher rate of child maltreatment in infants 
presenting with more severe initial episodes and in those requiring 
resuscitation.
Any bruising should be noted, especially in a nonambulatory infant. 
A careful ear, nose, and throat examination should be performed, 
TABLE 6.4  Clinical Manifestations of CCHS
Organ System
Clinical Manifestations
Ophthalmologic
Decreased/absent pupillary light response
Anisocoria
Strabismus
Lack of convergent gaze
Marcus Gunn jaw winking
Respiratory
Alveolar hypoventilation
Absent perception of dyspnea
Cardiovascular
Bradycardia
Prolonged sinus pauses (>3 sec)
Transient asystole
Decreased heart rate variability
Low normal daytime BP
Orthostatic hypotension
Nondipping BP circadian pattern
Decreased BP response to exercise
Syncope
GI
Hirschsprung disease (20%)
Constipation
Esophageal dysmotility
Endocrine
Hyperinsulinism
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia
Neurologic
Decreased anxiety
Decreased pain perception
Seizures
Neurocognitive deficits
Skin
Sporadic profuse sweating
Tumors
Neuroblastoma
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroblastoma
Others
Decreased baseline body temperature
Poor heat tolerance
BP, blood pressure; CCHS, congenital central hypoventilation syndrome; 
GI, gastrointestinal.
From Bishara J, Keens TG, Perez IA. The genetics of congenital central 
hypoventilation syndrome: clinical implications. Appl Clin Genet. 
2018;11:135–144 (Table 1, p. 136).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
107
CHAPTER 6  Apparent Life-­Threatening Event/Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
noting any ear bruising, bleeding from the nose or mouth, or frenulum 
tears. A thorough neurologic examination is also essential, assessing 
for altered sensorium, fontanel fullness, pupillary abnormalities, or 
other focal neurologic findings. These findings should all raise suspi­
cion for child maltreatment. However, it is also important to note that 
infants with child maltreatment may appear well on presentation with 
no external signs of trauma; the absence of these findings does not rule 
out maltreatment as the cause for the event.
If there is clinical suspicion for child maltreatment, a skeletal sur­
vey, cranial/brain imaging, select laboratory studies, and a dilated 
funduscopic examination should be considered to assess for support­
ive findings. Video surveillance while the infant is hospitalized can 
also be considered in these cases. In addition, if there is concern for 
possible intentional or unintentional poisoning, a toxicology screen 
should be considered to identify the presence of medications that 
could cause the presenting symptoms. However, in patients without 
historical or physical examination findings concerning for child mal­
treatment, the evidence does not support the routine use of any of 
these assessments.
Cardiac
Though relatively rare, with a reported rate of 0–2%, cardiac pathology 
can lead to BRUE-­like events in myriad ways. Children with structur­
ally normal hearts may experience events due to arrhythmias, cardio­
myopathy, and myocarditis. Those with structurally abnormal hearts, 
such as vascular anomalies, cyanotic heart disease, and left-­sided 
obstruction, may also present with symptoms similar to a BRUE. A 
history of multiple and/or escalating events over days to weeks, feed­
ing difficulties, diaphoresis, failure to thrive, long QT syndrome, or a 
positive family history of an ALTE, BRUE, cardiac disease, or sudden 
unexplained death before the age of 35 years should raise the index 
of suspicion for cardiac pathology. A complete cardiac examination 
should be performed, noting abnormalities that might suggest under­
lying cardiac pathology, such as irregular rhythms, decreased femoral 
pulses, or murmurs.
Given the low rate of cardiac disease in patients presenting with 
a BRUE, routine echocardiograms are generally not useful in the ini­
tial work-­up of these patients. ECGs may be a more useful screening 
tool, as they are relatively easy to perform and are highly sensitive in 
identifying cardiac abnormalities. Therefore, ECG could be considered 
to help exclude cardiac etiologies in patients where this is a clinical 
concern. However, the examiner should note that there is a high false-­
positive rate for ECGs in these patients, which could lead to additional 
unnecessary testing. If arrhythmia is strongly suspected or identified, 
assessment for electrolyte disturbances, such as hypo-­ or hyperkalemia, 
should be undertaken.
Metabolic/Genetic
BRUE-­like events can be the initial presentation of various metabolic 
disorders including organic acidemias, urea cycle disorders, fatty 
acid oxidation disorders, and mitochondrial disorders. Similarly, this 
type of event can be the presenting symptom of hypoglycemia and 
Suspected alveolar hypoventilation?
Hypoventilation?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Clinical features of
other conditions, e.g.,
Prader Willi, ROHHAD
Genetic and
other specific
studies
PHOX2B genetic test
Hypoventilation
remains unexplained
Brain +/– spinal MRI
Chest x-ray
Echocardiogram
Diaphragmatic echo
Airway endoscopy
EMG and NCV
Pyridostigmine test
Metabolic study
Other studies
Categorize hypoventilation
• Secondary
• Primary
         • Central
         • Peripheral
Sleep-related?
PSG or CRP confirms
worse in quiet sleep
Not CCHS
Consider other
diagnoses according
to symptoms and
physical findings
Confirm hypoventilation:
Polysomnography or cardiorespiratory polygraphy
to include CO2 (Tcco2, Etco2) in all sleep & waking phases
Figure 6.2  Diagnostic algorithm for alveolar hypoventilation. CCHS, congenital central hypoventilation syn­
drome; CRP, cardiorespiratory polygraphy; EMG, electromyogram; Etco2, end-­tidal co2; NCV, nerve conduction 
velocity; PHOX2B, paired-­like homeobox 2B; PSG, polysomnography; ROHHAD, rapid-­onset obesity with 
hypoventilation, hypothalamic dysfunction, and autonomic disregulation; Tcco2, transcutaneous Pco2. (From 
Trang H, Samuels M, Ceccherini I, et  al. Guidelines for diagnosis and management of congenital central 
hypoventilation syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020;15:252 [Fig. 1, p. 3].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
108
SECTION 2   Respiratory Disorders
hypocalcemia. Although metabolic entities are rare, they can be pro­
gressive and life-­threatening and therefore should be considered in the 
differential for these patients.
Clinical findings that may suggest an inborn error of metabolism 
include recurrent or severe events, associated developmental delay, 
failure to thrive, or positive family history of seizure disorders, SIDS, 
or early infant deaths. Physical findings such as dysmorphic features 
should also be noted as these could suggest an underlying syndromic 
etiology. Disorders of the face and upper airway, such as cri du chat 
and Pierre Robin syndromes, can lead to obstructed respiratory 
patterns.
Serum chemistries, while not necessarily diagnostic of an inborn 
error of metabolism, can be helpful in screening patients with potential 
metabolic abnormalities and should be considered in patients when 
this is a clinical concern. Serum glucose, bicarbonate, ammonia, lac­
tate, and pyruvic acid levels are useful screening tests in these patients 
because abnormalities signal the possibility of metabolic disorders 
requiring additional evaluation. The newborn metabolic screen 
should also be reviewed to ensure no abnormalities were identified. If 
there is a high index of suspicion, it is prudent to repeat the newborn 
screen to ensure that the findings remain normal following the intro­
duction of enteral feeds.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
A thorough history and physical examination are paramount in the 
evaluation of patients with a suspected BRUE. Concerning historical 
factors and physical examination findings, such as prematurity, age <60 
days, multiple events, or requirement for resuscitation, should prompt 
consideration of further evaluation (Table 6.5).
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 6.5  Red Flags in Infants Presenting 
with a Suspected BRUE
Age <60 days
Prematurity (gestational age ≤32 wk and postconceptual age ≤45 wk)
Duration >1 min
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation by a trained medical provider
Recurrent events
Concerning historical features
 • Inconsistent history/history incompatible with the child’s developmental 
age (concern for child abuse)
 • Congenital anomalies, autonomic dysfunction, or known syndromes
 • Family history of BRUE, ALTE, SIDS, or unexplained death
Concerning physical exam findings
 • Unexplained bruising, torn labial or lingual frenulum, signs of trauma 
(concern for child abuse)
 • Fever or persistent respiratory symptoms (concern for infection)
 • Dysmorphic feature
 • Abnormal physical examination findings at the time of presentation; no 
recovery from event
ALTE, apparent life-­threatening event; BRUE, brief resolved unexplained 
event; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
108.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Apparent Life-­Threatening Event
Brand D, Altman R, Purtill K, et al. Yield of diagnostic testing in infants who 
have had an apparent life-­threatening event. Pediatrics. 2005;115:885–893.
Davies F, Gupta R. Apparent life threatening events in infants presenting to an 
emergency department. Emerg Med J. 2002;19:11–16.
Fu LY, Moon RY. Apparent life-­threatening events: an update. Pediatr Rev. 
2012;33:361–368.
Kahn A. European Society for the Study and Prevention of Infant Death. Rec­
ommended clinical evaluation of infants with an apparent life-­threatening 
event. Consensus document of the European Society for the Study and 
Prevention of Infant Death, 2003. Eur J Pediatr. 2004;163:108.
Kaji AH, Claudius I, Santillanes G, et al. Apparent life-­threatening event: 
multicenter prospective cohort study to develop a clinical decision rule for 
admission to the hospital. Ann Emerg Med. 2013;61:379–387.
Mittal MK, Sun G, Baren JM. A clinical decision rule to identify infants with 
apparent life threatening event who can be safely discharged from the 
emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28:599–605.
National Institutes of Health. Consensus Development Conference on Infantile 
Apnea and Home Monitoring. Pediatrics. 1987;79:292–299.
Okada K, Miyako M, Honma S, et al. Discharge diagnoses in infants with 
apparent life-­threatening event. Pediatr Int. 2003;45:560–563.
Shah S, Sharieff G. An update on the approach to apparent life-­threatening 
events. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007;19:288–294.
Tieder JS, Altman RL, Bonkowsky JL, et al. Management of apparent life-­
threatening events in infants: a systematic review. J Pediatr. 2013;163:94–
99.
Brief Resolved Unexplained Event
Ari A, Atias Y, Amir J. Long-term follow-­up of infants after a brief re­
solved unexplained event–related hospitalization. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2019;35(11):765–768. https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000001816.
Brand DA, Fazzari MJ. Risk of death in infants who have experienced a brief 
resolved unexplained event: a meta-­analysis. J Pediatr. 2018;197:63–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.12.028.
Colombo M, Katz ES, Bosco A, et al. Brief resolved unexplained events: 
retrospective validation of diagnostic criteria and risk stratification. Pediatr 
Pulmonol. 2019;54(1):61–65. https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.24195.
Merritt JL, Quinonez RA, Bonkowsky JL, et al. A framework for evaluation of 
the higher-­risk infant after a brief resolved unexplained event. Pediatrics. 
2019;144(2):e20184101. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2018-­4101.
Ramgopal S, Soung J, Pitetti RD. Brief resolved unexplained events: analysis of 
an apparent life-­threatening event database. Acad Pediatr. 2019;19(8):963–
968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acap.2019.08.001.
The Johns Hopkins Hospital (Baltimore, Maryland). The Harriet Lane Hand­
book. 22nd ed. Elsevier; 2020.
Tieder JS, Bonkowsky JL, Etzel RA, et al. Brief resolved unexplained events 
(formally apparent life-threatening events) and evaluation of lower-­risk 
infants. Pediatrics. 2016;137(5):e20160590.
Zwemer E, Claudius I, Tieder J. Update on the evaluation and management 
of brief resolved unexplained events (previously apparent life-threatening 
events). RRCT. 2017;12(4). https://doi.org/10.2174/157488711266617081
6150104.
Gastrointestinal
Duncan DR, Amirault J, Mitchell PD, et al. Oropharyngeal dysphagia is 
strongly correlated with apparent life-­threatening events. J Pediatr Gastro­
enterol Nutr. 2017;65(2):168–172.
Mousa H, Woodley FW, Metheney M, et al. Testing the association between 
gastroesophageal reflux and apnea in infants. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2005;41:169–177.
Infectious
Claudius I, Mittal MK, Murray R, et al. Should infants presenting with an 
apparent life-­threatening event undergo evaluation for serious bacterial 
infections and respiratory pathogens? J Pediatr. 2014;164:1231–1233.
Loron G, Tromeur T, Venot P, et al. COVID-19 associated with life-threatening 
apnea in an infant born preterm: a case report. Front Pediatr. 2020;8(Arti­
cle 568).
Needleman JS, Hanson AE. COVID-19-associated apnea and circumoral 
cyanosis in a 3-week-old. Pediatrics. 2020;20:382.
Neurologic
Barratt S, Kendrick A, Buchanan F, et al. Central hypoventilation with 
PHOX2B expansion mutation presenting in adulthood. BMJ Case Rep 
2009bcr09.2008.0946. Published online 2009 Feb 2.
Berry-­Kravis EM, Zhou L, Rand CM, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006;174:1139–1144.
Bonkowsky JL, Guenther E, Srivastava R, et al. Seizures in children following 
an apparent life-­threatening event. J Child Neurol. 2009;24:709–713.
Doherty LS, Kiely JL, Deegan PC, et al. Late-­onset central hypoventilation 
syndrome: a family genetic study. Eur Respir J. 2007;29:312–316.
Genizi J, Pillar G, Ravid S, et al. Apparent life-­threatening events: neurological 
correlates and the mandatory work-­up. J Child Neurol. 2008;23:1305–1307.
Tirosh E, Jaffe M. Apparent life-­threatening event: a neurologic perspective. J 
Child Neurol. 1995;10:216–218.
Weese-­Mayer DE, Rand CM, Zhou A, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome: a bedside-­to-­bench success story for advancing early diagno­
sis and treatment and improved survival and quality of life. Pediatr Res. 
2017;81(1):192–201.
Airway/Pulmonary
McMurray JS, Holinger LD. Otolaryngic manifestations in children present­
ing with apparent life-­threatening events. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1997;116(6 Pt 1):575–579.
Child Maltreatment
Altman RL, Brand DA, Forman S, et al. Abusive head injury as a cause of 
apparent life-­threatening events in infancy. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2003;157:1011–1015.
Altman RL, Forman S, Brand DA. Ophthalmologic findings in infants after an 
apparent life-­threatening event. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2007;17:648–653.
Bonkowsky JL, Guenther E, Filloux FM, et al. Death, child abuse, and adverse 
neurological outcome of infants after an apparent life-­threatening event. 
Pediatrics. 2008;122:125–131.
Guenther E, Powers A, Srivastava R, et al. Abusive head trauma in children 
presenting with an apparent life-­threatening event. J Pediatr. 2010;157:821–
825.
Pitetti RD, Maffei F, Chang K, et al. Prevalence of retinal hemorrhages and 
child abuse in children who present with an apparent life-­threatening 
event. Pediatrics. 2002;110:557–562.
Truman TL, Ayoub CC. Considering suffocatory abuse and Munchausen by 
proxy in the evaluation of children experiencing apparent life-­threatening 
events and sudden infant death syndrome. Child Maltreat. 2002;7:138–148.
Cardiac
Hoki R, Bonkowsky JL, Minich LL, et al. Cardiac testing and outcomes 
in infants after an apparent life-­threatening event. Arch Dis Child. 
2012;97(12):1034–1038.
Woolf PK, Gewitz MH, Preminger T, et al. Infants with apparent life threaten­
ing events. Cardiac rhythm and conduction. Clin Pediatr. 1989;28:517–520.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
