1162
Many skin findings in childhood are benign and self-­limited condi­
tions. Other dermatologic complaints may be the first manifestation of 
a systemic disease or associated condition, recognition of which facili­
tates appropriate evaluation and treatment.
HISTORY, PHYSICAL EXAMINATION, AND 
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
History
A careful and focused history is necessary to diagnose pediatric skin 
disorders. It may be helpful to examine the patient first and then pro­
ceed with a relevant line of questioning. Important questions to ask 
include the following:
	1.	 When did the eruption begin?
	2.	 How did the eruption evolve (distribution, spread, change in the 
structure of individual lesions)?
	3.	 Are the lesions pruritic or painful?
	4.	 Have there been previous similar episodes?
	5.	 Are there associated systemic symptoms?
	6.	 Are there exacerbating or alleviating factors?
	7.	 Has treatment been rendered? If so, what effect has it had?
	8.	 Are there affected family members or close contacts?
	9.	 Is there a family history of skin disease?
Physical Examination
Precise morphologic descriptions are critical for establishing a dif­
ferential diagnosis (Figs. 61.1 and 61.2). For every eruption, the pri­
mary and secondary skin lesions are identified, and then the size, 
color, distribution, and configuration of the lesions are described. 
Palpation of cutaneous lesions provides additional information, 
such as firmness, tenderness, mobility, temperature, and ability to 
blanch with pressure. Examination of the hair, nails, and mucosal 
surfaces should be included. Certain diseases have pathognomonic 
findings.
Primary Lesions
Macules and Patches. Macules are flat, circumscribed lesions that 
are detected because of a change in color. Pink or red macules may be 
caused by inflammation or vasodilation. Brown, black, or white lesions 
may be caused by alterations in melanin synthesis. Purple hues may 
represent extravasation of blood into the skin. Macules >1 cm in diam­
eter are usually described as patches.
Papules, Nodules, Plaques, and Tumors. Papules are circum­
scribed, palpable, elevated solid lesions. Typically <0.5–1 cm in diam­
eter, these lesions may be epidermal or dermal in origin and may be 
flat-­topped or dome shaped. Plaques are elevated flat-­topped lesions, 
larger than 1 cm in diameter, often formed by the coalescence of pap­
ules. Nodules are epidermal, dermal, or subcutaneous lesions that may, 
in some cases, evolve from pre-­existing papules; size may range from 
0.5 to 2 cm. Tumors are larger nodules >2 cm in diameter that are usu­
ally solid and well circumscribed.
Vesicles and Bullae. Vesicles are small fluid-­filled lesions. Bullae 
are large vesicles, usually >1 cm in diameter. The tenseness or flaccidity 
of the blister indicates whether the level of separation is intraepidermal 
or subepidermal (Fig. 61.3 and Table 61.1).
Pustules. Pustules are white or yellow well-­circumscribed lesions 
that contain purulent material. Pustules do not always signify an infec­
tious cause.
Wheals. Wheals are edematous, elevated lesions that are transient 
in nature and variable in shape and size. They may be white or ery­
thematous and often have central pallor.
Telangiectases. Telangiectases are ectatic, dilated superficial 
blood vessels of the skin that typically blanch when pressure is 
applied.
Secondary Lesions
Secondary lesions may represent the natural evolution of primary 
lesions or changes that result from external manipulation, such as 
scratching.
Crusts. Crusts represent serum, pus, blood, or exudate that has 
dried on the skin surface.
Scales. Scales appear as yellow, white, or brownish flakes on the 
skin surface that represent desquamation of stratum corneum.
Erosions. Erosions are moist, erythematous, circumscribed 
lesions that result from partial or complete loss of the epidermis. 
They often result from rupture of a vesicle or bulla. Erosions do not 
involve the dermis or subcutaneous tissue; therefore, they heal with­
out scarring.
Ulcers. Ulcers are deeper than erosions and result from full-­
thickness loss of the epidermis. As they penetrate the dermis or fat, 
they usually heal with scarring.
Lichenification. Lichenification, or thickening of the skin, usually 
results from chronic scratching or rubbing. Accentuation of skin mark­
ings or hyperpigmentation is observed.
Fissures. A fissure is a linear crack in the epidermis extending to 
the dermis.
Atrophy. Atrophy represents loss of substance of the skin. Epi­
dermal atrophy is characterized by loss of skin markings, increased 
wrinkling, and transparency with visibility of underlying vasculature. 
Dermal or subcutaneous atrophy results in depression of the skin with 
minimal, if any, epidermal changes.
Excoriations. Excoriations are linear erosions on the skin caused 
by scratching.
Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
Kristen E. Holland
61
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1163
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
Diagnostic Techniques
Potassium Hydroxide Test
This simple and rapid test can confirm the diagnosis of dermato­
phyte or candidal infections. Scale is scraped with a curved blade onto 
a microscope slide. Hair or nail fragments can also be examined. A 
glass coverslip is then placed on the slide after 1–2 drops of 10–20% 
potassium hydroxide (KOH) are added. The slide is heated gently but 
not boiled, which can result in KOH crystallization and subsequent 
difficulty in interpretation. Dermatophyte infections are confirmed by 
identifying fungal hyphae, which appear as long, branching septate 
filaments. Pseudohyphae or budding spores are characteristic of can­
didiasis. Short, broad hyphae and clusters of budding cells resembling 
“spaghetti and meatballs” are diagnostic of tinea versicolor.
Tzanck Smear
A Tzanck smear can be useful in the diagnosis of varicella-­zoster virus 
and herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections. The smear is prepared by 
unroofing a blister with a curved blade and gently scraping the blister 
base and underside of the roof. The material is spread in a thin layer onto a 
glass slide. The slide is air-­dried and stained with Giemsa or Wright stain. 
Identification of multinucleated giant cells, a syncytium of epidermal 
cells with multiple overlapping nuclei, establishes the diagnosis. These 
cells may have 2–15 nuclei and are much larger than other inflammatory 
cells. Although a positive result of Tzanck preparation is confirmatory, a 
negative test result does not rule out herpes viral infection. Viral speci­
mens should be obtained for culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
to differentiate HSV from varicella-­zoster virus infections.
Macule/patch
Papule/plaque
Tumor
Nodule
Vesicle
Bulla
Wheal
Fig. 61.1  Primary skin lesions. (From Cohen BA. Introduction to pediat­
ric dermatology. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2013.)
Scale
Pustule
Ulcer
Erosion 
Fibrotic scar
Atrophic scar
Excoriation
Fissure
Fig. 61.2  Secondary skin lesions. (From Cohen BA. Introduction to 
pediatric dermatology. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Phila­
delphia: Saunders; 2013:1–13.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1164
SECTION 12  Dermatology
Scabies Test
A scabies preparation exhibiting the mite, egg, or feces (scybala) con­
firms the diagnosis of scabies infestation with Sarcoptes scabiei. The 
mite is most often found within burrows (serpiginous or elongated 
papules), which may have a vesicle or pustule at one end. A drop of 
mineral oil should be applied to the lesion so that the scraped mate­
rial adheres to the blade. The site is then scraped firmly with a curved 
blade, which occasionally induces minimal bleeding. The material is 
applied to a microscope slide, another drop of mineral oil is added, and 
a glass coverslip is placed. Mites are eight-­legged arachnids that are eas­
ily identified under low magnification. Eggs are frequently observed as 
smooth ovals approximately half the size of the mite. Feces are smaller 
than ova and appear as red-­brown round pellets, often in clusters.
Gram Stain
A Gram stain can be useful in the diagnosis and treatment of suspected 
bacterial infections. After the site is disinfected, the pustule or blister 
roof is carefully removed with a needle or straight blade. The contents 
of the pustule are removed in a sterile manner and spread thinly onto a 
glass slide. The specimen is air-­dried or heat-­fixed, stained, and exam­
ined microscopically. Results help determine which antibiotic, if any, 
is indicated. Bacterial cultures are typically obtained simultaneously.
Wood Lamp Examination
A Wood lamp emits low-­intensity ultraviolet light at 365 nm and is use­
ful for accentuating pigmentary alterations such as those of vitiligo, pie­
baldism, or ash leaf macules in the newborn, and for detecting several 
fungal or bacterial infections. The examination is performed in a dark­
ened room, and the lamp is held 4–6 inches from the patient’s skin. Char­
acteristic color changes of infectious etiologies are outlined in Table 61.2.
Skin Biopsy
A skin biopsy can be performed when a clinical diagnosis is unclear. 
Histologic evaluation of a small skin specimen may reveal changes in 
the epidermis, dermis, or subcutaneous tissue that confirm or rule out 
specific disorders. Direct immunofluorescence testing can be extremely 
helpful in the diagnosis of collagen vascular and autoimmune bullous 
diseases (Table 61.3).
DERMATOLOGIC DISORDERS IN OLDER INFANTS 
AND CHILDREN
Many skin lesions are acquired during childhood and adolescence, 
ranging from benign self-­limited asymptomatic dermatoses to chronic 
skin disorders. Establishing the symptomatology and time course and 
evaluating the morphology of the lesions can help distinguish among 
childhood dermatoses.
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
Fig. 61.3  Blister cleavage sites in the skin. 1, Intracorneal. 2, Subcor­
neal. 3, Granular layer. 4, Intraepidermal. 5, Suprabasal. 6, Junctional 
(between the basal cell membrane and basement membrane). 7, Sub­
epidermal. (From Esterly NB. The skin. In: Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Text­
book of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:1640.)
TABLE 61.1  Sites of Blister Formation in 
Selected Vesiculobullous Diseases
Site of Cleavage
Clinical Examples
Intracorneal
Miliaria crystallina
Granular layer
Bullous impetigo
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Pemphigus foliaceus
Intraepidermal
Dermatophytosis
Insect bites
Incontinentia pigmenti
Scabies
Viral blisters
Suprabasal
Pemphigus vulgaris
Basal cell layer
Epidermolysis simplex
Junctional
Junctional epidermolysis bullosa
Subepidermal
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
Dominant dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
Linear IgA disease of childhood
IgA, immunoglobulin A.
TABLE 61.2  Wood Lamp Examination 
Findings
Clinical Appearance
Fluorescence
Organisms/Disease
Brown or red thin plaques 
on the groin, axillae, or 
toe webs
Coral, red, pink
Erythrasma 
(Corynebacterium 
minutissimum)
Hypopigmented or 
hyperpigmented macules 
and plaques on the trunk
Pale green or 
yellow
Tinea versicolor 
(Malassezia spp.)
Infection of the toe web 
space; often in burn 
patients
Bright yellow-­
green
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Scaling of the scalp with 
patchy hair loss
Yellow-­green
Tinea capitis (Microsporum 
canis, Microsporum 
audouinii)
Not Trichophyton 
tonsurans
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1165
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
Scaling Disorders
The term papulosquamous refers to conditions in which the pri­
mary lesions are papules or plaques associated with scale. These dis­
orders are typically benign but can be chronic and therapeutically 
challenging.
Pityriasis Rosea
Pityriasis rosea is an acute, common, self-­limited eruption that has no 
gender predilection. Although the precise cause is unknown, a viral 
origin is suspected because there have been reports of epidemics, clus­
ters of cases among closely related individuals, and low recurrence 
rates. Furthermore, a prodrome of malaise, headache, and respiratory 
symptoms is occasionally observed. Pityriasis rosea has been associ­
ated with systemic reactivation of human herpesvirus (HHV)-­6 and 
HHV-­7.
The eruption usually begins with a solitary oval, pink, scaly plaque 
approximately 3–5 cm in diameter, typically located on the trunk or 
proximal extremities (Fig. 61.4). Referred to as the herald patch, this 
finding is observed in up to 70% of cases. When the herald patch has 
an elevated red border and central clearing, it resembles tinea corporis. 
Performing a KOH preparation can differentiate these two conditions. 
Within 1–2 weeks after appearance of the herald patch, numerous 
small, pink, scaly papules or plaques arise over the trunk and prox­
imal extremities, sparing the face and distal extremities. The lesions 
TABLE 61.3  Immunofluorescent Findings in Immune-­Mediated Cutaneous Diseases
Disease
Involved Skin
Uninvolved Skin
Direct IF Findings
Indirect IF Findings
Circulating Antibodies
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Negative
Positive
Granular IgA ± C3 in 
papillary dermis
None
IgA antiendomysial and 
transglutaminase antibodies
Bullous pemphigoid
Positive
Positive
Linear IgG and C3 band 
in BMZ, occasionally 
IgM, IgA, IgE
IgG to BMZ
IgG anti-­BP180 and anti-­BP230
Pemphigus (all variants)
Positive
Positive
IgG in intercellular 
spaces of the epidermis 
between keratinocytes
IgG in intercellular 
spaces of the epidermis 
between keratinocytes
IgG antidesmoglein 1 and 3 
(pemphigus vulgaris and 
foliaceus)
IgA antidesmocollin 1 (IgA 
pemphigus)
Linear IgA bullous 
dermatosis (chronic 
bullous dermatosis of 
childhood)
Positive
Positive
Linear IgA at BMZ, 
occasionally C3
Low titer, rare IgA, 
anti-­BP180
None
Discoid lupus 
erythematosus
Positive
Negative
Linear IgG, IgM, IgA, and 
C3 at BMZ (lupus band)
None
Usually ANA negative
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Positive
Variable; exposed 
to sun, 30–50%; 
nonexposed, 
10–30%
Linear IgG, IgM, IgA, and 
C3 at BMZ (lupus band)
None
ANA
Anti-­Ro (SSA), anti-­La (SSB)
Anti-­RNP
Anti-­dsDNA
Anti-­Sm
Henoch-­Schönlein 
purpura
Positive
Positive
IgA around vessel walls
None
None
ANA, antinuclear antibody; BMZ, basement membrane zone at the dermal-­epidermal junction; BP, bullous pemphigoid; C, complement; dsDNA, 
double-­stranded DNA; IF, immunofluorescence; Ig, immunoglobulin; Sm, Smith; SSA/SSB, Sjögren syndrome A/B; RNP, ribonucleoprotein.
A
B
C
Fig. 61.4  Pityriasis rosea. A, The herald patch. B, Oval lesions oriented along the lines of skin cleavage on the 
trunk. C, Christmas tree distribution on the back. (From Cohen BA, Davis HW, Gehris RP. Dermatology. In: 
Zitelli BJ, et al., eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:299–368.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1166
SECTION 12  Dermatology
classically have a fine cigarette paper–like peripheral collarette of scale. 
These oval 0.5-­ to 2-­cm lesions have their long axis oriented along 
skin lines and, when present on the trunk, result in a “Christmas tree” 
pattern on the back (see Fig. 61.4). Young children, particularly those 
with darker skin pigmentation, may have an “inverse” type of pityria­
sis rosea, with most lesions distributed on the distal extremities, face, 
neck, and intertriginous regions. Other variants seen in children may 
have lesions that are papular, vesicular, pustular, purpuric, or lichenoid.
The duration of the eruption varies from 2 to 12 weeks. Pityriasis 
rosea is self-­limited and does not necessarily require therapy, though 
it improves significantly with exposure to ultraviolet light. Emollients, 
topical corticosteroids, or oral antihistamines help relieve pruritus. 
Postinflammatory hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation may per­
sist for weeks to months, especially in dark-­skinned patients. Many 
other dermatoses can resemble pityriasis rosea (Table 61.4). In sexually 
active adolescents, a rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test should be obtained 
to rule out the possibility of secondary syphilis, especially if the palms 
and soles are involved. Persistence of the eruption after 3–4 months 
necessitates an evaluation for another diagnosis.
Psoriasis
Psoriasis is an immune-­mediated inflammatory skin condition char­
acterized by well-­demarcated, erythematous scaly papules and plaques 
located most often on the scalp, elbows, knees, genitalia, and lumbo­
sacral regions. The course is more chronic and unpredictable than 
that of pityriasis rosea. Psoriasis occurs in up to 3% of the population, 
with approximately 30% of affected individuals manifesting symptoms 
before the age of 20 years. Both genders are equally affected in adult­
hood, but childhood psoriasis has a slight female predominance. The 
cause is multifactorial, though a familial predisposition is present in 
many affected individuals, including up to 50% of patients with child­
hood onset. The association between psoriasis, obesity, and metabolic 
syndrome has been described in both adult and pediatric patients with 
psoriasis; metabolic screening for individuals with moderate to severe 
involvement should be considered.
Psoriasis encompasses a broad spectrum of clinical manifesta­
tions, ranging from mild, asymptomatic, virtually undetectable dis­
ease to extensive, chronic, debilitating disease. The course is usually 
marked by recurrent flares and remissions and is often exacerbated 
by stress, trauma, infection, climate, hormonal factors, and particular 
medications.
Although morphologic variations exist, the classic lesions of 
plaque psoriasis are well-­demarcated erythematous papules or 
plaques with a silvery-­white scale (Fig. 61.5). The lesions usually 
begin as small erythematous papules that gradually enlarge and 
coalesce to form plaques up to several centimeters in diameter. The 
micaceous (mica-­like) scale of the psoriatic plaque is more adherent 
centrally than peripherally. Removal of this scale results in multiple 
small bleeding points, a finding referred to as the Auspitz sign that is 
secondary to disruption of the dilated blood vessels that are located 
high in the papillary dermis. Although this finding is seen in psori­
asis, it is not pathognomonic. The Koebner phenomenon, another 
characteristic feature of psoriasis that is also observed in a number 
of dermatologic conditions, is an isomorphic response (i.e., develop­
ment of new or larger lesions) occurring at sites of injury or trauma 
such as scratching, sunburn, or surgery (Fig. 61.6).
Psoriatic lesions tend to be distributed symmetrically. Although 
extensor surfaces are typically involved, a variant of psoriasis known 
as inverse psoriasis affects flexural surfaces, such as the axillae and 
groin. Facial involvement is more common in children than in adults. 
Scalp lesions are present in most children with psoriasis, wherein a dif­
fuse, thick white scale may be accompanied by erythema. In contrast 
TABLE 61.4  Differential Diagnosis of 
Papulosquamous Disorders (Primary Skin 
Lesions Are Papules or Plaques Associated 
with Scale)
Lichen planus
Lupus erythematosus
Lichen striatus
Lichen nitidus
Psoriasis
Guttate psoriasis
Pityriasis rosea
Pityriasis lichenoides (parapsoriasis)
Pityriasis rubra
Dermatophyte infections
Dermatomyositis
Drug eruption
Nummular eczema
Atopic dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis
Secondary syphilis
Cutaneous T-­cell lymphoma
Fig. 61.5  Well-­demarcated erythematous, scaly plaques of psoriasis. 
(From Kliegman RM, et al. Diseases of the epidermis. In: Kliegman RM, 
et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2015:3160–3162.)
Fig. 61.6  Koebner phenomenon in psoriasis with linear plaques formed in 
the pattern of excoriations. (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen 
BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1167
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
to seborrhea, psoriasis often extends beyond the hairline, affecting the 
forehead, ears, and neck. The lesions are variably pruritic and are gen­
erally not associated with hair loss. Scalp psoriasis tends to be more 
resistant to therapy than seborrheic dermatitis.
Nail abnormalities are seen in up to 50% of patients with psoriasis. 
Nail pits are the most common finding, identified by multiple pinpoint 
depressions that are irregularly distributed over the nail plate. Although 
nail pitting is characteristic of psoriasis, it is not pathognomonic, also 
being found in atopic dermatitis, alopecia areata, and trauma. Other 
nail changes include separation of the nail plate from the nail bed (ony­
cholysis), subungual hyperkeratosis, discoloration, crumbling, and 
yellowish-­brown “oil spots” on the nail plate.
Guttate psoriasis, characterized by numerous droplike lesions, is a 
variant commonly seen in children and young adults (Fig. 61.7). The 
round-­to-­oval, pinkish red, somewhat scaly papules arise in crops and 
are widely distributed, particularly on the trunk. Two thirds of affected 
patients have a history of an upper respiratory tract infection or phar­
yngitis, usually streptococcal in origin, in the 1–3 weeks preceding the 
onset of lesions. Lesions often improve following appropriate antibiotic 
therapy; however, the course may range from spontaneous resolution 
to chronic disease.
Psoriasis is usually diagnosed from the appearance of skin lesions. 
However, when the diagnosis is unclear, a skin biopsy may be help­
ful. Differential diagnosis of psoriasis includes seborrheic dermatitis, 
dermatophytosis, pityriasis rosea, lichen planus, atopic dermatitis, and 
subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Table 61.4).
The course of psoriasis is marked by recurrent flares and remissions, 
often in an unpredictable fashion. A subset of individuals gradually 
improves over time. Management of psoriasis varies and depends on 
age of the child, extent of involvement, functional limitations, and psy­
chosocial impact. For limited disease, topical therapy (e.g., emollients, 
corticosteroids, vitamin D derivatives, retinoids, tar, keratolytics) alone 
may afford control. For more extensive or debilitating disease, the addi­
tion of phototherapy or a systemic agent (e.g., immunosuppressants, 
retinoids, or biologic therapy) may be necessary.
Pityriasis Lichenoides
Pityriasis lichenoides can manifest in two forms: pityriasis lichenoi­
des et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) or pityriasis lichenoides chronica. 
These diseases most commonly affect children between ages 5 and 15 
years, and both are believed to be part of the same clinical spectrum. 
PLEVA is characterized by an abrupt eruption of multiple, 2-­ to 4-­mm, 
nonpruritic, variably scaly erythematous macules and papules that may 
progress to vesicular, necrotic, or crusted lesions. The lesions often 
occur in crops and are thus present in different stages. Distribution is 
most commonly on the trunk, but lesions may spread to the extremi­
ties. The condition may resolve spontaneously within several months, 
or recurrences and relapses may occur episodically for several years.
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica manifests more gradually and 
is characterized by pink-­to-­brown 2-­ to 5-­mm papules with central 
adherent scale, found primarily on the trunk and proximal extremities. 
The clinical course is variable, and the lesions may last from months to 
years. After the papules recede, postinflammatory hypopigmentation 
or hyperpigmentation commonly occurs. Sequelae are uncommon, 
and the lesions usually heal without a scar. Pityriasis lichenoides chron­
ica may initially resemble pityriasis rosea and other papulosquamous 
eruptions (see Table 61.4). Reports of cutaneous T-­cell lymphoma 
(mycosis fungoides) in the setting of pityriasis lichenoides chronica 
exist, and the patient with a persistent or atypical eruption should be 
evaluated with consideration of a skin biopsy (Fig. 61.8).
Treatment may be limited to topical emollients in an asymptomatic 
patient. If treatment is required, first-­line agents include oral antibiot­
ics with antiinflammatory properties (e.g., erythromycin, doxycycline) 
for several weeks, which have shown benefit in some children.
Lichen Planus
Lichen planus occurs in patients of all ages but is less commonly seen 
in children than in adults. It is characterized by the “5 Ps”: purple, 
poly­gonal, planar, pruritic papules. The primary lesion is a shiny, vio­
laceous, flat-­topped papule, often with angulated borders, measur­
ing from 2 mm to more than 1 cm in diameter. The lesions are very 
pruritic and demonstrate the Koebner phenomenon, which results 
in the development of new lesions (often in a linear configuration) at 
sites of scratching. The distribution may be localized or generalized, 
and lesions may number from few to numerous. Sites of predilection 
include the volar wrists, forearms, legs, genitalia, and mucous mem­
branes. The presence of Wickham striae, a reticulated pattern of del­
icate white lines or streaks seen on the buccal mucosa or skin, aids in 
confirming the diagnosis.
Nail changes consisting of longitudinal ridging, generalized nail 
destruction, red or brown discoloration, subungual hyperkeratosis, 
Fig. 61.7  Small droplike plaques of guttate psoriasis. (From Cohen BA, 
Davis HW, Gehris RP. Dermatology. In: Zitelli BJ, et al., eds. Atlas of 
Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:299–368.)
Fig. 61.8  Asymptomatic, hypopigmented, minimally scaly patches on 
the trunk of a child, which were present for several years and found to be 
cutaneous T-­cell lymphoma. (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen 
BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1168
SECTION 12  Dermatology
and thinning of the nail plate are seen in approximately 10% of 
patients. Pterygium formation results from the overgrowth of fibrous 
tissue, which extends from the proximal nail fold to the tip of the nail, 
obliterating the nail plate.
Drug-­induced lichenoid eruptions may mimic lichen planus. 
Common medications that can produce a lichenoid eruption include 
antihypertensives (e.g., β blockers, angiotensin-­converting enzyme 
inhibitors), diuretics (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide), antimalarials, peni­
cillamine, and gold salts. Rarely, tetracycline, griseofulvin, nonsteroi­
dal antiinflammatory medications, phenytoin, and carbamazepine can 
be causes. Unlike other cutaneous medication reactions, the lichenoid 
reaction may not occur for months or years after medication initiation.
Lichen planus is typically a clinical diagnosis, though if necessary, 
a skin biopsy specimen can reveal specific findings. The differential 
diagnosis most often includes psoriasis and drug eruptions (see Table 
61.4). If oral lesions are present, possible alternate diagnoses include 
aphthous stomatitis, erythema multiforme (EM), herpes simplex, or 
leukoplakia.
Topical corticosteroids are the treatment of choice in most cases. 
Lichen planus often resolves spontaneously over 1–2 years, but some 
cases may persist for many years. Generalized eruptions may respond 
to a short course of systemic corticosteroids. Oral antihistamines pro­
vide symptomatic relief.
Seborrheic Dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by an erythematous, scaly, 
symmetric eruption that occurs most often in hair-­bearing and inter­
triginous regions. Seborrhea of infancy is discussed in Chapter 60. In 
adolescents, yellowish, greasy scale of the scalp, eyebrows, nasolabial 
folds, nasal bridge, posterior auricular regions, and mid-­chest may be 
accompanied by mild erythema (Fig. 61.9). Immunodeficiency and 
histiocytic disorders may be accompanied by severe, recalcitrant sebor­
rheic dermatitis (Fig. 61.10). Although typical patients usually respond 
well to therapy, it is a chronic condition characterized by recurrences. 
It is often responsive to low-­potency topical corticosteroids or topical 
antifungals (e.g., azoles, ciclopirox, selenium sulfide). These prepara­
tions may be available in a number of vehicles, including solutions or 
shampoos for the scalp. Keratolytics may be added when thicker scale 
is present.
Atopic Dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis (eczema) is a chronic condition characterized by 
pruritus, a personal or family history of atopy, and an age-­dependent 
distribution. It is common during infancy and childhood. Up to 95% of 
affected individuals have signs before the age of 5 years.
Typical lesions are pink-­to-­red crusted or scaly plaques or pap­
ules. Some individuals have follicular accentuation, particularly on the 
trunk, manifested by a goosebump-­like texture. Lichenification (thick­
ened skin with exaggerated skin markings) is a feature of chronic atopic 
dermatitis and results from repeated rubbing and scratching. Excori­
ations are secondary lesions caused by scratching. Postinflammatory 
pigmentary changes are frequently noted, especially in darker-­skinned 
individuals (Fig. 61.11). Associated findings are noted in Table 61.5.
The distribution of the lesions tends to be age dependent. The 
cheeks, face, scalp, trunk, and extensor surfaces of the arms and legs are 
characteristically involved in the infant form. Between the ages of 2 and 
10 years (childhood atopic dermatitis), the distribution predominantly 
A
B
C
Fig. 61.9  Seborrheic dermatitis in the older child or adolescent. A, Scaly, hypopigmented lesions on the face 
involving eyebrows, nasolabial folds, and nasal bridge. B, Thick, yellow, adherent scale in the scalp. C, Con­
fluent, scaly patches on the scalp with mild erythema. (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. 
Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
Fig. 61.10  Letterer-­Siwe disease. Erythematous, slightly scaly plaques 
are present on the scalp of this child. (From Piette WW. Cutaneous man­
ifestations of macrophage/dendritic cell proliferative disorders [histiocyto­
sis]. In: Callen JP, Jorizzo JL, Bolognia JL, et al., eds. Dermatological Signs 
of Internal Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009:150, Fig. 17-­1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1169
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
involves the neck, wrists, ankles, and flexural surfaces of the extremities 
(Fig. 61.12). After puberty, atopic dermatitis has a predilection for the 
face, neck, hands, and feet. The clinical features of the skin lesions are 
not specific to this condition, as other eczematous eruptions (contact 
dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis) have a similar appearance. Labora­
tory tests are of limited value, and histologic findings reveal nonspe­
cific spongiotic dermatitis. The distribution of lesions, age at onset, and 
history are most important for establishing the diagnosis. Obtaining a 
complete personal and family history of atopic diatheses is necessary.
Secondary infections are the most common complication. Individuals 
with atopic dermatitis have increased colonization with Staphylococcus 
aureus. Most affected children need occasional treatment with antibiotics 
to eradicate secondary infection, and dilute sodium hypochlorite bleach 
baths can help reduce infection with S. aureus. The presence of pustules, 
extensive excoriations, or weeping and crusted lesions suggests the need 
for antibacterial therapy. Topical therapy with mupirocin may be suffi­
cient for limited areas; however, widespread involvement may necessitate 
the use of oral antimicrobial agents. The increase in methicillin-­resistant 
S. aureus (MRSA) infections has limited therapeutic options in some 
patients. Secondary infection with HSV is referred to as eczema herpe­
ticum or Kaposi varicelliform eruption (Fig. 61.13). Transmission may 
occur during routine childcare from a caretaker with a herpetic fever 
blister, whereby the eczematous skin becomes inoculated with HSV. The 
hallmark of this condition is the rapid development of numerous umbil­
icated vesicles and pustules. Later in the course, multiple erosions are 
seen, and identification of an intact vesicle may be difficult. The infection 
may be associated with fever and other constitutional symptoms, and 
expedient treatment with acyclovir is required. Hospitalization may be 
necessary in young infants or severely affected individuals. Recurrences 
of eczema herpeticum can be problematic. Eczema coxsackium is a sim­
ilar condition due to entroviruses.
Other dermatologic conditions to consider in the differential diag­
nosis of a rash that looks like atopic dermatitis are presented in Tables 
61.6 and 61.7.
An overview of the management of atopic dermatitis is presented 
in Table 61.8.
Vascular Lesions
Spider Angioma (Nevus Araneus)
Telangiectases are dilated capillaries that appear as red linear stellate 
or punctate lesions. There are many causes of primary telangiectasia 
(spider angiomas, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia syndrome) 
and secondary telangiectasia, such as collagen vascular disease. Spider 
angiomas are the most common of the telangiectases. In the pediat­
ric age group, these lesions are typically not associated with systemic 
disease. Spider angiomas are seen most often on the face and tops of 
hands. They usually develop after 2 years of age. Small vessels radiate 
from a central punctum (arteriole), giving the appearance of a “spider.” 
When pressure is applied to the central punctum, the lesion blanches. 
Treatment, if desired, consists of gentle electrodesiccation or pulsed dye 
laser therapy. In some cases, spider angiomas clear without treatment.
Pyogenic Granuloma
Pyogenic granulomas are acquired vascular lesions that arise from the 
connective tissue of the skin or mucous membranes. These vascular 
A
B
Fig. 61.11  Postinflammatory pigment changes of the ankles (A) and 
hands (B). (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediat­
ric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
TABLE 61.5  Atopic Dermatitis: 
Associated Findings
Finding
Features
Ichthyosis vulgaris
Affects 20% of patients with atopic dermatitis
Primarily involves the legs and trunk
Keratosis pilaris
Asymptomatic hyperkeratotic follicular papules 
found mainly on the extensor surfaces of the 
upper arms and anterior thighs, also on the 
face in children
Pityriasis alba
Hypopigmented patches on the cheeks and 
occasionally upper body
Hyperlinear palms/soles
Common
Dennie-­Morgan fold
A double line found under the lower eyelids
Not pathognomonic
Lichen spinulosus
More commonly seen in darker skin
Pruritic grouped hyperkeratotic follicular spires
Eye findings
Keratoconjunctivitis, cataracts, keratoconus 
(abnormally shaped cornea), retinal 
detachment (rare)
Dyshidrotic eczema
Firm vesicles found on the palms and soles and 
lateral aspects of digits
Frequently associated with hyperhidrosis
Nummular eczema
Well-­demarcated, scaly, coin-­shaped lesions 
usually on the lower extremities
Associated with xerosis
Juvenile plantar 
dermatosis
Occasionally exudative lesions
Painful erythema, scaling, cracking, and fissuring 
of weight-­bearing surfaces of the feet
Often associated with hyperhidrosis
Improvement after puberty
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1170
SECTION 12  Dermatology
A
C
B
Fig. 61.12  Atopic dermatitis in childhood with lesions of the arm (A), ankles (B), and neck (C). (From Papu­
losquamous eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
A
B
Fig. 61.13  Eczema herpeticum infection in a patient with atopic dermatitis. Numerous punched-­out vesicles 
and erosions involving the face (A) and extremities (B). (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. 
Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
TABLE 61.6  Differential Diagnosis of Atopic Dermatitis
Condition
Similarities
Differences
Seborrheic dermatitis
Scaly plaques
Earlier onset is typical, can be seen in older children
Erythroderma may be seen when severe
Increased severity associated with immunodeficiency disorders and neurologic 
dysfunction
Pruritus minimal or absent
Well-­demarcated lesions
Characteristic yellowish-­salmon greasy lesions with intertriginous distribution
Contact dermatitis
Primary irritant
Common in infants, young children
Usually less pruritic and less eczematoid
May have similar distributions depending on the 
irritant (i.e., cheeks, chin, neck)
Diaper area distribution uncommon in atopic dermatitis
Allergic
Pruritic
Well circumscribed
Erythematous, papulovesicular eruption
Uncommon in first few months of life
Involutes spontaneously after the removal of the offending agent
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1171
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
TABLE 61.7  Features of Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with Eczematous Dermatitis
Disease
Gene
Inheritance
Clinical Features
Lab Abnormalities
AD-­HIES
STAT3
AD, less commonly 
sporadic
 • Cold abscesses
 • Recurrent sinopulmonary infections
 • Mucocutaneous candidiasis
 • Coarse facies
 • Minimal trauma fractures
 • Scoliosis
 • Joint hyperextensibility
 • Retained primary teeth
 • Coronary artery tortuosity or dilatation
 • Lymphoma
 • High IgE (>2,000 IU/μL)
 • Eosinophilia
DOCK8 deficiency
DOCK8
AR
 • Severe mucocutaneous viral infections
 • Mucocutaneous candidiasis
 • Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
 • Squamous cell carcinoma
 • Lymphoma
 • High IgE
 • Eosinophilia
 • With or without decreased 
IgM
PGM3 deficiency
PGM3
AR
 • Neurologic abnormalities
 • Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
 • Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
 • Sinopulmonary infections
 • Mucocutaneous viral infections
 • High IgE
 • Eosinophilia
WAS
WASP
XLR
 • Hepatosplenomegaly
 • Lymphadenopathy
 • Atopic diathesis
 • Autoimmune conditions (especially hemolytic 
anemia)
 • Lymphoreticular malignancies
 • Thrombocytopenia 
(<80,000/μL)
 • Low mean platelet volume
 • Eosinophilia is common
 • Lymphopenia
 • Low IgM, variable IgG
SCID
Variable, depends 
on type
XLR and AR most 
common
 • Recurrent, severe infections
 • Failure to thrive
 • Persistent diarrhea
 • Recalcitrant oral candidiasis
 • Omenn: lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, 
erythroderma
 • Lymphopenia common
 • Variable patterns of reduced 
lymphocyte subsets (T, B, 
natural killer cells)
 • Omenn: high lymphocytes, 
eosinophilia, high IgE
Condition
Similarities
Differences
Psoriasis
Scaly, red lesions
Deeper red-­violaceous hue
Thick micaceous scale
Characteristic nail changes
Sharply demarcated lesions
Distinct distribution
Pruritus may be less intense
Scabies
Frequent eczematous changes secondary to 
scratching, rubbing, or irritating therapy
Can be very difficult to distinguish in infancy
Polymorphous with papules, pustules, and hyperpigmented nodules
Presence of burrows
Isolation of a mite from skin scrapings
Acute onset
Affected household members
Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis
Scaly, erythematous eruption
Usually begins during first year of life
Primarily children <3 yr of age
Presence of purpuric papules
Associated hematologic abnormalities, hepatosplenomegaly
Acrodermatitis 
enteropathica
Vesiculobullous eczematoid lesions
Onset during infancy
Acral, periorificial distribution
Associated features: failure to thrive, diarrhea, alopecia, nail dystrophy, low 
serum zinc levels
Phenylketonuria
Eczematous eruption
Hereditary
Intellectual disability, seizures
Diffuse hypopigmentation, blond hair, photosensitivity
Elevated blood phenylalanine levels
TABLE 61.6  Differential Diagnosis of Atopic Dermatitis—cont’d
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 61.8  Atopic Dermatitis Management
Therapeutic Modality
Indications and Recommendations
Bathing
Recommended daily for 10–15 min with warm, not hot, water.
May use fragrance-­free bath oils.
Hydrates the skin.
Soaps
Mild, fragrance-­free cleansers are essential.
Emollients
Best applied immediately after bathing/showering. Should be used as often as possible.
Petroleum jelly is an ideal emollient: contains no water, additives, or preservatives and prevents evaporative water loss from the skin.
Thick creams are an alternative.
Bleach (sodium hypochlorite)
Depending on the size of the bathtub/amount of water used, 0.25–0.5 U.S. cup (60–120 mL) of common bleach solution (6% sodium 
hypochlorite) is added to a full bath (40-­gallon tub). Performed 2–3 times/wk to reduce Staphylococcus aureus colonization.
Compresses
Indicated for acute weeping lesions. Helps cool and dry the skin, reduces inflammation. Use cool tap water or aluminum acetate 
solutions for 20 min, 2–4 times daily. Follow with topical corticosteroid application.
Topical corticosteroids
Indicated to reduce pruritus and inflammation. The potency of the topical corticosteroid is determined by the age of patient, site 
of involvement, severity of dermatitis, and duration of therapy. Facial and intertriginous skin should be treated with low-­potency 
preparations. Apply before emollient. Use the lowest potency that is effective. Monitor closely for potential side effects, such as 
striae and cushingoid features.
Topical immunomodulators
Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus may be effective steroid-­sparing agents for mild to moderate focal involvement, particularly on the face or groin.
Antihistamines
Controversial whether effective in this condition. Topical formulations should be avoided. Hydroxyzine may be more effective 
than diphenhydramine. May induce drowsiness and help some patients sleep. Nonsedating antihistamines include cetirizine, 
loratadine, and fexofenadine.
Antibiotics
Patients with atopic dermatitis often have increased colonization with S. aureus. Use if multiple weeping excoriations, crusts, 
or pustules suggest secondary infection or if severe or resistant eczema is present. Treat with antistaphylococcal antibiotics; 
specific antibiotic is based on local susceptibilities.
Ultraviolet light
Useful for severe, uncontrollable atopic dermatitis. May administer narrowband ultraviolet B (NBUVB) light.
Tars
Useful for chronic, dry, lichenified lesions, not for acute dermatitis.
Environmental conditions
Environmental factors may influence the severity of the dermatitis. Some helpful measures:
 • Avoid fragrances in all topicals and laundry products.
 • Avoid wool, feathers, dust exposure.
 • Reduce house dust mites.
 • Eliminate animal dander.
 • Use plastic mattress covers.
 • Reduce stress/anxiety.
 • Increase environmental humidity to reduce skin evaporative losses.
 • Avoid smoking.
Systemic immunosuppressants
Oral corticosteroids should be avoided.
Dupilumab, an IL-­4 receptor α-antagonist, is FDA-­approved for the treatment of atopic dermatitis.
Cyclosporine, methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine have shown some benefit in the management of atopic 
dermatitis but, given the side effect profile, should be prescribed under the direction of a dermatologist.
FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; IL, interleukin.
Disease
Gene
Inheritance
Clinical Features
Lab Abnormalities
IPEX
FOXP3
XLR
 • Severe diarrhea (autoimmune enteropathy)
 • Various autoimmune endocrinopathies (especially 
diabetes mellitus, thyroiditis)
 • Food allergies
 • High IgE
 • Eosinophilia
 • Various autoantibodies
Netherton syndrome
SPINK5
AR
 • Hair shaft abnormalities
 • Erythroderma
 • Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa
 • Food allergies
 • Recurrent gastroenteritis
 • Neonatal hypernatremic dehydration
 • Upper and lower respiratory infections
 • High IgE
 • Eosinophilia
AD, autosomal dominant; AD-­HIES, autosomal-­dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome; AR, autosomal recessive; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8 gene; Ig, 
immunoglobulin; IPEX, immune disregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked syndrome; PGM3, phosphoglucomutase 3; SCID, severe 
combined immunodeficiency; WAS, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome.
From Youssef MJ, Chiu YE. Eczema and urticaria as manifestations of undiagnosed and rare diseases. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2017;64(1):39–56 (Table 
1, pp. 41–42).
TABLE 61.7  Features of Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with Eczematous 
Dermatitis—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1173
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
nodules may be associated with antecedent trauma and represent a 
reactive, proliferative process. They are usually solitary, but multiple 
lesions occur in rare cases (Fig. 61.14). Arising as small red papules, 
pyogenic granulomas grow rapidly and can ulcerate, leading to profuse 
bleeding. Histologically, these lesions resemble infantile hemangiomas 
(IHs). Unlike IHs, onset after the first year of life is typical, bleeding is 
common, spontaneous regression is rare, and recurrences may be seen. 
Treatment involves destruction by pulsed dye laser therapy, electro­
desiccation, surgical removal, or cryotherapy.
DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION
These conditions are often cosmetically disfiguring and persistent and 
can be markers of serious systemic diseases. Pigmentary disorders may 
be localized or generalized; congenital or acquired; and transient, sta­
ble, or progressive (see Chapter 60).
Acquired Disorders of Hypopigmentation or 
Depigmentation
Postinflammatory Hypopigmentation
Postinflammatory hypopigmentation is a common form of acquired 
hypopigmentation and may follow any inflammatory skin condition, 
including bullous disorders, infections, eczema, psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, 
secondary syphilis, insect bites, acne, pityriasis lichenoides chronica, and 
burns. More frequently detected in darker-­skinned individuals, the clinical 
findings consist of irregularly shaped hypopigmented patches of variable 
size, often ill-­defined, located at sites of preceding inflammation. Post­
inflammatory hypopigmentation usually resolves gradually over several 
months, and no treatment is necessary other than photoprotection.
Pityriasis Alba
Pityriasis alba is characterized by poorly demarcated, slightly scaly, 
hypopigmented oval macules or patches located on the face (typically 
the cheeks), upper trunk, or extensor surfaces of the arms (Fig. 61.15). 
The lesions generally vary from 0.5 to 2 cm in diameter, are often mul­
tiple, and are usually asymptomatic. Sun exposure may increase the 
contrast with normal skin, prompting patients to seek treatment. The 
condition may at times be associated with atopic dermatitis, and dif­
ferentiating pityriasis alba from patches of atopic dermatitis–­related 
postinflammatory hypopigmentation may be difficult. In contrast to 
postinflammatory hypopigmentation, the histology of pityriasis alba 
demonstrates low-­grade inflammation. The hypopigmentation typ­
ically persists for several months to years. Although no therapeutic 
intervention is required, the use of emollients and low-­potency topical 
corticosteroids may be effective.
Vitiligo
Vitiligo is an acquired disorder characterized by areas of complete loss 
of skin pigment resulting from the cytotoxic activity of autoreactive T 
cells against melanocytes. Autoantibodies against melanocyte-­specific 
antigens have also been detected. The condition often manifests during 
childhood and is believed to be linked to specific pathogenic genetic 
variants. There is an increased incidence of autoimmune diseases in 
affected individuals and their families. The incidence of vitiligo (Addi­
son disease, hypothyroidism, pernicious anemia, lupus) in persons 
with diabetes mellitus is also higher than that in the general population.
The onset of vitiligo may be precipitated by sunburn or other 
trauma. Physical findings are usually sufficient for establishing the 
diagnosis. Well-­demarcated depigmented macules and patches that 
are often bilateral and symmetric are distributed over the joints of the 
extremities, on the periorificial areas, and within skin folds. Segmen­
tally distributed depigmentation is more common in children than 
in adults. The course is unpredictable. Spontaneous complete repig­
mentation is unusual; however, partial repigmentation may be seen, 
especially within lesions of less than 2 years’ duration. Repigmenta­
tion proceeds gradually and is more likely to occur in children than 
in adults.
Treatment response often takes months. For limited involvement, 
topical corticosteroids are most frequently used, and calcineurin inhib­
itors provide an option in places where it may be preferable to avoid 
corticosteroids. For more widespread involvement, phototherapy may 
provide the best chance of repigmentation and may slow progression 
in rapidly progressive disease. Other interventions may consist of cos­
metic camouflage, self-­tanners, or photoprotection to reduce the con­
trast between affected and unaffected sites. Careful photoprotection is 
also recommended to prevent the development of cutaneous malig­
nancy. Bleaching agents are another option in individuals with depig­
mentation of >50% of their cutaneous surface.
Fig. 61.14  Pyogenic granuloma. Hemorrhagic nodule with a central 
crust. (From Nodules and tumors. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatol­
ogy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:126–147.)
Fig. 61.15  Poorly demarcated areas of hypopigmentation in pityriasis 
alba. (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Der­
matology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:66–103.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1174
SECTION 12  Dermatology
Disorders of Hyperpigmentation
Lentigines
Lentigines are 1-­ to 5-­mm macules that are darker than freckles and 
may occur on any cutaneous site, including the mucous membranes. 
Lentigines have no seasonal variance, and those that manifest during 
early childhood often disappear during adulthood. A lentigo may be 
clinically indistinguishable from a junctional nevus (mole); however, 
these lesions are histologically distinct.
Several syndromes are associated with multiple lentigines. Patients 
with multiple lentigines/LEOPARD syndrome can present with iso­
lated skin involvement with generalized lentigines or the complete syn­
drome (multiple lentigines, ECG abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, 
pulmonic stenosis, abnormal genitalia, growth retardation, and neural 
deafness). Lentigines in these patients may not appear until 4–5 years 
of age and increase rapidly thereafter. Multiple lentigines located on 
the mucous membranes, especially the vermilion border of the lips 
and buccal mucosa, should alert the clinician to the possibility of 
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome, which is characteristically associated with 
intestinal polyposis and subsequent risk of malignant transformation 
and intussusception. Laugier-­Hunziker syndrome also presents with 
lentigines involving the lips and buccal mucosa without the gastroin­
testinal involvement of Peutz-­Jeghers. Solar lentigines occur in sun-­
exposed areas in older children, particularly at sites of prior sunburns.
Café-­Au-­Lait Macules
Café-­au-­lait macules are well-­circumscribed tan macules that usually 
measure <0.5 cm and may be as large as 15–20 cm in diameter (Fig. 
61.16). The lesions are found on any cutaneous site and may be present 
at birth or appear during early childhood. Although café-­au-­lait spots 
are seen in up to 20% of normal individuals and may be familial, the 
presence of many macules should raise the clinical suspicion of neu­
rofibromatosis (Table 61.9). The presence of six or more café-­au-­lait 
spots (>0.5 cm in prepubertal children; >1.5 cm in postpubertal chil­
dren) fulfills one of the diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 
1. Although the lesions are not pathognomonic, they are present in 
most patients with neurofibromatosis and tend to be larger and more 
numerous. Café-­au-­lait spots have also been associated with Watson 
syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, McCune-­Albright syndrome, Turner 
syndrome, Bloom syndrome, ataxia-­telangiectasia, Russell-­Silver syn­
drome, Fanconi anemia, Gaucher disease, Legius syndrome, ring chro­
mosome syndrome, and Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome.
Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is the most common cause of 
acquired hyperpigmentation in children. This pigmentary alteration 
can follow any inflammatory insult and is seen commonly after insect 
bites, acne, drug reactions, or other skin trauma. The clinical features 
are usually more striking in darkly pigmented individuals and often 
may be more pronounced than the original inflammatory lesions. The 
increased pigmentation usually resolves gradually over several months 
to years.
Acquired Melanocytic Nevi
Acquired melanocytic nevi arise during early childhood as 1-­ to 2-­mm 
brown macules occurring most often on sun-­exposed skin. These early 
flat nevi usually represent junctional nevi, in which nests of nevus cells 
are located along the dermo-­epidermal junction. Over time, some 
nevus cells may spread into the dermis, forming compound melano­
cytic nevi, which appear somewhat larger and more papular than junc­
tional nevi. In some nevi, the nevus cells may become restricted to the 
dermis. These intradermal nevi are usually fleshy or even pedunculated 
in appearance. Located usually on the head, neck, or upper trunk, these 
nevi may clinically resemble skin tags.
There is a gradual increase in the number of nevi during childhood 
and adolescence. The average individual acquires approximately 20–40 
melanocytic nevi. This number peaks at 25 years of age. In general, 
fair-­skinned persons have a greater number of nevi than do darkly pig­
mented persons.
Melanoma
Although melanomas are very rare in childhood, their incidence is 
increasing and can present with atypical features compared to the 
classic criteria of adult cases. The overall lifetime risk of melanoma in 
White persons in the United States is currently approximately 1 in 50 
individuals. Melanoma can arise de novo or from pre-­existing con­
genital or acquired melanocytic nevi. Three subtypes include spitzoid 
(papular, nodular, may be amelanotic, sun and non–sun-­exposed dis­
tribution), melanoma arising in a congenital melanotic nevus (new, 
rapidly growing nodule in subcutaneous or dermal plane of a nevus), 
and conventional melanoma (sun-­exposed skin in adolescents: papule 
or nodule may be melanotic in children). Nevi should be observed for 
specific changes that may be indicative of malignancy. These alterations 
include the following:
	1.	 Rapid growth of the nevi
	2.	 Changes in texture, including nodularity, crusting, ulceration, 
bleeding, or loss of normal skin lines
	3.	 Changes in pigmentation, especially the development of red, white, 
or blue hues
	4.	 Border irregularity, especially notched or scalloped edges
	5.	 Symptoms of itching, tenderness, or pain
Fig. 61.16  A child with neurofibromatosis 1 and numerous and variously 
sized café-­au-­lait macules over the trunk. (From Price HN, Marghoob 
AA. Disorders of hyperpigmentation and melanocytes. In: Eichenfield 
LF, Frieden IJ, Mathes EF, et al., eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:389, Fig. 24.1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1175
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
A
B
Fig. 61.17  Melanoma. A, This lesion shows the irregularity of outline, color, and thickness typical of a mela­
noma. B, A black papule developed in the border of a 3.5 × 1.5–cm congenital pigmented nevus. Biopsy showed 
a thin melanoma, and the lesion was excised with a 1-­cm margin. (From Mavropoulos JC, Cohen BA. Disorders 
of pigmentation. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:157, Fig. 6.15.)
TABLE 61.9  Neurocutaneous Syndromes
Syndrome
Mode of Inheritance
Cutaneous Findings
Systemic Findings
Tuberous sclerosis
Autosomal dominant
Ash leaf macules
Angiofibromas (adenoma sebaceum)
Shagreen patches
Periungual/subungual fibromas
Gingival fibromas
CNS involvement (seizures, intellectual 
disability, cortical tubers)
Cardiac rhabdomyomas
Retinal gliomas
Renal carcinoma or hamartoma
Renal or pulmonary cysts
Skeletal abnormalities
Neurofibromatosis 
(NF) (NF1 >85% 
of cases)
Autosomal dominant
Café-­au-­lait macules (more than six measuring ≥1.5 cm in 
adults and >0.5 cm in children)
Axillary, inguinal freckling (Crowe sign)
Neurofibromas
Blue-­red macules and pseudoatrophic macules (involuted 
neurofibromas)
Lisch nodules (melanocytic hamartomas of the iris)
Acoustic neuroma in NF2
Optic glioma may result in exophthalmos, 
decreased visual acuity
Intellectual disability (rarely)
Seizure disorders (rarely)
Tumors (astrocytomas)
Hyperactivity, macrocephaly
Learning disabilities, speech delay
Osseous defects (up to 50%)
Intestinal neurofibromas
Endocrine disorders
Incontinentia 
pigmenti
X-­linked dominant
Phase 1: inflammatory vesicles/bullae in crops over trunk and 
extremities, may persist weeks to months
Phase 2: irregular linear verrucous lesions on one or more 
extremities, resolves spontaneously within several months
Phase 3: brown to blue-­gray hyperpigmentation, swirl-­like 
formations on extremities and trunk; increases in intensity 
through second year of life, then remains stable or fades 
over many years
Phase 4: streaked hypopigmented lesions
Eosinophilia
CNS involvement (seizures, spasticity, 
↓ IQ) in 30%
Spasticity
Ophthalmic changes (strabismus, 
cataracts, optic atrophy, retinal damage)
Alopecia
Skeletal abnormalities
Dental abnormalities
CNS, central nervous system; IQ, intelligence quotient.
Additionally, the ABCD criteria include asymmetry, border irregu­
larity, color variegation, and diameter >6 mm.
In general, melanomas occur more frequently in lightly pigmented 
individuals, in individuals with a high nevus count, and in those with a 
family history of melanoma. Melanomas usually appear as darkly pig­
mented nodular masses, often with color variegation, larger than 6 mm 
in diameter (Fig. 61.17). They are often asymmetric and tend to have 
irregular borders and surface characteristics. Melanomas must be differ­
entiated from other benign pigmented lesions, including congenital and 
acquired melanocytic nevi, blue nevi, Spitz nevi, vascular lesions such as 
hemangiomas and pyogenic granulomas, and pigmented lesions caused 
by trauma. Suspect lesions should be referred to a dermatologist.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1176
SECTION 12  Dermatology
The mortality rate of melanoma is estimated to be between 10% and 
20%. The prognosis depends on the thickness of the lesion. For lesions 
<0.75 mm in depth, the prognosis is excellent. Surgical excision is the 
treatment of choice. Patients should be educated on the importance of 
photoprotection with broad-­spectrum (ultraviolet A and B) sunscreens.
REACTIVE ERYTHEMAS
Morbilliform Drug Eruption
Morbilliform (measles-­like) eruptions are the most common cuta­
neous manifestations of drug-­induced eruptions in children. In this 
eruption, fine erythematous macules and papules are distributed over 
the trunk (Fig. 61.18). The rash often spreads centripetally from the 
trunk to the extremities. Lesions may coalesce into large plaques and 
are usually pruritic. Morbilliform drug eruptions are often difficult to 
differentiate from viral exanthems. It is believed that concomitant viral 
infections may predispose susceptible individuals to develop an aller­
gic morbilliform drug eruption.
Many agents, including common antibiotics, can trigger a morbil­
liform drug eruption. These medications include penicillins, sulfon­
amides, thiazides, sulfonylureas, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), aromatic anticonvulsants, and gold. Treatment includes 
prompt diagnosis with discontinuation of the offending medication 
and symptomatic care with antihistamines and emollients. The rash 
may last an average of 1–2 weeks and sometimes progresses despite 
discontinuation of the offending medication. In rare cases for which 
discontinuation of the offending medication is not possible, continua­
tion of the medication with close monitoring for the development of a 
more severe reaction may be considered as tolerance may develop with 
subsequent resolution of the eruption.
Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reaction to Drugs
More serious drug reactions include DRESS (drug reaction with 
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) (Fig. 61.19), Stevens-­Johnson 
syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) (Fig. 61.20), and 
acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) (Fig. 61.21). Dis­
tinguishing features are noted in Table 61.10 and Fig. 61.22. SJS/TEN is 
also characterized by a positive Nikolsky sign (Fig. 61.23). Responsible 
drugs are noted for each syndrome in Table 61.11.
Fixed Drug Eruption
A fixed drug eruption is characterized by the sudden development 
of solitary or multiple well-­demarcated, annular, erythematous, or 
hyperpigmented plaques. One of the distinguishing features is per­
sistent postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, which may last weeks 
to months after the eruption subsides. The size of the lesion may vary, 
and the sites of predilection include the lips, trunk, legs, arms, and 
genitals. In some cases, the lesion may have a central bulla. Systemic 
symptoms are rare though may consist of local pruritus or a burning 
sensation.
Discontinuation of the offending medication causes a decrease 
in the intensity of the erythema and edema; repeated challenge with 
the same agent causes a reappearance of the lesion in the same loca­
tion and may produce new lesions. Future outbreaks may be pro­
gressively more severe. The most common agents inducing fixed 
drug eruption include barbiturates, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, 
phenolphthalein, acetaminophen, salicylates, NSAIDs, and even 
certain foods that contain the synthetic food coloring yellow 5 (tar­
trazine). Treatment is aimed at discontinuation and avoidance of the 
offending agent.
When numerous lesions occur, the condition may resemble erythema 
multiforme (EM), and the clinical history becomes paramount in estab­
lishing the diagnosis, particularly as there is significant histologic overlap.
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Allergic contact dermatitis is a type IV delayed hypersensitivity 
reaction. This T-­cell–­mediated immune response occurs after the 
Fig. 61.18  Morbilliform drug eruption due to trimethoprim-­sulfametho­
xazole (TMP-­SMZ). This HIV-­positive young man developed a wide­
spread eruption of blanchable erythematous macules and papules 8 
days after starting TMP-­SMZ. Note the coalescence on the upper trunk. 
(From Chan RKW, Chio MTW, Koh HY. Cutaneous manifestations of HIV 
infection. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds. Dermatology. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Fig 78.18.)
Fig. 61.19  Acute rash in DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and 
systemic symptoms) syndrome. (Modified from Mori F, Caffarelli C, 
Caim­mi S, et al. Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms 
[DRESS] in children. Acta Biomed. 2019;90[S3]:66–79 [Fig. 1, p. 68].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1177
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
responsible antigen contacts the skin, resulting in sensitization. Future 
contact with the same antigen provokes an inflammatory response 
within hours to several days. Acute contact dermatitis is usually char­
acterized by the sudden onset of erythema, vesiculation, edema, and 
intense pruritus. Chronic contact dermatitis results in the development 
of lichenification, scaling, and hyperpigmentation and can be compli­
cated by secondary bacterial infection.
Poison ivy is the most common cause of allergic contact dermatitis 
(Rhus dermatitis) in the United States, in which following sensitization, 
direct contact of the skin with the sap of poison ivy, oak, or sumac 
results in an intensely pruritic dermatitis. Contact with clothing or pets 
that have been exposed to the plant resin and smoke from the fire of 
such plants being burned are other forms of exposure. Given the rel­
ative ease with which the responsible antigens in poison ivy permeate 
the skin, sensitization can be very rapid. The eruption is usually seen 
as linear vesicles and papules or plaques. The spread to body sites is 
caused by exposure to the plant resin, not by the blister fluid. Therefore, 
scratching affected skin or contact with affected individuals should not 
result in spreading of the eruption.
Other common forms of allergic contact dermatitis result from 
exposure to cosmetics, fragrances, hair dyes, and nickel. Nickel der­
matitis often results from prolonged contact with the nickel in jew­
elry or belt buckles (Fig. 61.24). The eczematous changes are usually 
localized to the sites of contact, including the earlobes, neckline, 
wrists, and waistline, although generalized lichenoid papular id 
reactions have been described. The diagnosis of contact dermatitis 
can usually be determined from history and clinical examination 
findings. The distribution of linear, geometric, or well-­demarcated 
areas may be helpful in confirming the diagnosis. When allergic 
contact dermatitis is suspected but the responsible agent is unclear, 
patch testing with a selected group of antigens may provide useful 
information. Prevention of future exposure to inciting antigens is 
necessary.
Usually, treatment with topical corticosteroids, emollients, and 
antihistamines is sufficient to control the eruption. However, wide­
spread dermatitis or severe involvement of the face may necessitate 
administration of systemic corticosteroids. Wet compresses with alu­
minum acetate aid in the drying of weeping, vesicular lesions and pro­
vide symptomatic relief.
Urticaria
Urticaria is characterized by transient, edematous, erythematous, often 
annular wheals (Fig. 61.25). Central clearing may be seen but is not 
always present. The eruption is often sudden and pruritic, and each 
lesion rarely lasts longer than a few hours. Although the lesions are 
transient, they may continue to appear in new locations, and the entire 
urticarial episode may last hours to years. Angioedema is a form of 
urticaria that manifests with marked swelling of deeper tissue planes 
that frequently involves the lips, dorsum of the hands or feet, scalp, 
scrotum, or periorbital tissue.
Giant annular urticaria lesions are usually large, up to 20–30 cm, 
and polycyclic. A centrally bruised appearance is common within these 
lesions. Lesions may be of different sizes with bizarre shapes and pat­
terns. Affected patients are often irritable and may have edema of the 
hands, eyelids, or feet. Giant annular lesions are often confused with 
the target lesions of EM, although the target lesions of EM are typically 
smaller (e.g., 1–3 cm). Additional key features differentiate the two 
disorders. By definition urticarial lesions are transient, with individual 
A
B
Fig. 61.20  A, Erosions and crusting of the lips in Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. B, Widespread blistering and 
erosions of the skin and mucous membranes. (From Vesicopustular eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric 
Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013.)
Fig. 61.21  Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP). 
Nonfollicular pustules (arrow) arising on edematous erythema of the 
trunk. (From Supplement to Duong TA, Valeyrie-­Allanore L, Wolken­
stein P, et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs. Lancet. 
2017;390:1996–2011, Fig. S5.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1178
SECTION 12  Dermatology
lesions lasting <24 hours, whereas lesions in EM are fixed and usually 
last 1–2 weeks in the same anatomic location. Outlining the lesions 
with a marker may help determine whether the lesions are fixed or 
transient. Another differentiating feature is that the lesions in EM usu­
ally have a dusky, necrotic center or blister. A skin biopsy may also aid 
in differentiating between the two disorders (Table 61.12).
Urticaria may be defined as either acute or chronic. Acute urticaria 
lasts <6 weeks. When hives continue to develop for more than 6 weeks, 
urticaria is considered chronic. Acute urticaria has numerous etiol­
ogies but is often caused by medications (particularly antibacterials), 
foods, infections, or environmental stimuli such as stinging insects 
(Table 61.13). The cause of chronic urticaria is typically difficult to 
determine, with a broad list of potential etiologies (see Table 61.13). 
A thorough history and a careful physical examination are the most 
helpful tools for determining the cause. There are no routine laboratory 
tests that should be obtained in the evaluation of urticaria; however, if 
history or physical examination suggests a specific underlying cause, 
such as infection, then confirmatory testing for that cause should be 
pursued.
There are physical etiologies of urticaria that tend to recur with 
exposure to the stimulus (Table 61.14). In addition, urticaria-­like 
lesions have been reported in autoinflammatory diseases (Table 61.15) 
and other systemic disorders (Table 61.16). An approach to acute and 
chronic urticaria is noted in Fig. 61.26.
Urticaria is usually self-­limited. Treatment consists of eliminating 
identifiable causes and administering antihistamines. Hydroxyzine 
and diphenhydramine are often used though often result in drowsi­
ness. Nonsedating antihistamines are preferred, provided there are no 
potential interactions with concurrent medications. H1 and H2 block­
ers may be combined as needed. Systemic steroids are usually not indi­
cated unless there is airway involvement or anaphylaxis.
Erythema Multiforme
EM is a distinct hypersensitivity eruption associated with numerous 
etiologies, the most frequent of which is HSV infection, even in the 
absence of a clinically recognizable herpetic lesion. Additional etiol­
ogies include other infections and less commonly medications (Table 
61.17). This self-­limited condition lacks internal organ involvement 
and has minimal complications.
Manifestations of EM are variable. The typical lesion in EM is an 
erythematous papule with a dusky, purpuric, or necrotic center (Fig. 
61.27). The lesions are targetoid with concentric zones of color change: 
a dusky center or blister, a peripheral ring of pale edema, and an ery­
thematous halo; some may not demonstrate the characteristic concen­
tric changes, and the appearance may vary depending on the stage at 
which the lesion is visualized. Lesions start abruptly and symmetri­
cally as red macules or urticarial papules that expand into a targetoid 
appearance. They are commonly distributed on the dorsa of the hands, 
TABLE 61.10  Main Clinical and Histologic Characteristics of Severe Cutaneous Adverse 
Reactions (SCARs)
Drug-­to-­SCAR 
Interval
General 
Symptoms*
Skin Features
Laboratory Values
Main Organs Involved Histologic Features
SJS and TEN
4–28 days
Fever ≥38°C, 
influenza-­like 
syndrome, 
respiratory tract 
symptoms
Blisters, large skin detachment, 
confluent erythema, atypical 
target lesions, purpura, Nikolsky 
sign; skin detachment: Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome <10%, toxic 
epidermal necrolysis ≥30%, 
SJS-­TEN 10–30%; two or more 
mucous membranes involved
Lymphopenia, transitory 
neutropenia, mild 
cytolysis, renal 
impairment
Full-­thickness epidermal 
necrosis, focal adnexal 
necrosis, necrotic 
keratinocytes, mild 
mononuclear cell dermal 
infiltrate, negative direct 
immunofluorescence test
DRESS syndrome
2–6 wk
Fever ≥38°C, 
influenza-­like 
syndrome
Maculopapular rash, 
erythroderma, facial or extremity 
edema, purpura, pustules, focal 
monopolar mucous membrane 
involvement
Eosinophilia >700 cells/μL, 
atypical lymphocytes, 
elevated transaminase 
concentration, impaired 
renal function, herpesvirus 
reactivation (HHV-­6, HHV-­
7, EBV, CMV), parvovirus 
B19 reactivation
Lichenoid infiltrate or 
eczematous pattern 
(spongiosis, edema), focal 
necrotic keratinocytes, 
mononuclear infiltrate, focal 
eosinophil and neutrophil 
infiltrates, mild vasculitis
AGEP
1–11 days
Fever ≥38°C
Intertriginous erythema, edema, 
widespread nonfollicular sterile 
pustules, postpustular pinpoint 
desquamation, Nikolsky sign, 
rare oral mucous membrane 
involvement
Hyperleukocytosis, 
neutrophils ≥7,000 
cells/μL, mild eosinophilia
Subcorneal or intraepidermal 
spongiform or 
nonspongiform pustules with 
or without papillary edema, 
focal necrotic keratinocytes, 
neutrophilic sometimes with 
eosinophils, mild vasculitis
*General symptoms can precede or occur at the same time as skin manifestations.
AGEP, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; EBV, 
Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; SCAR, severe cutaneous adverse reaction; SJS, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis.
From Duong TA, Valeyrie-­Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs. Lancet. 2017;390:1996–2011 (Table 1, p. 
1997).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1179
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
feet, palms, and soles (see Table 61.12). The Koebner phenomenon may 
be seen with lesions occurring in areas of injury.
EM minor is often differentiated from EM major. EM minor con­
sists of mainly cutaneous lesions with no more than one area of muco­
sal involvement, typically orolabial. EM major has a similar cutaneous 
eruption with two or more sites of mucosal involvement with more 
extensively sized oral lesions. The mucous membranes most commonly 
involved are the conjunctivae and oral mucosa.
Histopathologic study of the lesions usually demonstrates a perivas­
cular lymphocytic infiltrate with individual keratinocyte necrosis. There 
may be vacuolar degeneration of the basal layer, spongiosis, papillary der­
mal edema, and junctional or subepidermal cleft formation. In general, 
patients with EM major tend to have more extensive inflammation and less 
extensive epidermal necrosis when compared to patients with SJS.
The disease is usually self-­limited and necessitates supportive treat­
ment with analgesics, topical steroids, and antihistamines for symp­
tomatic relief. Systemic steroids may be beneficial in severe cases. 
Lesions often heal within 1–3 weeks and may leave residual hyperpig­
mentation. In children with recurrent HSV-­associated EM, antivirals 
may prove helpful.
Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis 
Complex
SJS and TEN are considered part of a continuum of disease differenti­
ated by body surface area (see Table 61.10). The reaction is often elic­
ited by medications, frequently includes internal organ involvement, 
and has a high rate of complications and sequelae. In SJS, there is <10% 
body surface involvement; with 10–30% body surface involvement, the 
Drug eruption
Drug withdrawal
SCARs
Fever
Mucous membrane involvement
Large blisters
Facial edema
Pustulosis
Visceral involvement
Large blisters
No major
mucous membrane
involvement
Major mucous
membrane
involvement*
Fixed drug eruption
Linear IgA bullous
dermatosis
Skin detachment
<10% SJS
10-30% SJS-TEN
>30% TEN
Fever
Facial edema
Eosinophils
Visceral involvement
Fever
Pustulosis
AGEP
DRESS syndrome
Transfer to specialized unit
Fig. 61.22  Decisional algorithm for SCARs. Clinical features leading to suspicion of a SCAR and decisional 
algorithm helping physicians to classify the SCAR at the first visit. *Most patients with SJS or TEN have more 
than two affected mucous membranes. AGEP, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis; DRESS, drug 
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; IgA, immunoglobulin A; SCAR, severe cutaneous adverse 
reaction; SJS, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis. (From Duong TA, Valeyrie-­
Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs. Lancet. 2017;390:1996–2011 
[Fig. 2, p. 2003].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1180
SECTION 12  Dermatology
condition is labeled SJS/TEN overlap; TEN refers to cases with more 
than 30% body surface involvement.
SJS is a unique hypersensitivity reaction. Although many factors 
have been implicated in the origin of SJS/TEN, medications are the 
most common causes in children. In particular, sulfonamides, anticon­
vulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenobarbital), and 
NSAIDs are cited as some of the most common triggers. The nature of 
the reaction is not clearly understood but is believed to be a cytotoxic 
immune reaction aimed at the destruction of keratinocytes express­
ing drug-­related antigens. In children, infections are also associated 
with SJS. Classifications such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae–induced 
rash and mucositis (MIRM) and reactive infectious mucocutaneous 
eruption (RIME) have been used when children have documented M. 
pneumoniae or other infection with predominant mucosal involvement 
and limited cutaneous involvement. Patients with this mucocutane­
ous hypersensitivity reaction in the setting of infection, referred to as 
MIRM or RIME, tend to have more limited skin involvement than in 
traditional SJS.
SJS usually begins with a nonspecific prodrome (often fever, sore 
throat, and cough) followed by generalized blisters, erosions, ery­
thema, and hemorrhagic crusting of mucous membranes of the mouth, 
nose, eyes, and/or genitalia as well as the trunk and extremities (see 
Fig. 61.20). The prodrome associated with SJS can be difficult to dis­
tinguish from symptoms of an infection that might precipitate RIME.
To make a diagnosis of SJS, at least two mucous membranes must be 
involved. The nomenclature surrounding and the distinction between 
EM major and SJS are controversial as both have skin and mucosal 
involvement. Lesions in SJS are usually roundish, irregularly shaped, 
and less targetoid with numerous erythematous to violaceous macules 
Fig. 61.23  Toxic epidermal necrolysis begins with diffuse, hot ery­
thema. In hours the skin becomes painful, and with slight thumb pres­
sure the skin wrinkles, slides laterally, and separates from the dermis 
(Nikolsky sign). (From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:725, Fig. 18.9B.)
TABLE 61.11  Delayed Hypersensitivity 
Drug Rashes by Category
Maculopapular Exanthems—Any Drug Can Produce a Rash 
7–10 Days After the First Dose
Allopurinol
Antibiotics: penicillin, ampicillin, sulfonamides
Antiepileptics: phenytoin, phenobarbital
Antihypertensives: captopril, thiazide diuretics
Contrast dye: iodine
Gold salts
Hypoglycemic drugs
Meprobamate
Phenothiazines
Quinine
Drug Rash with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms 
(DRESS)
Anticonvulsants: phenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, lamotrigine
Antibiotics: sulfonamides, minocycline, dapsone, ampicillin, ethambutol, 
isoniazid, linezolid, metronidazole, rifampin, streptomycin, vancomycin
Antihypertensives: amlodipine, captopril
Antidepressants: bupropion, fluoxetine
Allopurinol
Celecoxib
Ibuprofen
Phenothiazines
Erythema Multiforme/Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome/Toxic 
Epidermal Necrolysis
Sulfonamides, phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, allopurinol, amikacin, 
phenothiazines
Toxic epidermal necrolysis: same as for erythema multiforme but also 
acetazolamide, gold, nitrofurantoin, pentazocine, tetracycline, quinidine
Acute Generalized Exanthematous Pustulosis (AGEP)
Antibiotics: penicillins, macrolides, cephalosporins, clindamycin, imipenem, 
fluoroquinolones, isoniazid, vancomycin, minocycline, doxycycline, 
linezolid
Antimalarials: chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine
Antifungals: terbinafine, nystatin
Anticonvulsants: carbamazepine
Calcium channel blockers
Furosemide
Systemic corticosteroids
Protease inhibitors
Collagen Vascular or Lupus-­Like Reactions
Procainamide, hydralazine, phenytoin, penicillamine, trimethadione, 
methyldopa, carbamazepine, griseofulvin, nalidixic acid, oral contraceptives, 
propranolol
Erythema Nodosum
Oral contraceptives, penicillin, sulfonamides, diuretics, gold, clonidine, 
propranolol, opiates
Fixed drug reactions: phenolphthalein, barbiturates, gold, sulfonamides, 
meprobamate, penicillin, tetracycline, analgesics
From Duvic M. Urticaria, drug hypersensitivity rashes, nodules and 
tumors, and atrophic diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. 
Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2635, 
Table 411-­3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1181
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
and papules with dusky centers. The macules may then quickly prog­
ress to bullae with skin necrosis. Involvement usually begins more 
proximally, with a predilection for the face, chest, and neck. There is 
a striking tendency for coalescence, reminiscent of a diffuse erythema. 
The eruption in SJS is more generalized and tends to be more truncally 
distributed than that of EM major.
Histopathologic findings in SJS are characterized by prominent 
epidermal necrosis with minimal inflammation. Epidermal injury and 
subepidermal separation may be observed as the result of full-­thickness 
necrosis. Spongiosis and dermal edema are usually absent.
TEN is the most severe hypersensitivity reaction, with an estimated 
mortality rate as high as 20%. Patients experience tender erythema of 
the skin that progresses rapidly to blistering and skin fragility with 
subsequent denudation. Malaise and prolonged fever often accom­
pany these skin changes. Sheets of necrotic epidermis may slough off 
and leave denuded patches in areas of pressure, such as the back and 
shoulders (see Fig. 61.23). Mucous membranes are typically involved, 
and lesions are similar to those seen in SJS with flaccid, hemorrhagic 
blisters. In severe cases of TEN, sheets of necrotic epidermis may 
include skin appendages such as fingernails and toenails.
Systemic signs such as fever, weakness, and arthralgia occur com­
monly. SJS/TEN may be complicated by dehydration, electrolyte imbal­
ance, and bacterial infection that can progress to septic shock. TEN is 
often accompanied by a systemic toxic state with increased morbidity 
and mortality. Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomeg­
aly may be present. Internal organ involvement, manifesting as tracheal 
and bronchial symptoms, pneumonitis, hepatitis, acute kidney injury, 
myocarditis, confusion, and coma, can be prominent in TEN.
Supportive therapy is the mainstay of treatment. Removal of the offend­
ing medication or triggering factor is of utmost importance. Careful oph­
thalmologic monitoring is necessary because corneal scarring may lead to 
blindness. Affected patients are cared for as if they sustained a severe burn; 
fluid and electrolyte balance, temperature control, protein loss, and preven­
tion of infection are serious concerns. Affected children usually require ini­
tial management in a pediatric intensive care unit or burn center. A number 
of immunosuppressants or immunomodulators have been used. Systemic 
corticosteroids remain a topic of controversy with efficacy varying and 
reports of increased morbidity and mortality. Cyclosporine use has demon­
strated decreased morbidity and mortality for SJS/TEN, and tumor necrosis 
factor-­α (TNF-­α) inhibitors have shown promise in early studies.
With meticulous supportive care, most children survive; however, 
there is a high morbidity. Poor prognostic factors include neutropenia, 
impaired renal function, and extensive skin lesions. Recovery is slow; 
skin lesions require several weeks to heal, depending on the extent of 
involvement. Scarring and stricture formation may occur at mucosal 
sites, as may postinflammatory hypo-­ or hyperpigmentation.
BULLOUS LESIONS
Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) (Table 61.18) is an exfo­
liative dermatitis produced by staphylococcal epidermolytic toxins 
Fig. 61.24  Nickel contact dermatitis. Wrist lesions in the distribution of 
the nickel bracelet clasp. (From Cohen BA, Davis HW, Gehris RP. Der­
matology. In: Zitelli BJ, et al., eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:299–368.)
Fig. 61.25  Acute urticaria. Giant annular urticaria with large, bizarre 
shapes. (From Lee AD, Jorizzo JL. Acute urticaria. In: Dermatologic 
Signs of Internal Disease. 2009:53–62.)
TABLE 61.12  Urticaria vs Erythema 
Multiforme
Urticaria
Erythema Multiforme
Transient lesions: usually last for 
hours
Asymmetric, variable, and bizarre 
shapes
Can enlarge to multiple centimeters
No epidermal change: may have 
central clearing
Continued appearance of new 
lesions
Associated edema of hands/feet, 
eyelids
Generalized
Fixed lesions: lasting several days 
in the same location
Usually round or oval
Typically less than a few 
centimeters
Epidermal change: usually central 
necrosis, duskiness, blistering or 
crusting
All lesions present within first few 
days
No edema
Acral distribution
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1182
SECTION 12  Dermatology
associated with S. aureus phage group II. The condition is most com­
mon in children younger than 5 years. The condition may be localized, 
as in the case of bullous impetigo, or become more generalized as the 
result of hematogenous spread of the epidermolytic toxin from local­
ized sites of infection. The diagnosis of SSSS should be considered in 
children with generalized tender erythema. The onset of the erythema 
may be preceded by fever, skin tenderness, malaise, and irritability. 
The initial sites of involvement are the flexural (neck, groin, and axil­
lae) and periorificial skin. Circumoral erythema with radial crusting 
and fissuring around the mouth, eyes, and nose is characteristic (Fig. 
61.28). A positive Nikolsky sign, the ability to laterally spread a blis­
ter or slough the skin with the application of light tangential pressure, 
is seen in most cases. Flaccid bullae, sheets of desquamating skin, or 
moist red erosions may be present, with the desquamation phase typ­
ically beginning 2–5 days after the onset of erythema. As the desqua­
mation is superficial, healing without residual scarring occurs within 
1–2 weeks. The diagnosis is usually established from the clinical pre­
sentation with the lack of mucosal involvement differentiating between 
SJS/TEN. S. aureus may be isolated from a minority of blood cultures. 
The organism is more likely to be isolated from distant sites, such as 
the nares, throat, and conjunctivae, than from the bullae themselves. In 
some children, the toxin may be produced by an underlying infection, 
such as pneumonia, osteomyelitis, or septic arthritis.
Localized SSSS or bullous impetigo is typically responsive to oral 
antibiotics. Children with widespread involvement usually require hos­
pitalization and treatment with intravenous antistaphylococcal antibi­
otics with antibiotic choice to be based on local resistance patterns to 
account for the prevalence of methicillin resistance. Clindamycin may 
be added to inhibit bacterial protein (i.e., toxin) synthesis. Supportive 
management should be undertaken with close monitoring for fluid and 
electrolyte imbalances, signs of sepsis, or underlying focal infections. 
The skin should be handled very carefully, and adhesive bandages 
should be avoided. Application of an emollient in the desquamation 
phase may help lubricate the skin and reduce discomfort. Pain control 
is frequently necessary. The prognosis is good in immunocompetent 
children.
Epidermolysis Bullosa
Epidermolysis bullosa is a heterogeneous group of inherited blistering 
disorders characterized by spontaneous and post-traumatic bulla for­
mation (see Chapter 60). It is estimated to occur in approximately 1 
in 50,000 births; the severe variants are seen less frequently. There are 
several distinct variants that are distinguished by the inheritance pat­
tern, cutaneous manifestations, histologic findings, and ultrastructural 
abnormalities.
In epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS), the level of blister cleav­
age is intraepidermal (see Fig. 61.3). This form results from a defect 
in the basal cell keratins 5 and 14, which have been localized to chro­
mosomes 12 and 17, respectively, and which are necessary for epider­
mal integrity. Most of the simplex forms are relatively mild and are 
autosomal dominant conditions. Bullae formation may be localized or 
generalized, but it is usually worst in areas of frequent trauma, such as 
the hands, feet, and joints.
In the localized form of EBS (formerly Weber-­Cockayne), blisters 
are usually confined to the hands and feet and develop after significant 
friction or trauma. This form may not become apparent until adoles­
cence or adulthood and may manifest after strenuous activities such as 
hiking, military training, or golf. There are also generalized forms of 
EBS in which the bullae are much more extensive and usually apparent 
at birth and during early infancy. In general, the various EBS subtypes 
TABLE 61.13  Etiology of Acute and Chronic 
Urticaria
Etiology of Acute Urticaria
Foods
Eggs, milk, wheat, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, shellfish, 
fish, strawberries, food additives (direct mast cell 
degranulation)
Medications
Suspect all medications, even topical, nonprescription, 
or homeopathic (examples include penicillin, aspirin, 
sulfonamides, codeine)
Insect stings
Hymenoptera (honeybee, yellow jacket, hornet, wasp, 
fire ant), biting insects (papular urticaria)
Infections
Bacterial (streptococcal pharyngitis, Mycoplasma, 
sinusitis); viral (hepatitis, mononucleosis [Epstein-­
Barr virus], coxsackieviruses A and B); fungal 
(dermatophytes, Candida); parasitic (Ascaris, 
Ancylostoma, Echinococcus, Fasciola, Filaria, 
Schistosoma, Strongyloides, Toxocara, Trichinella)
Contact allergy
Latex, pollen, animal saliva, nettle plants, caterpillars
Transfusion 
reactions
Blood, blood products, or IVIG administration
Etiology of Chronic Urticaria
Idiopathic/
autoimmune
Approximately 30% of chronic urticaria cases are 
physical urticaria and 60–70% are idiopathic. Of the 
idiopathic cases approximately 35–40% have anti-­
IgE or anti-­FcεRI (high-­affinity IgE receptor α chain) 
autoantibodies (autoimmune chronic urticaria)
Physically mediated
Dermatographism
Cholinergic urticaria
Cold urticaria
Delayed pressure urticaria
Solar urticaria
Vibratory urticaria
Aquagenic urticaria
Autoimmune 
diseases
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Thyroid (Graves, Hashimoto)
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Autoinflammatory/
periodic fever 
syndromes
NOMID (neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory 
disease)
Muckle-­Wells syndrome
Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome
Cold urticaria, immunodeficiency, autoimmunity as a 
result of PLCG2 deficiency
Neoplastic
Lymphoma
Mastocytosis
Leukemia
Angioedema
Hereditary angioedema (autosomal dominant inherited 
deficiency of C1-­esterase inhibitor)
Acquired angioedema
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
From Lasley MV, Kennedy MS, Altman LC. Urticaria and angioedema. 
In: Altman LC, Becker JW, Williams PV, eds. Allergy in Primary Care. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:232–234.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1183
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
TABLE 61.14  Comparison of the Physical Urticarias
Urticaria
Relative 
Frequency
Precipitant
Time of 
Onset
Duration
Local 
Symptoms
Systemic 
Symptoms
Tests
Mechanism
Treatment
Symptomatic 
dermatographism
Most frequent
Stroking skin
Minutes
2–3 hr
Irregular pruritic 
attacks
None
Scratch skin
Passive transfer, IgE, 
histamine, possible role of 
adenosine triphosphate, 
substance P, possible 
direct pharmacologic 
mechanism
Continual antihistamines
Delayed 
dermatographism
Rare
Stroking skin
30 min to 8 hr <48 hr
Burning, deep 
swelling
None
Scratch skin, observe 
early and late
Unknown
Avoidance of precipitants
Pressure urticaria
Frequent
Pressure
3–12 hr
8–24 hr
Diffuse, tender 
swelling
Flulike symptoms
Apply weight
Unknown
Avoidance of precipitants; 
if severe, low doses of 
corticosteroids given for 
systemic effects
Solar urticaria
Frequent
Various 
wavelengths 
of light
2–5 min
15 min to 
3 hr
Pruritic wheals
Wheezing, 
dizziness, 
syncope
Phototest
Passive transfer, reverse 
passive transfer, IgE, 
possible histamine
Avoidance of precipitants; 
antihistamines, sunscreens, 
antimalarials
Familial cold 
urticaria
Rare
Change in skin 
temperature
30 min to 3 hr <48 hr
Burning wheals
Tremor; headache; 
arthralgia; fever
Expose skin to cold 
air
Unknown
Avoidance of precipitants
Essential acquired 
cold urticaria
Frequent
Cold contact
2–5 min
1–2 hr
Pruritic wheals
Wheezing, 
syncope, 
drowning
Apply ice-­filled 
copper beaker to 
arm, immerse
Passive transfer, reverse 
passive transfer, IgE (IgM), 
histamine; vasculitis can 
be induced
Cyproheptadine hydrochloride, 
other antihistamines; 
desensitization; avoidance of 
precipitants
Heat urticaria
Rare
Heat contact
2–5 min 
(rarely 
delayed)
1 hr
Pruritic wheals
None
Apply hot water–
filled cylinder to 
arm
Possibly histamine; possibly 
complement
Antihistamines; 
desensitization; avoidance of 
precipitants
Cholinergic 
urticaria
Very 
frequent
General 
overheating of 
body
2–20 min
30 min to 
1 hr
Papular, pruritic 
wheals
Syncope; 
diarrhea; 
vomiting, 
salivation; 
headaches
Bathe in hot water; 
exercise until 
perspiring, inject 
methacholine 
chloride
Passive transfer; possible 
immunoglobulin; 
product of sweat gland 
stimulation; histamine, 
reduced protease
Application of cold water 
or ice to skin; hydroxyzine 
regimen; refractory period; 
anticholinergics
Aquagenic 
urticaria
Rare
Water contact
Several 
minutes
30–45 min
Papular, pruritic 
wheals
None reported
Apply water 
compresses to skin
Unknown
Avoidance of precipitants; 
antihistamine; application of 
inert oil
Vibratory 
angioedema
Very rare
Vibrating 
against skin
2–5 min
1 hr
Angioedema
None reported
Apply vibration to 
forearm
Unknown
Avoidance of precipitants
Ig, immunoglobulin.
From Lee AD, Jorizzo JL. Urticaria. In: Callen JP, Jorizzo JL, Bolognia JL, et al., eds. Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009:59, Table 6-­4.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1184
SECTION 12  Dermatology
TABLE 61.15  Febrile Autoinflammatory Diseases Causing Urticaria in Children
Disease
Gene (Protein)
Inheritance
Attack Length
Timing of Onset
Cutaneous Features
Extracutaneous Clinical Features
FCAS
NLRP3  (cryopyrin)
AD
Brief; minutes to 3 days
Neonatal or infantile
Cold-­induced urticaria
 • Arthralgia
 • Conjunctivitis
 • Headache
Muckle-­Wells syndrome
NLRP3  (cryopyrin)
AD
1–3 days
Neonatal, infantile, 
childhood (can be 
later)
Widespread urticaria
 • Arthralgia/arthritis
 • Sensorineural hearing loss
 • Conjunctivitis/episcleritis
 • Headache
 • Amyloidosis
Chronic infantile 
neurologic cutaneous 
articular syndrome/
neonatal-­onset 
multisystem 
inflammatory 
disease
NLRP3  (cryopyrin)
AD
Continuous flares
Neonatal or infantile
Widespread urticaria
 • Deforming osteoarthropathy, epiphyseal 
overgrowth
 • Sensorineural hearing loss
 • Dysmorphic facies
 • Chronic aseptic meningitis, headaches, 
papilledema, seizures
 • Conjunctivitis/uveitis, optic atrophy
 • Growth retardation
 • Developmental delay
 • Amyloidosis
HIDS
MVK  (mevalonate 
kinase)
AR
3–7 days
Infancy (<2 yr)
 • Intermittent morbilliform or urticarial 
rash
 • Aphthous mucosal ulcers
 • Erythema nodosum
 • Arthralgia/arthritis
 • Cervical lymphadenopathy
 • Severe abdominal pain
 • Diarrhea/vomiting
 • Headache
 • Elevated IgD and IgA antibody levels
 • Elevated urine mevalonic acid during attacks
Tumor necrosis factor 
receptor–associated 
periodic syndrome
TNFRSF1A  (TNFR1)
AD
>7 days
Childhood
 • Intermittent migratory erythematous 
macules and edematous plaques 
overlying areas of myalgia, often on limbs
 • Periorbital edema
 • Migratory myalgia
 • Conjunctivitis
 • Serositis
 • Amyloidosis
Systemic-­onset juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis
Polygenic
Varies
Daily (quotidian)
Peak onset at 1–6 yr
 • Nonfixed erythematous rash, may be 
urticarial
 • With or without dermatographism
 • With or without periorbital edema
 • Polyarthritis
 • Myalgia
 • Hepatosplenomegaly
 • Lymphadenopathy
 • Serositis
PLAID
PLCG2
AD
N/A
Infancy
 • Urticaria induced by evaporative 
cooling
 • Ulcers in cold-­exposed areas
 • Allergies
 • Autoimmune disease
 • Recurrent sinopulmonary infections
 • Elevated IgE antibody levels
 • Decreased IgA and IgM antibody levels
 • Often elevated antinuclear antibody titers
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; FCAS, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome; HIDS, hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome; Ig, immunoglobulin; PLAID, PLCγ2-­associated 
antibody deficiency and immune disregulation.
From Youssef MJ, Chiu YE. Eczema and urticaria as manifestations of undiagnosed and rare diseases. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2017;64(1):39–56 (Table 2, pp. 49–50).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1185
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
Urticaria/
angioedema
Chronic >6-8 wk
Inflammatory
Autoimmune
Thyroid
syndrome
Postviral
Vasculitis
Malignancy
Physical
Food/
scornbroid
Medication
Medication
Photo-
dermatitis
Mast cell
activation
syndrome
NSAID/
leukotriene
Contrast
dye
Toxin/anaphylactoid
Complement
Infectious/
serum sickness
Urticaria
Angioedema
Spontaneous
Spontaneous
Hereditary
Hereditary
Cold
Heat
Vibratory/
other
Food
Allergic/
IgE
Systemic
Cutaneous/
contact
Fig. 61.26  Phenotypic classification of urticaria and angioedema. This figure is intended to provide a frame­
work for clinical use based on the author’s and others’ experience that most presentations of urticaria and 
angioedema can be grouped in distinct categories that can predict prognosis and response to therapy. IgE, 
immunoglobulin E; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. (From Dreyfus DH. Differential diagnosis 
of chronic urticaria and angioedema based on molecular biology, pharmacology, and proteomics. Immunol 
Allergy Clin North Am. 2017;37[1]:201–215.)
TABLE 61.16  Diseases Related to Urticaria
Disease
Clinical Features
Histopathology
Urticarial vasculitis
Urticarial lesions >24 hr; residual purpura; more painful than 
pruritic angioedema in ≤40%; systemic symptoms: fever, 
arthralgia, arthritis, malaise, lymphadenopathy, and renal 
and liver involvement
Subtle findings; fibrinoid necrosis of vessel walls, karyorrhexis, 
extravasation of red blood cells, and endothelial swelling
Serum sickness–like reactions
Urticarial lesions >24 hr; fever, arthralgia, myalgia, arthritis, 
lymphadenopathy, glomerulonephritis, myocarditis, and 
neuritis; 1–2 wk after antigen exposure (heterologous 
serum, or certain infections or drugs)
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Mastocytosis
Urticarial lesions; reddish-­brown macules and papules; 
positive Darier sign (urticarial reaction elicited by stroking 
lesion)
Uniformly spaced mast cells filling papillary dermis with or 
without reticular dermis; scattered eosinophils
Sweet syndrome (acute febrile 
neutrophilic dermatosis)
Urticarial plaques >24 hr; fever, leukocytosis; systemic 
symptoms: arthralgia, malaise, headache, and myalgia
Dense neutrophilic infiltrate in the papillary dermis; 
pronounced dermal edema
Bullous pemphigoid
Elderly patients; multiple, erythematous, urticarial, pruritic 
plaques with or without tense blisters
Subepidermal band of inflammatory infiltrate, with an 
abundance of eosinophils; perilesional DIF: linear 
complement 3 with or without immunoglobulin G at the BMZ
Insect bites
Long-­standing urticarial lesions; central punctum
Variable; intraepidermal and papillary dermal edema; wedge-­
shaped perivascular and interstitial infiltrate: lymphocytes, 
eosinophils, and neutrophils
BMZ, basement membrane zone; DIF, direct immunofluorescence.
From Anita C, Baquerizo K, Korman A, et al. Urticaria: a comprehensive review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;79:599–614 (Table VIII, p. 609).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1186
SECTION 12  Dermatology
are characterized by bullae that heal without scarring, mild or no nail 
changes, and minimal mucosal involvement. There are usually no asso­
ciated extracutaneous manifestations.
In junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB), the cleavage plane is 
located within the lamina lucida of the dermo-­epidermal junction. 
Most forms are clinically apparent at birth. Inheritance is autosomal 
recessive. The majority of JEB subtypes result from defects in the lami­
nin 5 protein, which localizes to fibrillar structures within the lamina 
lucida termed anchoring filaments. Other JEB variants are caused by 
defects in collagen XVII, an important component of the hemidesmo­
some. There is a wide spectrum of severity across subtypes, ranging 
from moderate involvement to a more severe, often fatal variant. Some 
subsets of epidermolysis bullosa are associated with pyloric atresia; 
the subset resulting from altered expression of plectin is a type of EBS, 
while the subset resulting from altered expression of α6β4 integrin is 
a type of JEB. Individuals with these findings may also develop ure­
terovesical obstruction resulting in recurrent urinary tract infections.
JEB is characterized by widespread bullae that heal with atrophy, 
not scarring. Dysplastic nails, severe oral lesions, and enamel dysplasia 
are common. The most severe variant has been referred to as JEB, gen­
eralized severe (formerly referred to as JEB, Herlitz type). Often fatal 
by 2 years of age, this variant is characterized by exuberant granulation 
tissue on the face and around the mouth. Extracutaneous manifesta­
tions include pyloric atresia, chronic anemia, and laryngeal involve­
ment that often necessitates tracheostomy.
In dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), tissue separation 
occurs below the dermo-­epidermal junction at the level of the lamina 
densa. The lamina densa is made up of anchoring fibrils composed of 
type VII collagen. Individuals with the dystrophic form have qualita­
tive or quantitative abnormalities caused by pathogenic variants in the 
gene for type VII collagen. DEB is further separated into subtypes that 
may be inherited in either an autosomal dominant or recessive fash­
ion. DEB is usually apparent at birth; there is a wide array of clinical 
manifestations, but the condition is generally characterized by nail dys­
trophy and generalized blisters that heal with scarring and milia forma­
tion. In the more severe recessive dystrophic form, affected individuals 
often develop severe interdigital scarring, which results in syndactyly 
between fingers and eventual encasement of the fingers and thumbs, 
a finding known as the mitten deformity; similar changes occur in 
the feet. Severe mucosal involvement is a constant feature of recessive 
DEB, and esophageal stenosis and obstruction are significant causes 
of morbidity and mortality. Chronic malnutrition, growth failure, and 
increased susceptibility to infection may lead to sepsis and death in 
children with this epidermolysis bullosa subset. Affected patients 
have multiple extracutaneous manifestations, as well as a very high 
frequency of aggressive and recurrent squamous cell carcinomas. The 
TABLE 61.17  Precipitating Factors in 
Erythema Multiforme–Like Reaction*
Infection (90% of 
cases)
Viral
Herpes simplex virus (HSV-­1, HSV-­2)
Vaccinia (smallpox vaccine)
Varicella-­zoster virus
Adenovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Cytomegalovirus
Hepatitis virus
Coxsackievirus
Parvovirus B19
HIV
Bacterial
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Chlamydophila (formerly Chlamydia) 
psittaci
Salmonella
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Fungal
Histoplasma capsulatum
Dermatophytes
Medications
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Sulfonamides
Anticonvulsants
Other antibiotics
Allopurinol
TNF antibodies
Taurine-­containing energy drinks
Biologic immune therapies
Exposures (unusual)
Poison ivy
Systemic disease (rare)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Lupus erythematosus
Behçet disease
*Most common causes are bolded.
TNF, tumor necrosis factor
B
A
Fig. 61.27  Target lesions of erythema multiforme with characteristic 
dusky centers on the palms (A) and dorsum of the hand (B). (A, From 
Kliegman RM, et al. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2015:3142; B, from Bolognia JL, et al. Erythema multi­
forme, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: 
Bolognia JL, et al. Dermatology Essentials. Elsevier; 2014:140–150.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1187
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
TABLE 61.18  Childhood Vesicular-­Bullous Eruptions Categorized by Etiology
Entity
Clinical Clues
I.  Hereditary
	A.	Epidermolysis 
bullosa (AR, AD)
Bullae at birth in more severe forms
Localized or widespread
Dystrophic nails in some forms
Bullae induced by trauma, friction; may occur 
spontaneously
Mucosal involvement in severe forms
	B.	Incontinentia 
pigmenti (X-­linked 
recessive)
Crops of blisters at birth or early infancy
Often linear
May have coexistent streaky hyperpigmentation
Eosinophilia
Associated CNS, dental, ocular, cardiac, skeletal 
abnormalities
Girls affected; boys may have Klinefelter syndrome
	C.	Porphyria cutanea 
tarda (AD or 
acquired)
On dorsal hands, other sun-­exposed skin
Heal with milia formation
Increased fragility of skin
Hypertrichosis
	D.	Epidermolytic 
hyperkeratosis 
(bullous congenital 
ichthyosiform 
erythroderma) (AD)
Bullae within the first week after birth
Verruciform scales on flexural surfaces
Hyperkeratosis after the third month
Collodion membrane at birth in some cases
II.  Autoimmune
	A.	Linear IgA disease 
(chronic bullous 
disease of 
childhood)
Onset usually before the age of 6 yr
Sites of predilection: perioral, periocular, lower 
abdomen, buttocks, anogenital region
Annular or rosette configuration of tense blisters: 
“cluster of jewels”
Mucous membranes commonly involved
Spontaneous remission
DIF shows linear deposits of IgA at DEJ
	B.	Bullous pemphigoid
Large, tense subepidermal bullae
Acral involvement common in infants
Oral lesions common
DIF shows linear deposits of C3 and IgG at DEJ
	C.	Pemphigus vulgaris
Flaccid bullae, persistent erosions
Seborrheic distribution
Mucosal involvement very common, usually the initial 
manifestation
Positive Nikolsky sign
DIF with intercellular (desmosomal) deposits of IgG, C3
	D.	Pemphigus foliaceus
Small flaccid bullae or shallow erosions with scaling, 
crusting
Back, scalp, face, upper chest, abdomen; 
photodistribution
Oral lesions uncommon
May resemble a generalized exfoliative dermatitis
DIF shows intercellular deposition of IgG, C3 in 
superficial epidermis
	E.	 Dermatitis 
herpetiformis
Intensely pruritic
Associated with celiac disease
Extensor surfaces of elbows, knees, buttocks, shoulders
Hemorrhagic lesions on palms and soles
DIF shows granular deposition of IgA in dermal papillae
Entity
Clinical Clues
III.  Infectious
	A.	Bacterial
	 1.	Staphylococcal 
scalded skin 
syndrome (SSSS)
Generalized, tender erythema
Positive Nikolsky sign
Occasionally associated with underlying infection such 
as osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, pneumonia
Desquamation, moist erosions observed
More common in children <5 yr of age
	 2.	 Bullous impetigo
Localized SSSS
Transparent flaccid bullae initially, then moist 
erythematous shallow erosions once bullae disrupted
Covered sites of trunk and perineum likely, can occur 
on face and extremities
	B.	Viral
	 1.	Herpes simplex 
virus
Grouped vesicles on erythematous base
May be recurrent at the same site: lips, eyes, cheeks, 
hands
Reactivated by fever, sunlight, trauma, stress
Positive Tzanck smear, herpes PCR
	 2.	Varicella
Crops of vesicles on erythematous base: “dewdrops 
on rose petal”
Highly contagious
Multiple stages of lesions may be present 
simultaneously
Associated with fever
Positive Tzanck smear, varicella-­zoster PCR
	 3.	Herpes zoster
Grouped vesicles on erythematous base, limited to one 
or several adjacent dermatomes
Usually unilateral
Burning, pruritus
Positive Tzanck smear, varicella-­zoster PCR
Thoracic dermatomes most commonly involved in 
children
	 4.	Hand-­foot-and-
mouth syndrome 
(coxsackievirus)
Prodrome of fever, anorexia, sore throat
Oval blisters in acral distribution, usually few in 
number classically, but more generalized eruptions 
or concentration in the diaper area may be seen
Shallow oval oral lesions on erythematous base
Highly infectious
Peak incidence: late summer, fall
	C.	Fungal
	 1.	Tinea corporis
Annular scaly plaques, usually with central clearing
Pustule formation common
Positive KOH, fungal culture
	 2.	Tinea pedis
Vesicles and erosions on instep
Interdigital fissuring
Positive KOH, fungal culture
	D.	Scabies
Interdigital web spaces, genitalia, ankles, lower 
abdomen, wrist
Intensely pruritic; vesicles on palms and soles
Burrow formation
Very contagious
Positive scabies preparation
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1188
SECTION 12  Dermatology
dominant dystrophic forms are usually more localized and have a bet­
ter prognosis than recessive DEB.
It is usually impossible to distinguish the variants of epidermoly­
sis bullosa on the basis of clinical manifestations alone; skin biopsies 
are generally necessary. Immunofluorescence antigen mapping (IFM) 
and/or transmission electron microscopy on newly induced blisters 
are used to begin classifying epidermolysis bullosa subtypes. IFM 
involves use of monoclonal antibodies directed toward the skin 
basement membrane zone and epidermal antigens to determine the 
depth of skin cleavage data and presence of proteins. Genetic analysis 
directed by the results of IFM is recommended for the most precise 
subclassification.
Treatment modalities depend on the severity of the particular vari­
ant. In general, the emphasis is on wound care, infection prevention, 
and elimination or reduction of mechanical factors likely to induce 
blister formation. Topical antibiotics and nonadhesive semiperme­
able dressings may be necessary for recalcitrant wounds. All adhesives 
should be avoided. In patients with the severe variants of epidermol­
ysis bullosa, a multidisciplinary approach is imperative and should 
focus on preventive care. All affected patients should undergo genetic 
counseling.
PURPURA AND PETECHIAE
Purpura refers to the leakage of blood from vessels into the skin 
or mucous membranes and is associated with diverse causes (Table 
61.19). Purpuric lesions do not blanch when pressure is applied. 
Small lesions that are pinpoint-­sized or a few millimeters in diameter 
are called petechiae. Large lesions may be referred to as ecchymoses. 
Raised or palpable purpura is diagnostic of vasculitis and can be seen 
in conditions such as immunoglobulin A (IgA) vasculitis (formerly 
referred to as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, HSP), systemic lupus ery­
thematosus, and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Inflammation and 
destruction of blood vessel walls are responsible for the raised qual­
ity of these lesions. Nonpalpable purpura can be seen with platelet 
abnormalities, leukemia, and other thrombocytopenic conditions 
TABLE 61.18  Childhood Vesicular-­Bullous Eruptions Categorized by Etiology—cont’d
Entity
Clinical Clues
IV.  Hypersensitivity
	 A.	Erythema 
multiforme (EM) 
major
Prodrome of fever, headache, malaise, sore throat, 
cough, vomiting, diarrhea
Involvement of two or more mucosal surfaces; 
hemorrhagic crusts on lips usually present
Target lesions progress from central vesiculation to 
extensive epidermal necrosis; sheets of denuded 
skin may be present
	 B.	Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (SJS)/
toxic epidermal 
necrolysis (TEN)
SJS has <10% body surface involvement
Associated with infection (e.g., HSV, Mycoplasma), 
medications
Extension of SJS involving >30% of body surface
Severe exfoliative dermatitis
Affects older children, adults
Frequently related to medications (e.g., sulfonamides, 
anticonvulsants)
Positive Nikolsky sign
V.  Extrinsic
	A.	Contact dermatitis
Irritant or allergic
Distribution dependent on the irritant/allergen
Distribution helpful in establishing diagnosis
Entity
Clinical Clues
	B.	Insect bites
Occur occasionally after flea or mosquito bites
May be hemorrhagic bullae
Often in linear or irregular clusters
Very pruritic
	C.	Burns
Irregular shapes and configurations
May be suggestive of abuse
Vary from first to third degree; bullae with second and 
third degree
	D.	Friction
Usually on acral surfaces
May be related to footwear
Often activity related
VI.  Miscellaneous
	 A.	Urticaria 
pigmentosa
Positive Darier sign (areas where skin is stroked 
become erythematous, pruritic, and edematous)
Coexistent pigmented lesions
Usually manifests during infancy
Dermatographism commonly seen
	 B.	Miliaria crystallina Seen in the setting of fever or overheating
Clear, 1–2-­mm superficial vesicles occurring in crops, 
rupturing spontaneously
Intertriginous areas, especially the neck and axillae
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; C, complement; CNS, central nervous system; DEJ, dermo-­epidermal junction; DIF, direct immu­
nofluorescence; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IgA and IgG, immunoglobulins A and G; KOH, potassium hydroxide; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Fig. 61.28  Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Perioral crusting 
and generalized tender erythematous skin with areas of desquamation. 
(From Vesicopustular eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatol­
ogy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:104–125.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1189
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
(see Chapter 51); capillaritis (pigmented purpuras); scurvy; viral 
exanthems; and physical exertion. Petechiae on the upper body 
(above the nipple line) can result from crying, vomiting, or coughing. 
Careful clinical examination is important for detecting these lesions 
and establishing a proper diagnosis.
Immunoglobulin A Vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein 
Purpura)
IgA vasculitis, a small-­vessel vasculitis that usually occurs in children 
and young adults, is the most common vasculitis of childhood, with 
most cases occurring between 3 and 10 years of age (Table 61.20). A 
leukocytoclastic vasculitis characterized by perivascular IgA deposi­
tion in affected tissues can involve the skin, joints, kidneys, and gas­
trointestinal tract. Given the seasonality and frequency of preceding 
upper respiratory infections, bacterial (such as streptococcal infec­
tions) and viral etiologies are suspected, although the precise nature of 
the pathogenesis is unclear.
The classic presentation is that of nonthrombocytopenic palpable 
purpura predominantly on the lower extremities and buttocks (Fig. 
61.29). However, urticarial and ecchymotic lesions may appear as well. 
Hemorrhagic bullae and ulcerations can also be present. Edema of 
the hands, feet, genitalia, and face is common. Systemic involvement 
is present in approximately two thirds of affected patients, with angi­
nal abdominal pain, arthritis, and arthralgia being the most common 
extracutaneous symptoms. Arthritis most frequently affects the lower 
extremities; joint effusions are rare. Gastrointestinal features may 
include vomiting, colicky abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, bleeding, 
and, in rare cases, intussusception or bowel perforation (see Chap­
ter 13). Renal involvement is the most serious complication and can 
be manifested by hematuria and/or hypertension (see Chapter 23). 
Affected patients require close and serial monitoring for nephritis, as 
renal manifestations can develop several months after diagnosis.
Diagnosis is typically clinical, but a skin biopsy confirms the presence 
of leukocytoclastic vasculitis in atypical or severe cases. Direct immuno­
fluorescence staining of the skin biopsy specimen reveals IgA deposition 
around the blood vessels in the superficial dermis (see Table 61.3).
Treatment includes supportive care and analgesics for joint pains. 
Systemic corticosteroids may be indicated when there is significant 
gastrointestinal or joint pain as well as renal involvement, but this 
treatment remains controversial as it does not alter the renal prog­
nosis. Systemic corticosteroids are generally not indicated for skin 
involvement alone. The clinical course is characterized by acute 
onset of cutaneous lesions, often associated with fever and malaise. 
Systemic symptoms usually last for several weeks. Recurrences are 
common, but spontaneous resolution almost always occurs. The 
prognosis is excellent, with the primary factor being the extent of 
renal involvement. Mortality is rare and is usually caused by chronic 
renal disease.
Livedo Reticularis, Livedo Racemosa (Retiform Purpura)
Livedo reticularis is an ischemic dermopathy characterized by wax­
ing and waning mottling in a reticular violaceous pattern of unbroken 
rings (branches or nets) with central pallor, most often seen on the 
lower extremities (Fig. 61.30). It is often primary or idiopathic, but, 
on occasion, it may be associated with an underlying systemic illness 
(Table 61.21).
Livedo racemosa (retiform purpura) is associated with an under­
lying systemic disorder (see Table 61.21) and is characterized by per­
manent discoloration of large irregular broken rings (nets, branches) 
with involvement of multiple cutaneous site (trunk, upper and lower 
extremities) (Figs. 61.30B and 61.31).
HAIR LOSS
Alopecia (hair loss) is the most common hair abnormality seen in 
children. Hair loss can have a number of presentations ranging from 
focal patches to diffuse thinning. An accurate history alone can often 
lead to a presumptive diagnosis. Information regarding duration of 
loss, rate of shedding, medications, trauma, family history of hair dis­
orders, symptoms such as pruritus or burning, breakage, and hair care 
is particularly important. The scalp should be examined for the pattern 
and distribution of hair loss, erythema, scaling, scarring, pustules, and 
TABLE 61.19  Causes of Purpura
Infections
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Sepsis
Bacterial endocarditis
Streptococcal infection
Gonococcemia
Meningococcemia
Hepatitis
Atypical measles
Varicella
COVID-­19
Parvovirus 19
Epstein-­Barr virus
Collagen Vascular Diseases*
Lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Hematologic Disorders
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Acute lymphocytic leukemia
Aplastic anemia
DIC
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Clotting factor deficiencies
Warfarin or heparin use
Malignancy
Medications
Aspirin
Corticosteroids
Penicillins
Sulfonamides
Thiazides
Antiepileptics (phenytoin, valproic acid)
Vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyangiitis with granulomatosis
Cryoglobulinemia
Other
Scurvy
Trauma
*Usually livedo pattern.
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; IgA, immunoglobulin A.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1190
SECTION 12  Dermatology
crusts. Abnormal or broken hairs as well as texture, length, and color 
should be noted. Associated abnormalities of the teeth, nails, and sweat 
glands may occur. Hair pulls (gentle pulling on small tufts of hair) 
and microscopic examination of removed hairs should be performed. 
Appropriate tests (KOH, fungal culture, scalp biopsy) may be necessary 
to confirm the clinical suspicions.
It is helpful to determine whether hair loss is acquired or congen­
ital and localized or diffuse. Congenital alopecia usually results from 
aplasia cutis, intrauterine injury, or nevus sebaceous. Five common 
disorders responsible for most cases of childhood hair loss are (1) alo­
pecia areata, (2) tinea capitis, (3) traction alopecia, (4) trichotilloma­
nia, and (5) telogen effluvium.
Alopecia Areata
Alopecia areata is a common disorder that affects all ages, particularly 
children. Although several hypotheses have been proposed, the exact 
cause is unknown though is generally thought to be an autoimmune 
condition triggered by genetic and environmental factors. There is a 
family history of alopecia areata for approximately 20% of affected 
individuals. Clinically, there is acute onset of hair loss that is occa­
sionally preceded by burning or itching of the scalp. In most cases, 
well-­demarcated, localized areas of alopecia result, and the scalp is 
usually normal without epidermal changes. Exclamation point hairs 
are pathognomonic and are caused by breakage of abnormally growing 
hairs. Exclamation point hairs, when pulled out, appear as a tapered or 
attenuated bulb secondary to atrophy of that portion. When the disease 
is active, dystrophic anagen hairs can be easily pulled from the periph­
ery of lesions. Nail pitting, often seen in rows, is seen in some cases. 
Factors that portend a poor prognosis for regrowth include extensive 
loss, early onset, nail involvement, atopic background, and an ophiasis 
pattern (involvement of the temporal and occipital hairline).
Treatment consists of topical and intralesional corticosteroids; top­
ical minoxidil; anthralin; and sensitization to contact allergens. Janus 
kinase inhibitors are currently investigational and may prove benefi­
cial for hair growth. Other supportive measures include camouflage, 
hairpieces, and support groups. In some cases, hair regrows without 
medical intervention. Although the course is unpredictable, about half 
of affected patients have a recurrence.
Tinea Capitis
Tinea capitis (ringworm) is a common cause of alopecia in children, 
although it may not always be associated with hair loss or breakage. The 
“seborrheic” type of tinea capitis is manifested by diffuse scaling without 
scalp inflammation. Alopecia is often not noted, but broken hairs are occa­
sionally present. This type of alopecia is frequently misdiagnosed as dan­
druff. Tinea capitis can also manifest as localized scaly patches, kerions, 
TABLE 61.20  Types of Vasculitis and Associated Skin Lesions
Type of Vasculitis
Blood Vessels Involved
Type of Skin Lesion
Small vessel vasculitis:
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Cryoglobulinemia
Urticarial vasculitis
ANCA associated:
 
• Microscopic polyangiitis
 
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener)
 
• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Churg-­Strauss)
Dermal capillaries, venules, and occasional 
small muscular arteries in internal organs
Dermal small and larger muscular arteries and 
medium muscular arteries in subcutaneous 
tissue and other organs
Small venules, arterioles of dermis, and small 
muscular arteries
Purpuric papules and plaques, petechial macules, 
ecchymotic lesions, hemorrhagic bullae, 
cutaneous infarctions/necrosis
Lesions may be urticarial, especially early
Erythematous, purpuric, and ulcerated nodules, 
plaques, and purpura
Ulcerative nodules, peripheral gangrene
Medium-­vessel vasculitis:
Polyarteritis nodosa
Kawasaki disease
Small and medium muscular arteries in deep 
dermis, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle
Deep subcutaneous nodules with ulceration; 
livedo reticularis; ecchymoses
Large-­vessel vasculitis:
Temporal arteritis
Polymyalgia rheumatica
Takayasu disease
Medium muscular arteries and larger arteries 
(subclavian, renal, and carotid most common in 
Takayasu)
Skin necrosis over scalp
Modified from Sunderkotter CH, Zelger B, Chen KR, et al. Nomenclature of cutaneous vasculitis: dermatologic addendum to the 2012 Revised 
International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018;70(2):171–184.
Fig. 61.29  Henoch–Schönlein purpura. Palpable purpura in the lower 
extremities. (From Kliegman RM, et al. Vasculitis syndromes. In: Klieg­
man RM, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2015:1217.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1191
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
A
B
Fig. 61.30  A, Livedo reticularis. B, Livedo racemosa. (Extracted from Ko CJ. Approach to skin diseases. In: 
Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2602, Table 407-­5.)
and “black-­dot” patches. This latter type features hairs that have broken at 
the surface of the scalp, resulting in a black-­dot appearance. Kerions are 
boggy inflammatory plaques on the scalp that are caused by hypersensi­
tivity to the offending dermatophyte (Fig. 61.32). Pustules and drainage 
are common, but the purulent material is often sterile. Cervical lymphade­
nopathy, fever, and elevated white blood cell counts may accompany ker­
ions. The differential diagnosis of tinea capitis includes psoriasis, alopecia 
areata, trichotillomania, folliculitis, and seborrheic dermatitis.
The most common etiologic agent of tinea capitis is Trichophyton 
tonsurans, a dermatophyte that produces endothrix infections. Because 
spores are not present on the surfaces of the hair shafts, Wood lamp 
examination is not useful. If the infection is caused by Microsporum 
canis or another dermatophyte that produces an ectothrix infection, 
Wood lamp examination results in positive fluorescence (see Table 61.2). 
Fungal cultures should be performed in all suspected cases of tinea capi­
tis. Fungal culture can be performed with a standard toothbrush and 
Petri dish. KOH preparations can be useful if positive, but false-­negative 
results are common. Some children may be asymptomatic carriers.
Traditional therapy consists of oral griseofulvin for 6–8 weeks. Sele­
nium sulfide 2.5% shampoo or 2% ketoconazole shampoo should be 
TABLE 61.21  Pathologic Livedo Reticularis and Livedo Racemosa (Retiform Purpura) with 
Systemic Associations
Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome
Sneddon Syndrome
Autoimmune Disease/Vasculitis
SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, dermatomyositis, scleroderma
Small-­ and medium-­vessel vasculitis (microscopic polyangiitis, SLE/RA-­
associated vasculitis, systemic and cutaneous PAN, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, ADA-­2 deficiency)
Sarcoidosis
Medications
Amantadine
Gemcitabine
Minocycline
Pressors (ergotamines, epinephrine/catecholamines, amphetamines, 
cocaine)
Lopinavir and aripiprazole combination
α and β interferons
Quinidine
Warfarin necrosis
Heparin necrosis
Hematologic/Thrombosis
Cryopathies (cryoglobulinemia, cryofibrinogenemia, cold agglutinins) and 
paraproteinemias
Myeloproliferative syndromes
Pernicious anemia
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Hematologic/Thrombosis— cont’d
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Livedoid vasculopathy
Vessel Wall Disorders/Emboli
Calciphylaxis
Primary hyperoxaluria
Athero (cholesterol) emboli/septic emboli
Atrial myxoma
Infections
Various bacteria, spirochetes, rickettsiae, viruses, malaria, Strongyloides, 
COVID-­19
Neurologic Disorders
Dysautonomias
Complex regional pain syndrome
Paraplegia, stroke, multiple sclerosis
Divry–van Bogaert syndrome
Migraine
Neoplasia
Multiple myeloma, lymphoma, leukemia
Miscellaneous
Anorexia nervosa, chronic pancreatitis, homocystinuria, congenital 
hypogammaglobulinemia, premature PAD, intralymphatic histiocytosis, 
erythema ab igne, brown recluse spider bite
ADA, adenosine deaminase; PAD, peripheral arterial disease; PAN, polyarteritis nodosa; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1192
SECTION 12  Dermatology
used to decrease surface spores and reduce spread to other individuals. 
On occasion, there is a secondary bacterial infection that necessitates 
antibiotic therapy. Kerions typically respond to griseofulvin, but in 
severe cases, systemic corticosteroids may be added to decrease inflam­
mation and reduce the risk of scarring. Antifungal agents that may be 
useful include oral fluconazole, itraconazole, and terbinafine. Incision 
and drainage are not indicated. A follow-­up fungal culture may be 
obtained to confirm adequacy of treatment.
Traction Alopecia
Traction alopecia is seen in individuals whose hair is tightly braided 
or pulled into ponytails or cornrows for long periods of time. Chronic 
tension on the hair shafts leads to breakage and gradual hair loss, 
often most easily visualized at the frontotemporal hairline. Hairstyle 
procedures such as straightening or weaving may also result in hair 
breakage if performed improperly. Physical examination reveals linear 
areas of hair loss at the part line or throughout the scalp. The alopecia 
is reversible in most cases. However, if the traction is maintained for 
years, the alopecia may become permanent secondary to scarring. 
Treatment is aimed at avoiding all tension-­producing trauma. The 
patient should be advised to stop all hair chemical procedures, wear 
loose styles with no braids, avoid wearing heavy objects in the hair or 
ponytails, and handle hair as gently as possible.
Trichotillomania
In trichotillomania, individuals pull, break, or twist hair from the scalp, 
eyebrows, eyelashes, and/or pubic hair. In younger children, this form 
of hair pulling is usually a harmless habit that is outgrown. Trichotillo­
mania in older children and adolescents may represent a more serious 
psychologic problem with a less favorable prognosis. Psychiatric assis­
tance may be required, and the disorder may be refractory to treatment. 
On physical examination, there are hairs of varying length in bizarre, 
often geometric, patterns. The occiput is often spared. Treatment is 
aimed at identifying underlying psychologic stressors. Supportive ther­
apy and psychologic and/or psychiatric evaluation are usually needed.
Telogen Effluvium
Telogen effluvium is characterized by excessive shedding of telogen 
(resting) hairs. This may result from medications, febrile illness, crash 
diets, parturition, surgical procedures or anesthesia, endocrine disor­
ders, or severe emotional stress. A large number of growing hairs enter 
the resting phase, resulting in a threefold to fivefold increase in the 
number of resting hairs. Gradually, these numerous telogen hairs are 
shed over 6–24 weeks. Affected individuals notice increased hair loss 
and sparser scalp hair 2–4 months after exposure to the inciting factor. 
The prognosis for this type of diffuse alopecia is excellent. Patient edu­
cation is important, as is reassurance that regrowth can be expected 
within approximately 6 months. No treatment is indicated.
INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS
Impetigo
Impetigo is the most frequently diagnosed bacterial skin infection. It is 
a contagious superficial skin infection, occurring most often in infancy 
and early childhood. The two major pathogens, S. aureus and group A 
β-­hemolytic streptococcus (Streptococcus pyogenes), can cause lesions 
at any body site.
Nonbullous Impetigo
Nonbullous impetigo accounts for the majority of cases and is secondary 
to infection with either of the aforementioned pathogens. Clinical fea­
tures do not reliably distinguish staphylococcal from streptococcal impe­
tigo. Lesions typically arise on the face or extremities after trauma such as 
insect bites, cuts, and abrasions, or after varicella infection. The primary 
lesion is usually a vesicle or a pustule that develops secondary changes of 
honey-­colored crusting, the clinical hallmark of this condition. In gen­
eral, the lesions are smaller than 2 cm and may be single or multiple (Fig. 
61.33). Although the lesions are generally asymptomatic with little sur­
rounding erythema, regional lymphadenopathy may be present.
The differential diagnosis includes HSV infections, nummular 
eczema, varicella, kerions, and scabies, which all may become second­
arily infected. Nonbullous impetigo usually resolves spontaneously 
within 2 weeks. It is highly contagious to other parts of the body and to 
close contacts, however, and should therefore be treated with appropri­
ate antimicrobial agents.
Bullous Impetigo
Bullous impetigo develops on intact skin and is a localized form of 
SSSS. The initially transparent flaccid bullae are more likely to occur 
Fig. 61.31  Retiform purpura (livedo racemosa) in a child with deficiency 
of adenosine deaminase type 2. (From Eleftheriou D, Dusser P, Kone-­
Paut I. Polyarteritis nodosa. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., 
eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2021:469, Fig. 34.3.)
Fig. 61.32  Boggy, purulent mass of the scalp typical of kerions. (From 
Kliegman RM, et  al. Cutaneous fungal infections. In: Kliegman RM, 
et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2015:3215.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1193
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
on covered body sites such as the trunk and perineum than are the 
lesions of nonbullous impetigo. They can, however, occur on the face 
and extremities as well. Intact vesicles or bullae may be observed, or 
moist, erythematous shallow erosions may be the sole clinical finding 
after disruption of the bullae (Fig. 61.34). Bullous impetigo should be 
differentiated from early SSSS, herpetic infection, allergic contact der­
matitis, burns, EM, and inflammatory bullous diseases.
Impetigo may be treated with topical or oral antibiotics depending 
on the number and locations of the lesions. Topical antibiotics may be 
acceptable for localized disease.
Systemic therapy is indicated for streptococcal infections or staphy­
lococcal infections with an extensive number of lesions or more severe 
soft tissue involvement. One of the more cost-­effective first-­line choices 
includes cephalexin. However, the incidence of MRSA has increased 
dramatically, and local resistance patterns should be considered. If 
MRSA is suspected, initial medication choices include clindamycin, 
doxycycline (over age 8 years), or sulfamethoxazole-­trimethoprim. A 
culture should be obtained, and antibiotic choice should be based on 
susceptibility patterns when available. Recurrent impetigo is often sec­
ondary to carriage of S. aureus. Although intranasal carriage is com­
mon, colonization can also involve the axillae and perineum. Intranasal 
application of mupirocin may eradicate the organism; however, recol­
onization occurs over time. Of note, there are reports of increasing 
resistance with prolonged use of mupirocin. Dilute bleach baths (i.e., 
sodium hypochlorite) may help reduce recurrent skin infections by 
decreasing bacterial carriage.
Potential but rare complications of impetigo include pneumonia, 
cellulitis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, and septicemia. Streptococcal 
infections can also result in scarlet fever, guttate psoriasis, lymphade­
nitis, and lymphangitis. Furthermore, nephritogenic strains of group 
A β-­hemolytic streptococcus can result in poststreptococcal glomer­
ulonephritis (see Chapter 23). The latency period after impetigo is 
approximately 3 weeks. Treatment does not prevent poststreptococcal 
glomerulonephritis but does prevent the spread of the organism to 
other people.
Molluscum Contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum, caused by a large DNA poxvirus, is most 
often seen in children and adolescents. The characteristic well-­
circumscribed, skin-­colored to pearly papules usually arise in crops on 
the face, trunk, and extremities but have a predilection for the axillary, 
antecubital, and crural regions (Fig. 61.35). Generally ranging in size 
from 1 to 5 mm, these asymptomatic papules have a central umbilica­
tion, often with a central core. In some individuals, eczematous changes 
develop at sites of the molluscum lesions, probably representative of a 
delayed hypersensitivity response. This so-­called molluscum dermati­
tis may be localized or more extensive, is not an uncommon finding, 
and in fact may be more prominent on examination than the mollus­
cum papules, which are occasionally missed. The associated eczem­
atous dermatitis may resemble nummular eczema or tinea corporis. 
Molluscum lesions often become inflamed or appear infected shortly 
before spontaneous involution. Diagnosis is typically clinical; however, 
skin biopsies or microscopic examination of the cores of the lesions 
Fig. 61.33  Multiple honey-­colored crusted lesions of impetigo. (From 
Kliegman RM, et al. Cutaneous bacterial infections. In: Kliegman RM, 
et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2015:3203.)
Fig. 61.34  Thin-­walled vesicles and shallow erosions with surround­
ing erythema seen with bullous impetigo. (From Paller AS, Mancini 
AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015:334–359.)
Fig. 61.35  The characteristic umbilicated lesions of molluscum conta­
giosum. (From Nodules and tumors. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Derma­
tology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1194
SECTION 12  Dermatology
can confirm the diagnosis by revealing molluscum bodies, which are 
masses of virus-­infected epidermal cells. The condition should be dif­
ferentiated from warts, closed comedones, and milia.
Molluscum contagiosum is both contagious and autoinoculable. 
The incubation period ranges from 2 weeks to 6 months, and multiple 
family members are often affected. Immunosuppressed persons are at 
risk for more aggressive disease, especially patients infected with HIV. 
Patients with pre-­existing atopic dermatitis are also at greater risk for 
widespread molluscum.
Treatment options include curettage, topical cantharidin, liquid 
nitrogen, immunotherapy (e.g., with Candida antigen), topical ret­
inoids, and imiquimod cream. Most pediatric dermatologists avoid 
application of cantharidin to facial or genital lesions because of con­
cerns of a possible aberrant reaction. As with other poxvirus infections, 
these lesions occasionally result in scarring or pits as the lesions resolve.
Warts
Warts are intraepidermal tumors caused by human papillomavirus 
(HPV), a small DNA virus, and are present in up to 10% of the general 
population. There are more than 200 types of HPV. The virus produces 
four major types of warts: common, flat, plantar, and genital (condy­
loma acuminatum). The incubation period generally varies from 1 to 
6 months, depending on HPV type, the size of the inoculum, the site 
of infection, and the host’s immune status. The duration of the wart is 
variable as well; approximately 65% of the lesions resolve spontaneously 
within 2 years. Warts can be spread between persons and between body 
sites by direct or indirect contact. Most warts are located on the fingers, 
hands, and elbows because trauma to these sites promotes inocula­
tion of the virus. Warts also display the Koebner phenomenon, which 
results in linear configurations of lesions at sites of trauma (e.g., from 
shaving or scratching).
Common Warts
Verruca vulgaris, or the common wart, is found commonly on the 
dorsal surface of the hands or fingers, although it may be located any­
where. The lesions may be solitary or multiple and measure from sev­
eral millimeters to more than 1 cm. Varying in color from yellowish 
tan to grayish black, the common wart has a distinct rough, papillated 
surface. Punctate thrombosed capillaries, clinically manifested as black 
dots, may be seen on the surface.
Flat Warts
Verrucae plana, or flat warts, are 2-­ to 5-­mm flat-­topped papules that 
are typically skin-­colored, tan, or brown. They are distributed on the 
face, neck, and extremities. They often appear grouped, especially when 
the Koebner phenomenon has occurred secondary to shaving or other 
trauma. These lesions are most often confused with lichen planus or 
lichen nitidus because these disorders also feature flat-­topped papules.
Plantar Warts
Verrucae plantaris, or plantar warts, develop on the weight-­bearing 
areas of the toes and heels and the midmetatarsal region. The lesions 
are pushed into the skin in such a manner that the verrucous surface is 
even with the surrounding skin. These warts are often very tender and 
may produce significant discomfort with ambulation. Plantar warts 
may be difficult to distinguish from corns and calluses.
Genital Warts
Condylomata acuminata, or genital warts, are fleshy papillomatous 
growths found on the genitalia. In early or mild cases, the only phys­
ical finding may be subtle skin-­colored, flat-­topped papules. Their 
growth can be exuberant in some patients when untreated, resulting 
in cauliflower-­like masses. These genital warts should be differentiated 
from moist papular or nodular lesions of secondary syphilis (con­
dylomata lata). While consideration for the possibility of sexual 
abuse should be given when warts are present in the genital area in 
a child, benign transmission can also occur through vertical trans­
mission at birth, innocent heteroinoculation from a caregiver, and 
autoinoculation.
Herpes Simplex Virus
HSV is a large DNA virus that is divided into two major antigenic sub­
types. Type 1 (HSV-­1) has been traditionally associated with oral and 
nongenital skin herpes infections; type 2 (HSV-­2) is generally respon­
sible for genital and neonatal infections. The clinical lesions are indis­
tinguishable but can be differentiated by serologic and molecular tests. 
HSV infections are categorized as either primary or recurrent. Primary 
manifestations usually follow an incubation period of approximately 
1 week. They range from subclinical infections to localized or gener­
alized vesicular eruptions to life-­threatening systemic infections. Pri­
mary herpetic infections can involve any cutaneous or mucosal surface.
The classic clinical manifestation consists of grouped thin-­walled 
vesicles on an erythematous base (Fig. 61.36). The lesions usually begin 
as papules, which evolve into vesicles or, sometimes, pustules within 
approximately 48 hours. The vesicles rupture and form a crust over 
the next 5–7 days and generally heal within 2 weeks. The cutaneous 
eruption is often accompanied by fever, regional lymphadenopathy, or 
flulike symptoms (see Table 61.18).
After the primary infection, the virus remains dormant until reac­
tivated. Recurrent infections are characterized by localized vesicular 
eruptions and symptoms such as itching or burning at the same site. 
Recurrent HSV infections are usually less severe than primary herpes 
and only occur on keratinized mucosa (vermilion lip, tongue, hard 
palate, gingiva), sparing the buccal or inner labial mucosa. Location 
of these can help differentiate from aphthosis, which frequently affects 
nonkeratinized mucosa. Reactivation of the virus may be triggered 
by sunburn, cutaneous trauma, febrile illnesses, menstruation, or 
emotional stress. Oral antivirals, if administered during the prodro­
mal period before the onset of lesions, may abort or shorten recurrent 
episodes.
Herpetic gingivostomatitis is typically seen in infants and toddlers. 
Multiple vesicles and subsequent erosions develop on the lips, gingivae, 
anterior portion of the tongue, or hard palate. The condition is very 
painful and is often accompanied by inability to eat and drink. Fever, 
irritability, and cervical lymphadenopathy are frequently observed. The 
fever typically resolves within 3–5 days, whereas the oral lesions may 
persist for up to 2 weeks. The lesions may resemble aphthae, which 
Fig. 61.36  A cluster of vesicopustular lesions on an erythematous base 
in herpes simplex virus. (From Vesicopustular eruptions. In: Cohen BA, 
ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:104–125.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1195
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
are usually more localized and are not accompanied by systemic symp­
toms. Enteroviruses may produce similar oral manifestations; however, 
they tend to spare the gingivae and often affect the posterior pharynx.
The test of choice to confirm the diagnosis of HSV infection is PCR 
for HSV. Tzanck smear can suggest HSV but is not specific. Treatment 
is supportive, with an emphasis on pain control and fluid replacement. 
Systemic antivirals may hasten resolution of the lesions and shorten the 
course of the illness.
Neonatal herpes is a potentially fatal infection, often with severe 
central nervous system involvement. Vigilant evaluation to deter­
mine extent of infection, intravenous acyclovir, and supportive care 
are required. Immunocompromised children who develop a herpetic 
infection should receive intravenous acyclovir and be monitored care­
fully for evidence of pulmonary, hepatic, and central nervous system 
involvement.
Another high-­risk group consists of children with underlying atopic 
dermatitis who, if exposed to HSV, are susceptible to rapid spread of 
herpetic blisters. This condition, referred to as eczema herpeticum 
or Kaposi varicelliform eruption, may be accompanied by fever and 
malaise (see earlier, in Atopic Dermatitis). Oral or intravenous antivi­
rals and supportive care are indicated.
Varicella
Varicella (chickenpox) is a very contagious but usually self-­limited 
infection caused by the varicella-­zoster virus. Since the introduction 
of the varicella vaccine, mild and atypical variants of this disease have 
become more common.
Transmitted by close contact and respiratory droplets, varicella has 
an incubation period of 10–21 days. The cutaneous manifestation in 
healthy children is characterized by crops of lesions (usually two or 
three crops of 50–100 lesions each) that initially appear as 2-­ to 3-­mm 
red macules and then evolve through papular, vesicular, and finally 
pustular stages within approximately 24 hours. The vesicular stage has 
traditionally been described as resembling “dewdrops on a rose petal” 
(Fig. 61.37). The presence of lesions in various stages is characteristic of 
varicella. Varicella lesions often appear first on the scalp, face, or trunk 
and then progress to the extremities. All vesicles become crusted and 
resolve over several days. Chickenpox usually heals without scarring, 
except for lesions that have been excoriated or secondarily infected. 
The eruption is usually accompanied by fever, intense pruritus, and 
malaise (see Table 61.18). The exanthem may be more extensive in 
children with skin disorders.
When the diagnosis is unclear, confirmatory tests include PCR, 
immunofluorescent staining, and viral culture. A positive Tzanck 
smear supports the diagnosis but is not specific for varicella. Symp­
tomatic treatment consists of oral antihistamines, aluminum acetate 
soaks, oatmeal baths, calamine lotion, and cool compresses. Lesions 
should be observed for signs of secondary bacterial infection. Antiviral 
therapy is not routinely recommended in otherwise healthy children. 
Oral antivirals, if given, should be administered within 24 hours of the 
onset of the eruption. Immunosuppressed individuals usually require 
intravenous acyclovir.
High-­risk individuals (immunosuppressed, immunocompro­
mised, those with malignancies) who have been exposed to varicella 
should receive gamma globulin prophylaxis as soon as possible. If var­
icella develops in a pregnant woman within 5 days before delivery or 
in a mother 48 hours after delivery, the infant should also be treated 
with gamma globulin prophylaxis. Complications may include vis­
ceral organ involvement, coagulopathy, hemorrhage, pneumonia, or 
encephalitis.
Herpes Zoster
Similar to HSV, the varicella-­zoster virus remains dormant in the dor­
sal root ganglia after initial infection. Reactivation of the virus results 
in the clinical manifestations of herpes zoster, or shingles. The infec­
tion usually manifests as a linear or bandlike papulovesicular eruption 
affecting one or several dermatomes (Fig. 61.38; see also Table 61.18). 
Commonly, there is a prodrome of burning, pruritus, or pain of the 
affected skin that may last several days before the appearance of cuta­
neous lesions. Vesicles become crusted, and all lesions resolve within 
a few weeks. The most common dermatomes involved are within the 
thoracic regions. Up to 10 satellite lesions may be encountered outside 
the primary dermatomes in uncomplicated zoster. An increased num­
ber of satellite lesions is observed in generalized zoster, which car­
ries a greater risk of systemic involvement. Widespread vesicles should 
raise the suspicion of an underlying immunodeficiency disorder.
Immunocompromised patients, especially children with lympho­
reticular malignancies, are at increased risk for zoster and should 
be treated with either oral or intravenous acyclovir. As with HSV 
Fig. 61.37  Lesions in various stages of development including the 
dewdrop on a rose petal appearance characteristic of varicella. (From 
Vesicopustular eruptions. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Phil­
adelphia: Saunders; 2013:104–125.)
Fig. 61.38  A dermatomal distribution of umbilicated vesicles is char­
acteristic of herpes zoster. (From Vesicopustular eruptions. In: Cohen 
BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:104–125.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1196
SECTION 12  Dermatology
infection, lesions around the eyes, nose, and forehead require careful 
ophthalmologic examination. Ocular complications occur in approx­
imately 50% of the patients with ophthalmic zoster. The potential for 
deep keratitis, uveitis, secondary glaucoma, and loss of vision war­
rants prompt ophthalmologic evaluation. Patients with zoster should 
avoid contact with high-­risk individuals who are susceptible to devel­
opment of varicella.
Scabies
Scabies is an extremely common eruption. It occurs in persons of 
all ages and results from infestation of the superficial layers of skin 
by the human mite S. scabiei. The infestation is highly contagious 
and is therefore seen frequently among individuals living in crowded 
conditions. Humans are the only source of the mite, which can be 
passed from one person to another. Fomites can also play an import­
ant role in transmission. In previously unexposed individuals, the 
incubation period varies from 2 to 6 weeks. The incubation period 
is significantly shortened in individuals who have been previously 
exposed to the mite.
Although the morphologic appearance of scabies can vary dramat­
ically, the hallmark lesion is the burrow, a serpiginous or linear papule 
caused by movement of the mite through the epidermis. Although con­
sidered to be characteristic of scabies, the burrow is apparent in only 
a minority of patients. Other typical lesions include papules, vesicles, 
and pustules, the distribution of which is age dependent. Nodules may 
appear during active infection and may persist for several weeks to 
months after treatment; these are common in infantile scabies and on 
the penis and scrotum of affected males. These persistent nodules are 
referred to as postscabetic nodules and may be a manifestation of an 
ongoing hypersensitivity response. In infants, the distribution is gen­
eralized and involves the trunk, scalp, face, neck, axillae, palms, and 
soles. Because the eruption is extremely pruritic, secondary infection 
and eczematization are common, leading to misdiagnoses of impe­
tigo and atopic dermatitis. In affected older children, adolescents, 
and adults, the lesions characteristically involve the volar aspects of 
the wrists, ankles, interdigital web spaces, buttocks, genitalia, groin, 
abdomen, and axillae (Fig. 61.39). Unlike infantile scabies, the lesions 
always spare the head.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by scraping the newer lesions, 
ideally a burrow, with a blade after the application of mineral oil. The 
scraping may be viewed microscopically, and the presence of mites, 
ova, or feces is considered diagnostic. Although the yield may be low, 
suspect lesions should be scraped and an attempt should be made to 
identify evidence of the mite. In prolonged cases of scabies that have 
been appropriately treated, the diagnosis of acropustulosis of infancy 
needs to be considered.
Topical 5% permethrin cream is the treatment of choice for 
infants over 2 months and children. Permethrin cream is applied to 
the entire body from the neck down and thoroughly washed off after 
8–12 hours. Scalp and neck treatment is often necessary for infants. 
This treatment should be repeated 1 week later. Lindane is not rec­
ommended as first-­line treatment for scabies because of its potential 
for neurotoxicity. Six percent sulfur ointment should be used as an 
alternative therapy in infants younger than 2 months and in pregnant 
women. Topical and oral ivermectin are options for resistant infes­
tations. Because scabetic lesions are the result of a hypersensitivity 
reaction, itching may persist for several weeks despite treatment, 
which can be relieved with emollients, topical corticosteroids, and 
antihistamines.
It is critical that all household members as well as close contacts be 
treated simultaneously to prevent reinfestation. All linens and clothes 
should be washed and dried in an electric dryer because heat kills the 
mite. Bulkier linens and stuffed toys can be placed in plastic bags for 
several days. Mites do not survive without a human host for more than 
2–3 days.
Pediculosis
Lice are ectoparasitic insects. Pediculus humanus capitis, the head 
louse, causes the most common form of louse infestation. Because the 
head louse can survive for more than 2 days off the host’s scalp, the 
condition can be transmitted via shared hats, combs, brushes, towels, 
or bedding. On physical examination, the nits (ova) can be found close 
to the scalp on the proximal hair shafts. They appear as small, oval, 
whitish bodies approximately 0.5 mm in length. They adhere tightly to 
the hair shaft and are not easily removed. The nits can be more read­
ily identified by their fluorescence under a Wood lamp. Microscopic 
examination of the proximal hair shaft may further aid in recognition 
of the nits. The infestation is characterized by intense pruritus, espe­
cially at night.
Initial treatment may consist of over-­the-­counter topical applica­
tion of 1% permethrin shampoo or pyrethrin combined with piperonyl 
butoxide products, both of which have good safety profiles. However, 
resistance to these products has been documented. In treatment fail­
ures or known resistance, additional topical agents such as malathion 
0.5%, benzyl alcohol, spinosad, and ivermectin lotions are options. 
Oral ivermectin may be used when lice are resistant to all topical 
agents. However, each agent’s recommended age, weight, and safety 
profile need to be considered.
It is extremely important to wash and dry all exposed bedding and 
clothing on a hot cycle. All combs and brushes should be soaked in 
the pediculicide for 15 minutes, and all items that cannot be machine-­
washed with hot water or dry-­cleaned should be placed in plastic bags 
for 2 weeks. All household members should be treated at the same 
time. Nits must be removed with a fine-­toothed comb after application 
of a damp towel to the scalp.
Candidiasis
Candidal species, particularly Candida albicans, may be considered 
part of the normal cutaneous flora in most individuals. However, pre­
disposing factors such as endocrine or genetic disorders, immunosup­
pressed states, and the administration of systemic corticosteroids or 
antibiotics may allow for overgrowth of this organism and subsequent 
infection. Candidiasis refers to an acute or chronic infection of the 
skin, mucous membranes, or internal organs caused by this pathogenic 
yeast. Other conditions, such as warmth, moisture, and disruption of 
Fig. 61.39  Papulopustular eruption of scabies with burrows visible on the 
palms and wrist of a child. (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In: Cohen 
BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:68–103.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1197
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
the epidermal barrier, further promote invasion and overgrowth. Cuta­
neous candidiasis can have a variety of clinical manifestations, depend­
ing on the site of infection. Some of the most common manifestations 
include (1) oral candidiasis (thrush), (2) candidal diaper dermatitis, (3) 
vulvovaginitis, and (4) paronychia.
Oral candidiasis is a common condition of infancy and in immuno­
suppressed individuals. It is characterized by painful inflammation of the 
oral cavity with multiple, often confluent, white plaques on an intensely 
erythematous base. The disorder usually responds to treatment with 
oral nystatin suspension, which is applied to the oral mucosa 4 times 
daily until 2 days after the lesions have completely resolved. Oral flu­
conazole is another therapeutic option for more extensive or resistant 
cases. Extensive involvement or failure to respond to treatment may sug­
gest an underlying immunodeficiency disease. Cutaneous lesions in the 
intertriginous and diaper areas are frequently coexistent with thrush.
Candidal paronychia manifests with erythema and edema of the 
proximal and lateral nail folds, which is usually not associated with ten­
derness, in contrast to acute bacterial paronychia. The nail is often dys­
trophic, crumbly, and thick. The condition is seen commonly in thumb 
suckers. Treatment with topical antifungal creams with yeast coverage, 
applied nightly under occlusion for several weeks, usually results in 
clinical resolution.
Dermatophytoses
The dermatophytes are a group of fungi that infect the hair, skin, and 
nails and result in a collection of clinical syndromes referred to as der­
matophytoses. The clinical conditions are referred to as tinea (or ring­
worm), and the affected body site determines the name of the entity. 
This group of infections is caused by species of Trichophyton, Micros­
porum, and Epidermophyton. Dermatophyte infections are usually con­
fined to the epidermis.
Tinea Capitis
Tinea capitis is discussed in the section on alopecia.
Tinea Corporis
Tinea corporis is characterized by one or multiple annular erythem­
atous patches that can occur anywhere on the body. The lesions typ­
ically have a papular scaly border and demonstrate central clearing 
(Fig. 61.40). Vesiculation and pustulation, especially peripherally, are 
commonly observed. The borders are usually sharply demarcated. 
Identification of fungal hyphae by KOH examination of scrapings of 
the lesion’s scaly border confirms the diagnosis. Psoriasis, nummular 
eczema, secondary syphilis, the herald patch of pityriasis rosea, and 
the annular plaques of granuloma annulare may resemble tinea 
corporis.
Tinea Pedis
Tinea pedis is diagnosed most often in postpubertal adolescents. 
The clinical manifestation is variable, but multiple vesicles or ero­
sions on the insteps are characteristic. Other findings include fissures 
and maceration of the web spaces and a more treatment-­resistant 
variant of tinea pedis, in which there is generalized scaling of one 
or both soles with extension onto the lateral aspect of the foot. The 
differential diagnosis includes atopic or contact dermatitis, juvenile 
plantar dermatosis, psoriasis, and scabies. The clinician should have 
increased suspicion for tinea pedis if unilateral involvement is pres­
ent. A positive KOH scraping or fungal culture rules out these other 
entities.
Tinea Faciei
Tinea faciei, a dermatophyte infection of the face, is commonly seen 
in children. Erythematous, scaly, and often in a malar distribution, the 
condition may resemble lupus erythematosus but is less symmetric. 
Atopic, contact, and seborrheic dermatitis may have similar cutane­
ous manifestations. The diagnosis can be confirmed by a positive KOH 
scraping or fungal culture.
Tinea Cruris
Tinea cruris, uncommon before adolescence, is an erythematous scaly 
eruption involving the inguinal creases and medial thighs. The erup­
tion is usually symmetric, and sometimes the margins are papular. 
This infection may resemble candidiasis, in which there is also scrotal 
erythema. Erythrasma, an uncommon superficial bacterial infection 
caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum, may also mimic tinea cru­
ris. The coral red fluorescence seen on Wood lamp examination is diag­
nostic of erythrasma, which can be further differentiated from tinea 
cruris by a negative KOH preparation and fungal culture.
Dermatophyte infections of the skin can usually be success­
fully managed with topical antifungal agents such as clotrimazole, 
econazole, ciclopirox, tolnaftate, or terbinafine creams or lotions. 
These medications are applied twice daily for approximately 2–4 weeks. 
They should be continued for several days after clinical resolution is 
apparent. Widespread eruptions or treatment failures may necessitate 
systemic antifungal therapy, such as griseofulvin, fluconazole, itracon­
azole, or terbinafine.
Fig. 61.40  Annular erythematous, scaly plaques with central clearing as seen in tinea corporis. (From Cohen 
BA, Davis HW, Gehris RP. Dermatology. In: Zitelli BJ, et al., eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. Phila­
delphia: Saunders; 2012:299–368.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1198
SECTION 12  Dermatology
Tinea Versicolor
Occurring more frequently in adolescents and adults, tinea versicolor 
is a superficial fungal infection characterized by multiple slightly 
scaly macules and patches located on the upper trunk, neck, prox­
imal extremities, and, on occasion, the face. The macular lesions 
vary in hue (pink, tan, brown, white), hence the name “versicolor.” 
In darkly pigmented or tanned individuals, the macules appear 
hypopigmented; in fair-­skinned persons or during winter months, 
the lesions usually appear tan-­brown. Tinea versicolor is caused by 
Malassezia species, formerly referred to as Pityrosporum orbiculare 
or Pityrosporum ovale, a dimorphic fungus that is a skin saprophyte. 
It is generally present in its yeast form, which does not produce a 
rash. When proliferation of the filamentous form occurs, the organ­
ism produces the characteristic lesions of tinea versicolor. Usually 
asymptomatic or only slightly pruritic, tinea versicolor is primarily 
a cosmetic disturbance that occurs most commonly in warm and 
humid environments.
Although the diagnosis is established by the distinctive clini­
cal presentation, a KOH scraping of the fine scale reveals multiple 
round spores and short, curved hyphae, giving the characteristic 
“spaghetti and meatballs” appearance typical of this disorder. Wood 
lamp examination may demonstrate yellow to yellow-­green fluores­
cence, further supporting the diagnosis (see Table 61.2). The dif­
ferential diagnosis includes postinflammatory pigment alteration, 
pityriasis alba, vitiligo, contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, 
and pityriasis rosea.
Tinea versicolor is a chronic condition. Although usually respon­
sive to therapy, recurrences are common. Application of 2.5% sele­
nium sulfide shampoo to the affected skin can be very effective used 
daily and left on for 10 minutes or left on overnight as a single appli­
cation. Other topical treatments include broad-­spectrum antifungal 
creams or lotions. In extremely widespread or recalcitrant cases, or in 
immunosuppressed individuals, oral treatment with fluconazole or 
itraconazole may be indicated. Having patients exercise after medi­
cating may enhance delivery of the medication to the skin, resulting 
in greater success of treatment. After successful treatment, the lesions 
remain temporarily hypopigmented or hyperpigmented. Prophylaxis 
with weekly use of an antiyeast shampoo or soap may help reduce 
recurrences.
ACNE VULGARIS
Acne is a very common condition in adolescents, but all age groups 
can be affected. Open and closed comedones, inflammatory papules, 
pustules, and nodules are characteristic primary lesions. Scarring 
and sinus tracts are present in moderate to severe forms. Andro­
gens stimulate the hair follicle unit, leading to hyperkeratosis of the 
follicular epithelium and increased sebum production, resulting in 
follicular plugging. The microscopically plugged follicle is clinically 
apparent as a comedo. With further accumulation of keratin and 
sebum, the follicle wall may rupture and elicit an inflammatory reac­
tion as contents are released into the surrounding dermis. Clinically, 
this corresponds to inflammatory lesions ranging from inflamma­
tory papules and pustules to nodules or cysts. Propionibacterium 
acnes, an anaerobic follicular diphtheroid, contributes to the inflam­
matory process.
The diagnosis of acne is a clinical one; skin biopsies and other 
diagnostic studies are not necessary. In some cases of mid-­childhood 
acne (1–7 years of age) or associated signs or symptoms of androgen 
excess (e.g., hirsutism, irregular menses), endocrinologic evaluation 
may be needed to further elucidate the hormonal factors contributing 
to formation of acne lesions. Medication-­induced acne can be seen 
in all age groups; the offending medications include glucocorticoids, 
androgens, hydantoin, and isoniazid. The constellation of synovitis, 
acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis is the hallmark of SAPHO 
syndrome, a rare chronic inflammatory disorder of the bones, joints, 
and skin.
Other acne-­associated autoinflammatory syndromes include PAPA 
(pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne) (Fig. 61.41), 
PASH (pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative hidradenitis), 
PAC (pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, ulcerative colitis), and PAPASH 
(pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative hidra­
denitis). Hyperandrogen states such as polycystic ovary syndrome, 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, SAHA syndrome (seborrhea, acne, 
hirsutism, androgenetic alopecia), and HAIR-­AN syndrome (hyper­
androgenism, insulin resistance, acanthosis nigricans) are also associ­
ated with severe acne.
Treatment of acne varies depending on the types of lesions pres­
ent and individual tolerance to acne medication. Patients should be 
instructed to use mild cleansers and oil-­free, noncomedogenic mois­
turizers, sunscreen, and makeup. Antibacterial soaps and cleans­
ers may help reduce surface bacteria. Topical medications include 
B
A
Fig. 61.41  A, Aggressive ulcerative skin lesions indistinguishable from 
pyoderma gangrenosum seen in a patient with pyogenic sterile arthritis, 
pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (PAPA). B, Cystic acne in PAPA begins 
in adolescence and persists into adulthood. (From Barron K, Kastner DL. 
Periodic fever syndromes and other inherited autoinflammatory diseases. 
In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric 
Rheumatology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:538, Fig. 39.8.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1199
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
benzoyl peroxide, retinoids, antibiotics, and combination products. 
Retinoids are most effective in decreasing new comedo formation and 
promoting expulsion of existing comedones by reducing and prevent­
ing abnormal keratinization of the follicular canal. Benzoyl peroxide 
has mostly antiinflammatory activity as the result of its antibacterial 
activity with mild comedolytic effects and can be used as an adjunct 
to retinoid therapy.
Inflammatory acne, particularly with evidence of scarring, often 
requires the use of antibiotics, either topically or systemically. Oral 
contraceptives may also provide a significant benefit for the treatment 
of acne in women, particularly in those with a perimenstrual flare. 
Nodulocystic acne or recalcitrant severe inflammatory acne is best 
treated with isotretinoin, a synthetic vitamin A derivative. Given the 
restrictions surrounding its prescription and side effects, referral to a 
dermatologist is typically needed to pursue this therapy.
LUMPS AND BUMPS
The presence of cutaneous or subcutaneous nodules and tumors can 
present a diagnostic challenge. They are also a source of great concern 
to parents, who fear the possibility of malignancy. Fortunately, most 
cutaneous nodules and tumors in children are benign, and cutaneous 
malignancies are rare (Table 61.22). Nonetheless, certain genoderma­
toses are associated with cutaneous malignancies (Table 61.23).
Granuloma Annulare
Granuloma annulare is characterized by skin-­colored to mildly ery­
thematous dermal papules and nodules that may expand and coalesce 
into rings. These asymptomatic annular plaques measure 1–4 cm in 
diameter and appear most commonly on the dorsal hands and feet 
or extensor surfaces of the extremities (Fig. 61.42). The centers of 
these lesions usually appear normal but are occasionally hyperpig­
mented or violaceous in color. The overlying epidermis is unaffected. 
Multiple lesions are common, particularly in children. Histologi­
cally, there is dermal infiltration of lymphocytes and histiocytes sur­
rounding degenerated collagen. The eruption is commonly confused 
with that of tinea corporis, but tinea has epidermal changes such as 
scaling, vesiculation, or pustules. Granuloma annulare may be seen 
in all age groups, but at least 40% of cases occur before 15 years of 
age. The etiology remains unknown though may result from a cell-­
mediated immune response. Some cases have been associated with 
preceding trauma, such as insect bites. In adults, granuloma annulare 
TABLE 61.22  Cutaneous Lumps and Bumps: Distinguishing Features
Diagnosed 
Lesion
Usual Onset
Color
Size
Site
Comments
Therapy
Epidermal cyst
Childhood, 
adolescence
Skin-­colored
1–3 cm
Face, scalp, neck, 
trunk
Potential for 
inflammation and 
infection
Elective excision vs 
observation
Dermoid cyst
Birth
Skin-­colored
1–4 cm
Face, scalp, lateral 
eyebrow
When midline, may 
have sinus tract
Elective excision
Pilomatricoma
Any age, 50% before 
adolescence
Skin-­colored, reddish-­
blue, bluish-­gray
0.5–3 cm
Head, neck
Malignant 
transformation 
possible but rare
Elective excision vs 
observation
Dermatofibroma
Adulthood, 20% 
before age 20 yr
Skin-­colored, tan-­
brown, black
0.3–1 cm
Extremities
May follow trauma
Elective excision vs 
observation
Neurofibroma
Occasionally at birth
Usually childhood or 
adolescence
Usually skin colored
Also pink, blue
2 mm to several 
centimeters
Any body site
May be 
associated with 
neurofibromatosis
May see café-­au-­lait 
spots
Elective excision vs 
observation
Juvenile 
xanthogranuloma
Birth, childhood
Yellow-­orange to 
reddish-­brown
0.5–4 cm
Head, neck, 
trunk, proximal 
extremities
Extracutaneous 
lesions involving 
eye, other organs
Ophthalmology 
consult; resolves 
spontaneously
Keloids
Peak between 
puberty and 
age 30
Pink to violaceous
Variable
Any site of injury
Commonly earlobes 
after piercing
Often tender or 
pruritic
Familial tendency
Difficult; intralesional 
steroids, excision
Granuloma annulare Childhood, 
adolescence
Skin-­colored to red
1–4 cm
Distal extremities
May be generalized 
in approximately 
15% of cases
Observe, self-­limited
Topical steroids if 
needed
Lipoma
Puberty, adulthood
Skin-­colored
Variable
May be >10 cm
Any, but usually neck, 
shoulders, back, 
abdomen
Malignant change 
very rare
Observe, excision
Solitary 
mastocytoma
Birth, early infancy
Skin-­colored to light 
brown or tan
Occasionally pink or 
yellowish hue
1–5 cm
Any site, but most 
often on arms, neck, 
trunk
Positive Darier sign
Urticaria with stroking
Usually resolves 
spontaneously; 
antihistamines may 
be helpful
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1200
SECTION 12  Dermatology
TABLE 61.23  Cancer-­Associated Genodermatoses
Disease
Associated Cancer
Clinical Manifestations
Genetics
Basal cell nevus syndrome 
(Gorlin syndrome)
Many basal cell carcinomas 
(mean age of onset 15 yr) on sun-­
exposed and non–sun-­exposed 
areas; medulloblastoma; 
astrocytoma
Many basal cell nevi, palmar and plantar 
pits, jaw cysts, calcification of the falx 
cerebri, ovarian fibromas, fused ribs
Autosomal dominant; PTCH1 gene on 
chromosome 9q22.32
Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 
(Clouston syndrome)
Squamous cell carcinoma of palms, 
soles, nail bed
Normal sweating, total alopecia, severe 
nail dystrophy, palmar and plantar 
hyperkeratosis
Autosomal dominant GJB6 gene
Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica 
(Bazex syndrome)
Basal cell carcinomas of the face 
(second to third decade)
Follicular atrophoderma, localized anhidrosis 
and/or generalized hypohidrosis
Autosomal dominant Xq24–q27
Dysplastic nevus syndrome 
(familial, atypical, multiple-­
mole syndrome)
Cutaneous and intraocular 
melanoma, lymphoreticular 
malignancy, sarcomas
Multiple, large reddish-­brown 
moles with irregular borders and 
nonuniform colors, usually on trunk 
and arms; familial occurrence of 
melanoma
Autosomal dominant genetic 
heterogeneity
Multiple hamartoma syndrome 
(Cowden disease)
Carcinoma of the breast, colon, 
thyroid
Coexistence of multiple ectodermal, 
mesodermal, and endodermal 
nevoid neoplasms; punctate 
keratoderma of the palms; multiple 
angiomas, lipomas
Autosomal dominant; PTEN gene on 
chromosome 10q23.31
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von 
Recklinghausen disease)
Optic pathway gliomas
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
tumors
Fibrosarcomas
Squamous cell carcinomas
Nonlymphocytic leukemia
Pheochromocytoma
Carcinoid meningiomas
Café-­au-­lait spots
Skeletal anomalies
Neurofibromas
Lisch nodules
Axillary freckling
Xanthogranulomas
Autosomal dominant NF1 gene
Sporadic variants in 50% of cases
Neurofibromatosis type 2
Acoustic neuromas
Schwannomas
Meningiomas
Astrocytomas
Neurofibromas
± café-­au-­lait macules
Cataracts
Autosomal dominant NF2 gene
SCH gene on 22q11–13.1
Sporadic variants in 50% of cases
Multiple mucosal neuroma 
syndrome (multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type IIB)
Pheochromocytoma, medullary 
thyroid carcinoma
Pedunculated nodules on eyelid margins, 
lips, and tongue with true neuromas
Autosomal dominant; gene locus 
10q11.2; sporadic variant in 50% 
RET gene
Intestinal polyposis II (Peutz-­
Jeghers syndrome)
Adenocarcinoma of the colon, 
duodenum; granulosa cell ovarian 
tumors
Pigmented macules on oral mucosa, lips, 
conjunctivae, digits; intestinal polyps
Autosomal dominant; STK11/LKB1 
gene on chromosome 19p13.3; 
sporadic variant in 40%
Intestinal polyposis III (Gardner 
syndrome)
Malignant degeneration of colon, 
adenomatous polyps; sarcomas, 
thyroid carcinoma
Polyps of the colon, small intestine; globoid 
osteoma of mandible with overlying 
fibromas; epidermoid cysts; desmoids
5q21–q22 APC gene
Tuberous sclerosis
Rhabdomyoma of myocardium, 
gliomas, mixed tumor of kidney
Triad of angiofibromas, epilepsy, 
intellectual disability; ash leaf macules; 
shagreen patches; subungual fibromas; 
intracranial calcification in 50%
Spontaneous in 75%; autosomal 
dominant in 25%; heterogeneous loci, 
9q34 (TSC1), 16p13 (TSC2)
Epidermolysis bullosa 
dystrophica dominant
Squamous cell carcinoma in chronic 
lesions
Lifelong history of bullae; phenotype 
not as severe as in recessive forms
Autosomal recessive, chromosome 
3p21 (collagen type VII gene)
Epidermolysis bullosa 
dystrophica recessive
Basal, squamous cell carcinoma 
in skin, mucous membranes 
(especially esophagus)
Bullae develop at sites of trauma; present 
at birth or early infancy; may involve 
mucous membranes, esophagus, 
conjunctivae, cornea
Autosomal recessive, chromosome 3p 
(collagen type VII gene)
Albinism
Increased incidence of cutaneous 
malignancies
Lack skin pigment, incomplete 
hypopigmentation of ocular fundi, 
horizontal congenital nystagmus, 
myopia
Tyrosinase positive: autosomal 
recessive, gene locus 15q11.2– q12
Tyrosinase negative: autosomal 
recessive, gene locus 11q14q21
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1201
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
Fig. 61.42  Rings of confluent dermal papules with a depressed cen­
ter typical of granuloma annulare. (From Cutaneous tumors and tumor 
syndromes. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric 
Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016, Fig. 9.58.)
is associated with systemic diseases such as diabetes; in children, this 
association is less robust.
There are several variants of granuloma annulare. Generalized 
granuloma annulare is characterized by many symmetrically distrib­
uted asymptomatic papules. The ringlike lesions may coalesce into 
reticulated or circinate forms. Subcutaneous granuloma annulare con­
sists of single or multiple deep hard nodules on the extremities, but­
tocks, and scalp. The lesions of subcutaneous granuloma annulare are 
most frequently mistaken for rheumatoid nodules; however, the latter 
are usually larger.
Granuloma annulare resolves spontaneously over several months 
to years, often with a waxing and waning course. Although more than 
50% of cases clear within 2 years, recurrences are common. Treatment 
is generally unnecessary, but the use of topical or intralesional cortico­
steroids may hasten resolution.
Juvenile Xanthogranuloma
Juvenile xanthogranulomas (JXGs) are papules, nodules, or plaques 
within the skin that are distinguished by their characteristic yellow 
color, though some lesions may be orange, brown, or red. Lesions are 
solitary or multiple, well demarcated, and rubbery to firm. On exam­
ination, an overlying telangiectasia may be visualized. Lesions vary in 
size, usually from 0.5 to 2 cm, and are commonly located on the head 
and neck region. The differential diagnosis should include Spitz nevus, 
solitary mastocytoma, and occasionally nevus sebaceous. Biopsy 
demonstrates the characteristic histopathologic features of lipid-­laden 
histiocytes and Touton giant cells. Most JXGs are asymptomatic, but 
occasionally they cause pruritus or pain. The lesions may be noted at 
birth or present within the first years of life. JXGs are usually benign, 
and treatment of cutaneous lesions is generally not required. After a 
brief period of growth, the lesion often stabilizes and involutes sponta­
neously in months to years.
Multiple lesions should prompt a search for the rare possibility of 
extracutaneous involvement. The eye is the most common extracutane­
ous site. Lesions may be found in the iris, and JXG is the most common 
cause of anterior chamber hemorrhage in children. The incidence of 
ocular disease in JXGs is approximately 0.4%. Ophthalmologic exam­
ination is recommended if a JXG is present near the eye or if there are 
multiple lesions. Involvement has also been described in other organs 
including the testes, lungs, liver, spleen, heart, and central nervous sys­
tem. An increased risk of juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia has been 
reported in the setting of patients with both neurofibromatosis type 1 
and JXGs.
Erythema Nodosum
Erythema nodosum (EN) is an inflammatory, presumed hypersensitiv­
ity panniculitis characterized by painful, erythematous subcutaneous 
nodules classically affecting both shins and less often extensor sur­
faces of the forearms, thighs, and rarely trunk (Fig. 61.43). Associated 
features may include a prodrome of malaise, fever, arthralgias, or less 
often arthritis. The possible predisposing diseases are noted in Table 
61.24, although in ∼40% no identifiable etiology is detected.
Disease
Associated Cancer
Clinical Manifestations
Genetics
Poikiloderma congenitale 
(Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome)
Cutaneous malignancies
Osteosarcoma
Poikiloderma, short stature, cataracts, 
photosensitivity, nail defects, alopecia, 
bony defects
Autosomal recessive; gene locus 
8q24.3 RECQL4 gene
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Basal and squamous cell carcinoma of 
skin, malignant melanoma
Marked photosensitivity, early freckling, 
telangiectasia, keratoses, papillomas, 
photophobia, keratitis, corneal opacities
Autosomal recessive; gene loci – 
complementation group A – 9q22.33 
XPA gene
group B – 2q14.3 ERCC3 gene
group D – 19q13.32 ERCC2 gene
group F – 13p13.12 ERCC4 gene
Dyskeratosis congenita
Squamous cell carcinoma of oral cavity, 
esophagus, nasopharynx, skin, anus
Reticulated hypo-­ and hyperpigmentation 
of skin, nail dystrophy, leukoplakia of 
oral mucosa, thrombocytopenia, 
testicular atrophy
X-­linked recessive (most common); 
gene locus Xq28 DKCI gene
Modified from Cohen BA. Nodules and tumors. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:127–128, Table 5.2.
TABLE 61.23  Cancer-­Associated Genodermatoses—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1202
SECTION 12  Dermatology
A
B
C
Fig. 61.43  Erythema nodosum. A, Tender, deep-­seated nodules appeared on the shins of a 16-­year-­old girl 
2 weeks after starting birth control pills. The lesions resolved when the medication was discontinued. B, An 
18-­month-­old boy developed (biopsy-­proved) erythema nodosum on the chest and abdomen following a cold. 
The nodules resolved without therapy over several weeks. C, This 15-­year-­old girl developed recurrent biopsy-­
proven erythema nodosum on her shins with flares of her systemic lupus erythematosus. (From Cohen BA. 
Reactive erythema. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:192, Fig. 7.37.)
TABLE 61.24  Erythema Nodosum: Most Common Causes
Bacterial Infections
Streptococcus
Cat-­scratch disease
Campylobacter
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Mycobacterium leprae (histologically distinct)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Salmonella
Campylobacter
Brucellosis
Tularemia
Yersinia enterocolitica
Psittacosis
Fungal Infections
Blastomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Viral Infections
Epstein-­Barr virus
Hepatitis B
Drugs
Oral contraceptives
Sulfonamides
Sulfonylureas
Bromides and iodides
Gold
TNF-­α inhibitors
Systemic Illnesses
Inflammatory bowel disease
Acute myelogenous leukemia
Behçet disease
Hodgkin disease
Löfgren syndrome
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoidosis
Internal carcinomas
Other
Pregnancy
Sweet syndrome
Whipple disease
Behçet disease
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
From Dinulos GHJ. Habif’s Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:727, Box 18.6; and Sunderkotter CH, Zelger B, Chen KR, et al. 
Nomenclature of cutaneous vasculitis: dermatologic addendum to the 2012 Revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature 
of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018;70(2):171–184.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1203
CHAPTER 61  Acquired Rashes in the Older Child
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
While the time course of dermatosis often is variable, one should be 
vigilant to re-­evaluate skin lesions not following the typical course 
to identify skin findings that represent manifestations of underlying 
chronic disorders or life-­threatening disease processes. An ill-­appearing 
child with acute skin findings and systemic symptoms should narrow 
the focus to specific subsets of disease processes. A careful history and 
physical examination can help differentiate between disease processes 
of hypersensitivity such as SJS and TEN, DRESS, and infections (SSSS, 
HSV, meningococcemia) to determine appropriate acute evaluation 
and management of these life-­threatening entities.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1203.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General Overview
Cohen BA. Introduction to pediatric dermatology. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric 
Dermatology. Elsevier Limited; 2013:1–13.
Harper J, Oranje A, Prose N. Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology. London: 
Blackwell Sciences; 2000:629–636, 1743–1752.
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.
Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology. St. 
Louis: Mosby; 2002.
Scaling Disorders
Drago F, Ciccarese G, Broccolo F, et al. Pityriasis rosea in children: clinical 
features and laboratory investigations. Dermatology. 2015;231:9–14.
Eichenfield LF, Lucky AW, Boguniewicz M, et al. Safety and efficacy of 
pimecrolimus cream (ASM 981) 1% in the treatment of mild to moderate 
atopic dermatitis in children and adolescents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2002;46:495–504.
Ersoy-­Evans S, Greco MF, Mancini AJ, et al. Pityriasis lichenoides in 
childhood: a retrospective review of 124 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2007;56(2):205–210.
Goldminz AM, Buzney CD, Kim N, et al. Prevalence of the metabolic 
syndrome in children with psoriatic disease. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2013;30:700–705.
Huang JT, Rademaker A, Paller AS. Dilute bleach baths for Staphylococcus 
aureus colonization in atopic dermatitis to decrease disease severity. Arch 
Dermatol. 2011;147:246–247.
Magna M, Napolitano M, Balato A, et al. Psoriasis in children: a review. Curr 
Pediatr Rev. 2015;11(1):10–26.
McCollum AD, Paik A, Eichenfield LF. The safety and efficacy of tacrolimus 
ointment in pediatric patients with atopic dermatitis. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2010;27:425–436.
Patel D, Jahnke MN. Serious complications from Staphylococcal aureus in 
atopic dermatitis. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015;32:792–796.
Lumps and Bumps
Chang MW, Frieden IJ, Good W. The risk of intraocular juvenile 
xanthogranuloma: survey of current practices and assessment of risk. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1996;34:445–449.
Hamm H, Höger PH. Skin tumors in childhood. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 
2011;108(20):347–353.
Huang JT, Coughlin CC, Hawryluk EB, et al. Risk factors and outcomes 
of nonmelanoma skin cancer in children and young adults. J Pediatr. 
2019;211:152–158.
Keirnig EL. Granuloma annulare. Dermatol Clin. 2015;33(3):315–329.
Khosravi H, Schmidt B, Huang JT. Characteristics and outcomes of 
nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) in children and young adults. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2015;73:785–790.
Marion F, Jean-­François S, Barbarot S. Juvenile xanthogranulomas are highly 
prevalent but transient in young children with neurofibromatosis type 1. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(2):389–390.
Thornsberry LA, English III JC. Etiology, diagnosis, therapeutic management of 
granuloma annulare: an update. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2013;14(4):279–290.
Zvulunov A, Barak Y, Metzker A. Juvenile xanthogranuloma, 
neurofibromatosis, and juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia. Arch 
Dermatol. 1995;131:904–908.
Disorders of Pigmentation
Iannella G, Greco A, Didona D, et al. Vitiligo: pathogenesis, clinical variants 
and treatment approaches. Autoimmun Rev. 2016;15:335–343.
Merkel EA, Mohan LS, Shi K, et al. Paediatric melanoma: clinical update, genetic 
basis, and advances in diagnosis. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2019;3:646–654.
Pinto FJ, Bolognia JL. Disorders of hypopigmentation in children. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 1991;38:991–1017.
Shpall S, Frieden I, Chesney M, et al. Risk of malignant transformation of 
congenital melanocytic nevi in blacks. Pediatr Dermatol. 1994;11:204–208.
Sreeraman Kumar R, Messina JL, Reed D, et al. Pediatric melanoma and 
atypical melanocytic neoplasms. Cancer Treat Res. 2016;167:331–369.
Reactive Erythemas and Hypersensitivity Reactions
Bruce F. Could it be a drug eruption? Aust Fam Physician. 1997;26:689–695.
Canavan RN, Mathes EF, Frieden IF, et al. Mycoplasma pneumonia-­induced 
rash and mucositis as a syndrome distinct from Stevens-­Johnson syndrome 
and erythema multiforme: a systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2015;72(2):239–245.
De A, Rajagopalan M, Sarda A, et al. Drug reaction with eosinophilia and 
systemic symptoms: an update and review of the recent literature. Indian J 
Dermatol. 2018;63(1):30–40.
Gianetti A, Malmusi M, Girolomoni G. Vesiculobullous drug eruptions in 
children. Clin Dermatol. 1993;11:551–555.
Huang YC, Li YC, Chen TJ. The efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin for 
the treatment of toxic epidermal necrolysis: a systematic review and meta-­
analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2012;167:424–432.
Manders SM. Serious and life-­threatening drug eruptions. Am Fam Physician. 
1995;51:865–871.
Schopf E, Stuhmer A, Rzany B, et al. Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome. An epidemiological study from West Germany. Arch 
Dermatol. 1991;127:839.
Sharma V, Beyer D, Paruthi S, et al. Prominent pruritic periumbilical 
papules: allergic contact dermatitis to nickel. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2002;9:106–109.
Sharma VK, Dhar S. Clinical pattern of cutaneous drug eruptions among 
children and adolescents in North India. Pediatr Dermatol. 1995;12:178–
183.
Straussberg R, Harel L, Ben-­Amitai D, et al. Carbamazepine-­induced Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome treated with IV steroids and IVIG. Pediatr Neurol. 
2000;22:231–233.
Viard I, Wehrli P, Bullani R, et al. Inhibition of toxic epidermal necrolysis by 
blockade of CD95 with human intravenous immunoglobulin. Science. 
1998;282:490–493.
Bullous Lesions
Braunstein I, Wanat KA, Abuabara K, et al. Antibiotic sensitivity and resistance 
patterns in pediatric staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Pediatr 
Dermatol. 2014;31(3):305–308.
Dressler C, Werner RN, Eisert L, et al. Chronic inducible urticaria: a 
systematic review of treatment options. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;141:
1726–1734.
Feldman SR. Bullous dermatoses associated with systemic disease. Dermatol 
Clin. 1993;11:597–608.
Fine JD, Bauer EA, Briggaman RA, et al. Revised clinical and laboratory 
criteria for subtypes of inherited epidermolysis bullosa. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 1991;24:119–135.
Frantz GF, McAninoch SA. Mycoplasma mucositis. In: StatPearls [Internet]. 
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021:2020.
Hetem DJ, Bonten MJ. Clinical relevance of mupirocin resistance in 
Staphylococcal aureus. J Hosp Infect. 2013;85(4):249–256.
Maurer M, Fluhr JW, Khan DA. How to approach chronic inducible urticaria. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2018;6:1119–1130.
Mazori DR, Nagarajan S, Glick SA. Recurrent reactive infectious 
mucocutaneous eruption (RIME): insights from a child with three 
episodes. Pediatr Dermatol. 2020;37:545–547.
Niar R, Penencevich EN, Blevins AE, et al. Clinical effectiveness of mupirocin 
for preventing Staphylococcal aureus infections in nonsurgical settings: a 
meta-­analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62:618–630.
Pillay R, Fernando SL. The importance of distinguishing mycoplasma 
pneumoniae-­induced rash and mucositis (MIRM) and Stevens-­Johnson 
syndrome in a clinical setting. Hematol Med Oncol 5. https://doi.
org/10.15761/HMO.1000209.
Rabinowitz LG, Esterly NB. Inflammatory bullous diseases in children. 
Dermatol Clin. 1993;11:565–581.
Tolar J, Wagner JE. Allogeneic blood and bone marrow cells for the treatment 
of severe epidermolysis bullosa: repair of the extracellular matrix. Lancet. 
2013;382(9899):1214–1223.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
1203.e2
Purpura
Dean SM. Livedo reticularis and related disorders. Curr Treat Opt Cardiovasc 
Med. 2011;13:179–191.
Gonzalez Santiago TM, Zavialov A, Saarela J, et al. Dermatologic features 
of ADA2 deficiency in cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa. JAMA Dermatol. 
2015;151(11):1230–1234.
Yang YH, Yu HH, Chiang BL. The diagnosis and classification of Henoch–
Schönlein purpura: an updated review. Autoimmun Rev. 2014;13(4):355–358.
Hair Loss
Atton A, Tunnessen W. Alopecia in children: the most common causes. 
Pediatr Rev. 1990;12:25–30.
Castello-­Soccio L. Diagnosis and management of alopecia in children. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 2014;61(2):427–442.
Muller SA. Trichotillomania. Dermatol Clin. 1987;5:595–601.
Stroud JD. Hair loss in children. Symposium on Pediatric Dermatology. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 1983;30:641–657.
Infections and Infestations
Ahmad HM, Abel-­Azim ES, Abel-­Aziz RT. Clinical efficacy and safety of 
topical versus oral ivermectin in treatment of uncomplicated scabies. 
Dermatol Ther. 2016;29:58–63.
Bangert S, Levy M, Hebert AA. Bacterial resistance and impetigo treatment 
trends: a review. Pediatr Dermatol. 2012;29:243–248.
Chen SF. Staphylococcus aureus decolonization. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2005;24:79–80.
Chen W, Obermayer-­Pietsch B, Hong JB, et al. Acne-­associated syndromes: 
models for better understanding of acne pathogenesis. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Verenol. 2011;25(6):637–646.
Darmstadt GL, Lane AT. Impetigo: an overview. Pediatr Dermatol. 
1994;11:293–303.
Kahn RM, Goldstein EJ. Common bacterial skin infections. Postgrad Med. 
1993;93:175–182.
Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, et al., eds. Red Book: 2015 Report 
of the Committee of Infectious Diseases. 30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: 
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2015.
Meinking TL, Entzel P, Villar ME, et al. Comparative efficacy of treatments of 
pediculosis capitis infestations: update 2001. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137:
287–292.
Nolan K, Kamrath J, Levitt J. Lindane toxicity: a comprehensive review of the 
medical literature. Pediatr Dermatol. 2012;29:141–146.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
