Chapter Title One Line
Chapter Author
818
Arthritis
James J. Nocton
Musculoskeletal complaints are among the most frequent reasons for 
children to present to a primary care office, walk-­in clinic, or emer­
gency room. While the child and parents may be focusing on what they 
perceive to be a localized problem, complaints involving the musculo­
skeletal system (e.g., arthralgia, myalgia, joint swelling, poorly localized 
extremity pain, limping, or refusal to walk) may be associated with a 
long list of potential systemic illnesses. Children or their parents rarely 
arrive in the clinic expressing a concern for “arthritis” or “patellofemo­
ral syndrome.” Instead, they typically describe symptoms such as pain, 
swelling, limping, or other limitations of activity and function. These 
children might have complaints as a result of chronic inflammatory 
arthritis or an associated systemic rheumatic disease, a traumatic or 
overuse condition, a mechanical or anatomic problem, or a pain syn­
drome, among other possible explanations.
The differential diagnosis of extremity pain is extensive (Table 44.1). 
For many of these diagnoses, the history and physical examination are 
sufficient to confirm a diagnosis; for others, specific laboratory tests, 
imaging studies, or rarely tissue biopsy will additionally be required to 
confirm a suspected diagnosis. Musculoskeletal symptoms may indi­
cate pathologic processes isolated to a single extremity or joint, disease 
restricted to the musculoskeletal system, or a systemic illness of which 
the joint symptoms may be just one feature.
Arthritis is a specific sign indicating objective inflammation of the 
joint and can be defined as (1) swelling of the joint or (2) limitation 
of motion combined with one of the following: tenderness, warmth, 
or pain on motion. Arthritis should be distinguished from arthralgia 
(Table 44.2), myalgia, neuralgia, bone pain, cutaneous pain, and allo­
dynia, because if arthritis is present, the diagnostic possibilities are lim­
ited to more specific categories of disease (Fig. 44.1). Arthritis is not 
a specific disease; there are infectious, postinfectious/reactive, hema­
tologic, metabolic, oncologic, and rheumatic causes of arthritis. The 
cause of the arthritis is determined by establishing the characteristics of 
the arthritis, including the number and location of the joints affected; 
the severity, degree of disability, and chronicity of the arthritis; and the 
pattern of any associated systemic signs and symptoms.
HISTORY
Although the parents and child are usually the principal historians, it 
is helpful to determine whether other adults have seen signs or have 
been aware of the child’s symptoms. Have daycare providers reported 
problems to the parents? Has the school staff, coach, or physical edu­
cation teacher noticed any problems similar to those seen at home? 
Obtaining consistent information from several observers in different 
settings determines the frequency and consistency of the symptoms, 
as well as how disabling the symptoms have been, and may often help 
to confirm the reliability of the history. If there are inconsistencies, it 
becomes increasingly difficult to formulate a diagnosis, and informa­
tion from the physical examination, along with potential laboratory 
and imaging studies, may be needed to resolve these inconsistencies.
Pain Location
Pain directly over a joint or joints may indicate synovial inflammation 
(arthritis), arthralgia secondary to viral infection, or mechanical joint 
problems such as joint laxity or ligament trauma. Pain near a joint may 
represent disease in the muscle, bone, tendon, enthesis (tendon inser­
tion sites), or bursa, or may be referred from a nearby joint. There are 
several possible sites of extremity pain (Fig. 44.2). Pain may involve a 
whole limb or limbs, or isolated regions of a limb, in which case it may 
be secondary to neuropathy, myalgia, or a regional pain syndrome. 
Complaints of pain “all over” may suggest diffuse pain related to a sys­
temic illness or, if chronic, an amplified or myofascial pain syndrome. 
Intense pain localized to a single small area is seen with infection, 
trauma, fracture, or tumor. Migrating arthritis or arthralgia is more 
suggestive of diagnoses such as acute rheumatic fever or immune com­
plex–mediated disease (e.g., from infection or drug reaction) and is 
less consistent with trauma, tumors, osteomyelitis, or septic arthritis, 
except for the migratory polyarthritis-­tenosynovitis-­dermatitis seen 
in certain instances of disseminated Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection or 
endocarditis.
Pain Character
Arthritis is an aching discomfort that is usually not severe; some chil­
dren with arthritis may not complain of pain at all. Complete disability 
secondary to arthritis is rare and should prompt a search for an alter­
native explanation. Severe pain should increase the suspicion of a pain 
syndrome or bone disease such as osteomyelitis, leukemia, metastatic 
neuroblastoma, fracture, or bone tumors. Sporadic episodes of extreme 
pain interspersed with pain-­free intervals are seen with pain syn­
dromes such as growing pains, myofascial pain, and complex regional 
pain syndrome, or in situations in which psychologic and behavioral 
factors, such as stress, anxiety, or depression, contribute to the pain. 
Sharp, radiating, or throbbing pain is unusual for arthritis and sug­
gests an alternative explanation such as neuropathic pain, trauma, or 
psychogenic pain.
44
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 44.1  Conditions Causing Arthritis or Extremity Pain
Rheumatic and Inflammatory Diseases
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Polymyositis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Scleroderma
Sjögren syndrome
Behçet disease
Mixed connective tissue disease
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Microscopic polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Sarcoidosis
Kawasaki disease
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (immunoglobulin A vasculitis)
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis)
Autoinflammatory syndromes including familial Mediterranean fever
Juvenile ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Psoriasis
Relapsing polychondritis
Infectious Illnesses
Septic arthritis (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Kingella kingae, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Haemophilus influenzae)
Osteomyelitis
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Viral illness (e.g., parvovirus, rubella, mumps, Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis B and 
C, Chikungunya fever, HIV, human T-­lymphotropic virus-­1 [HTLV-­1], Zika)
Pyomyositis
Fungal arthritis
Mycobacterial infection
Endocarditis
Hematologic Disorders
Hemophilia
Hemoglobinopathies (including sickle cell disease)
Thalassemia
Immunodeficiencies
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Immunoglobulin A deficiency
HIV
Common variable immunodeficiency
Complement deficiency
DiGeorge syndrome
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Congenital and Metabolic Disorders
Gout
Pseudogout (calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease)
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Fucosidoses
Glycogen storage diseases
Thyroid disease (hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism)
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin C deficiency (scurvy)
Vitamin D deficiency (rickets)
Hereditary connective tissue disease (Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)
Fabry disease
Farber disease
Orthopedic Disorders
Trauma
Tendonitis
Patellofemoral syndrome
Hypermobility syndrome
Overuse syndrome
Osteochondritis dissecans
Avascular necrosis (including Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease)
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteolysis
Benign bone tumors (including osteoid osteoma)
Synovial chondromatosis
Idiopathic multicentric osteolysis
Neuropathic Disorders
Peripheral neuropathies
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Charcot joints (neuropathic osteoarthropathy)
Neoplastic Disorders
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Lymphoma
Bone tumors (osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Benign cartilage tumor (e.g., chondroma)
Chondrosarcoma
Histiocytic syndromes
Synovial tumors
Reactive Arthritis
Acute rheumatic fever
Postinfectious arthritis (meningococcus, H. influenzae b, postenteritis, 
posturethritis)
Serum sickness
Transient synovitis of the hip
Postimmunization
Pain Syndromes
Fibromyalgia
“Growing” pains
Depression (with somatization)
Anxiety
Stress
Complex regional pain syndrome
Myofascial pain syndromes
Miscellaneous Disorders
Plant-­thorn synovitis (Pantoea agglomerans, Nocardia sp.)
Myositis ossificans
Eosinophilic fasciitis
PAPA (pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne)
SAPHO (synovitis, acne, hyperostosis, osteitis)
Raynaud phenomenon
Erythromelalgia
Sweet syndrome
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
820
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
Pain Timing
Arthritis usually causes consistent patterns of daily discomfort with 
minor variability from day to day. Stiffness or pain-­related discomfort 
occurs on awakening in the morning or after other periods of inac­
tivity, such as prolonged sitting in class or taking a long car ride. The 
stiffness may last for hours but generally improves with activity during 
the day. Some forms of arthritis, such as Lyme arthritis or enthesitis-­
related arthritis, a subtype of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), may be 
more episodic. Lyme arthritis classically causes symptoms for days to 
weeks, usually in a single knee, interspersed with periods of improve­
ment. Enthesitis-­related arthritis can cause sudden swelling and dis­
comfort in one or more joints for several weeks to months at a time, 
followed by gradual spontaneous improvement.
Discomfort that occurs with activities and improves with rest is 
more suggestive of mechanical pain associated with patellofemo­
ral syndrome, hypermobility, tendonitis, overuse, or muscle strain. 
Affected children do not have significant symptoms in the morning or 
after naps, and these conditions are generally not associated with signs 
of significant inflammation such as warmth, prominent or chronic 
swelling, or limited range of motion.
Nocturnal pain that wakes children from sleep may be seen in 
conditions such as leukemia, bone tumors, or infections, but may 
also occur with less critical conditions such as growing pains, muscle 
cramps, or psychogenic pain. Children with benign causes of nocturnal 
pain will lack systemic symptoms, are well during the day, and have 
normal physical examination findings, whereas those with inflamma­
tory illnesses typically have additional signs and symptoms.
Pain Acuity
Most chronic arthritis is insidious in onset and affected children often 
have symptoms for weeks to months before they seek medical atten­
tion. If the onset is sudden and severe, the evaluation should focus on 
excluding diagnoses that require urgent treatment, such as trauma, 
fracture, atraumatic hemarthrosis, septic arthritis, or osteomyelitis. 
Acute rheumatic fever, reactive arthritis, and viral-­associated arthritis 
or myositis may also manifest suddenly.
Children who describe having extremity pains for many months or 
years often have mechanical causes of their discomfort such as hyper­
mobility syndrome or patellofemoral syndrome, psychogenic pain, or 
other relatively benign conditions such as growing pains.
Signs of Inflammation
The swelling and warmth of arthritis are often apparent to the child and 
parents. Exceptions may include the shoulder and hip, in which the 
joints are too deep for these signs to be visible, and the spinal, temporo­
mandibular, and sacroiliac joints, in which the articular surfaces are 
small in relation to the surrounding soft tissues. In these areas, physi­
cal examination may reveal tenderness or limitation of motion in the 
absence of signs of inflammation.
Disability
The chief complaint associated with arthritis may often be a disability 
such as limping, trouble running or climbing stairs, or difficulty dress­
ing. Some children have associated pain and signs of inflammation, 
whereas others have little or no discomfort, instead presenting with an 
isolated decrease in functional ability.
If the chief complaint is the disability, it is helpful to localize the 
source of the disability to the joint, the bones, the muscles, or the 
nerves. Muscle or nerve disease manifests primarily as weakness, 
although some children with sensory neuropathies or myositis, par­
ticularly acute viral or bacterial myositis, will also have pain. Dermato­
myositis and polymyositis cause symmetric proximal weakness in the 
upper and lower extremities. The characteristic symptoms are difficul­
ties climbing stairs, rising from the floor, taking the big step onto a bus 
or into the family minivan, and washing or combing the hair, as well 
as fatigue and poor endurance. Isolated lower extremity or asymmetric 
weakness should increase suspicion of neurologic disease.
TABLE 44.2  Distinguishing Characteristics 
of Arthritis and Arthralgia
Arthritis
Arthralgia
Prominent swelling
Minimal or no swelling
Morning stiffness
No morning stiffness
Symptoms improve with activity
Symptoms are exacerbated by activity
Stiffness follows rest
Pain constant or improves with rest
Limited range of motion
Normal or excessive range of motion
Warmth of joint
No warmth
Symptoms usually daily, consistent 
with minor variation
Symptoms variable, constant, or 
intermittent
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
ARTHRITIS
NO ARTHRITIS
Common
 Septic arthritis
 Reactive arthritis
 Rheumatic disease
Uncommon
 Malignancy
 Metabolic disease
 Hemophilia
Common
 Orthopedic or
     traumatic disorder
 Viral illness
 Pain syndrome
Uncommon
 Malignancy
 Benign bone lesion
 Metabolic disease
Fig. 44.1  Algorithm for determining the cause of extremity pain based 
on the presence or absence of arthritis.
Muscle:
inflammation
(myositis)
Bursa
Tendon
Joint space:
joint infection
Synovial
membrane:
synovitis
(rheumatoid
arthritis)
Enthesis:
enthesopathy
(ankylosing
spondylitis)
Bone
Bone
Muscle
Joint space:
microcrystalline
arthritis (gout)
Joint
capsule
Cartilage:
cartilage
degeneration
(osteoarthritis)
Localized site
(bursitis)
Fig. 44.2  Location of musculoskeletal disease processes by site, patho­
physiologic process, and typical disease (parentheses). (From Fries JF. 
Approach to the patient with musculoskeletal disease. In: Wyngaarden 
JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 19th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:1488.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
821
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
Disabilities from arthritis are caused by limited range of motion or 
discomfort in the joint rather than weakness. Limping, particularly in 
the mornings; unilateral toe-­walking because of inability to extend the 
knee; and difficulty running and jumping are seen with lower extremity 
arthritis. The child with hand or wrist arthritis has difficulty opening 
bottles, turning doorknobs, manipulating buttons or snaps on clothing, 
and gripping pencils or utensils.
Medical History
Numerous genetic syndromes and metabolic diseases are associated 
with arthritis and arthropathy (see Table 44.1). Endocrine disorders 
such as diabetes, hyperparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism may 
be associated with arthropathy, periosteal inflammation, and mus­
cle weakness, respectively. Arthritis is more frequent in patients with 
psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease. Bone pain is common in 
hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease. Cystic fibrosis and 
other chronic pulmonary diseases increase the likelihood of painful 
hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: the clinical triad of arthritis, digi­
tal clubbing, and ossifying periostitis of the long bones. Arthritis or 
arthralgia may occur after viral diseases or immunization, particularly 
with immunization against rubella and hepatitis B, presumably sec­
ondary to immune complex deposition in the joint.
Medications
Medications may directly cause joint or periarticular symptoms, either 
via serum sickness–like reactions associated with immune complex 
arthritis or swelling related to anaphylaxis. Response to medications 
may also provide further insight into the etiology of arthritis. In most 
children, an adequate dose of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) improves the discomfort of arthritis to some degree. In rheu­
matic fever, NSAIDs often result in dramatic improvement in symptoms. 
Conversely, the patient who continues to have severe pain despite ade­
quate doses of antiinflammatory and analgesic medication is more likely 
to have an infection, a fracture, a tumor, or psychogenic pain.
Family History
For some diseases, a positive family history increases the likelihood 
that other individuals in the family have that disease, but the genetics 
of the rheumatic diseases are complex, and none of the genetic asso­
ciations are strong enough to confirm or eliminate a diagnosis based 
solely on family history. Within the rheumatic diseases, the family his­
tory is most helpful when diagnostic possibilities include enthesitis-­
related arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, or lupus. Ankylosing spondylitis, 
reactive arthritis, or inflammatory bowel disease in the family increases 
the likelihood that the child’s arthritis is caused by one of these entities. 
The presence of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­B27 in these fam­
ily members may increase the likelihood of enthesitis-­related arthritis 
in the child. Approximately 30% of patients with lupus will have a first-­
degree relative affected by lupus. Less common familial illnesses that 
may cause rheumatic complaints include familial Mediterranean fever 
and other autoinflammatory syndromes that cause periodic fevers, 
mucopolysaccharidoses, fucosidoses, hemophilia, and muscular dys­
trophies. A family history of adults with osteoarthritis or other forms 
of degenerative arthritis is generally not helpful, since these entities 
are relatively common in adults and rarely relevant to a child’s joint 
symptoms.
Social History
Determining the extent to which the problem has limited usual activ­
ities helps to gauge the severity of the problem. Has the child missed 
school because of their symptoms? Has the child been able to par­
ticipate in physical education, organized sports, and other physical 
activities? Is the child participating in social activities with friends? 
In some instances, the limitations are directly related to discomfort or 
disability from arthritis, but school absences and the discontinuation 
of sports and social activities may also be secondary to depression or 
psychogenic pain. It is helpful to ask the parents whether the child’s 
mood or personality has changed recently and whether there have been 
any recent known psychosocial stressors such as problems at school 
or with friends or discord within the family. Chronic amplified pain 
syndromes in children are frequently associated with a history of psy­
chosocial stress, anxiety, or depression.
Travel history is important in considering certain infectious arthri­
tides. The spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme 
disease, is transmitted by the bite of a deer tick that has a specific geo­
graphic distribution. Lyme arthritis characteristically causes episodic 
joint effusions in one or several large joints, most commonly the knee. 
A small percentage of patients develop chronic arthritis. In the United 
States, endemic regions include the Northeast (Connecticut, Rhode 
Island, and Massachusetts), mid-­Atlantic (Long Island, New York City 
suburbs, New Jersey, southeastern Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Mary­
land), and the upper Midwest (parts of Minnesota, Illinois, and Wis­
consin). Although these endemic areas have been gradually expanding, 
a child who does not live in or has not traveled to these areas is unlikely 
to have Lyme disease. Arthritis may be the only symptom of Lyme 
disease and may not appear until up to 2 years after the tick bite; a 
history of the classic rash (erythema migrans) is helpful but not nec­
essary for a diagnosis of Lyme disease. Rickettsiosis and ehrlichiosis 
tend to produce arthralgia but occasionally result in frank arthritis; 
residing in or traveling to endemic regions should increase suspicion 
of these vector-­borne infections. The geographic distribution of Chi­
kungunya virus has been widening; in addition to established ende­
micity in Africa, Asia, regions of Europe, and areas within the Indian 
and Pacific Oceans, transmission has been documented throughout 
North and South America and the Caribbean. Acute infection is often 
accompanied by rash and, when present in combination with fever, 
small and large joint polyarthritis, arthralgia, and myalgia, may mimic 
systemic JIA. Some patients may go on to develop chronic joint symp­
toms; inquiring about travel to endemic regions may hint at the diag­
nosis in both the acute and chronic stages of infection. Other viruses 
confined to a specific geographic area include Zika (South America, 
Africa, Asia), Ross River (South Pacific), o’nyong-­nyong (Africa), and 
Sindbis (Africa, Middle East, Philippines).
REVIEW OF SYSTEMS
Constitutional Symptoms
Some rheumatic diseases, including several forms of childhood arthri­
tis, are generalized systemic illnesses and cause fevers, poor appetite, 
weight loss, and fatigue. The absence of these symptoms helps elim­
inate specific illnesses as diagnostic possibilities. When fevers are 
present, establishing the pattern of fever is important. Systemic JIA 
typically produces one or two high temperature spikes each day, with 
many afebrile hours in between (Fig. 44.3). More persistent fevers tend 
to be seen with infections or Kawasaki disease. A periodic fever pat­
tern, in which fevers occur for several days, followed by weeks without 
fever, is seen in familial Mediterranean fever, cyclic neutropenia; the 
syndrome of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and ade­
nopathy (PFAPA); and other autoinflammatory syndromes. Systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE), vasculitis, rheumatic fever, serum sickness, 
inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis, leukemia, and neuroblastoma 
may cause fevers associated with arthritis or extremity pains. These ill­
nesses do not cause specific patterns of fever.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
822
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
Decreased appetite is common in many arthritides, but when asso­
ciated with documented weight loss, may indicate more severe or sys­
temic illness. Although most children with JIA do not have significant 
appetite changes, those with systemic JIA may have substantial appe­
tite and growth disturbances. Severe polyarticular JIA may cause some 
appetite changes and mild weight loss. Children with Crohn disease 
or ulcerative colitis, both of which are often accompanied by abdom­
inal pain and diarrhea, may demonstrate poor appetite and failure to 
thrive. Vasculitis, SLE, scleroderma, malignancies, and chronic infec­
tions such as tuberculosis are additional causes of significant weight 
loss. An increase in weight should raise the suspicion of hypothyroid­
ism or fluid retention.
Fatigue is common with any systemic illness, and it may be present 
in systemic or polyarticular JIA, SLE, hypothyroidism, polymyositis, 
dermatomyositis, rheumatic fever, and chronic pain syndromes. The 
clinician should attempt to distinguish between generalized fatigue and 
specific muscle weakness. The presence of proximal muscle weakness, 
often associated with fatigue and poor endurance, is characteristic of 
polymyositis and dermatomyositis.
Skin Changes
Systemic JIA is nearly always accompanied by evanescent pink or 
salmon-­colored macules, often a few centimeters in diameter or 
smaller but sometimes coalescing to form larger patches (Fig. 44.4). 
These may be generalized or localized to the trunk or extremities. The 
macules usually appear with the fever spikes, are not pruritic, and may 
resolve completely when the fever is absent. Sometimes parents do not 
notice the rash because of its fleeting nature. Acute rheumatic fever is 
associated with a specific rash, erythema marginatum, though only 
in approximately 5% of cases. Erythema marginatum is also a fleet­
ing rash, changing in distribution over time, and consists of erythem­
atous patches with serpiginous borders that tend to migrate, usually 
105
F
AM
4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12 4 8 12
PM
6/27
Date
Hour
Temperature
Respiration pulse
6/28
6/29
6/30
7/1
7/2
7/3
AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM
40.6
104
40.0
103
39.4
102
38.9
101
38.3
100
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
37.8
99
37.2
98
36.7
97
36.0
C
Fig. 44.3  Intermittent fever of systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis in a 3-­year-­old girl. (From Petty 
RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:206.)
Fig. 44.4  Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis rash, a salmon-­colored, 
macular rash that is nonpruritic. The individual lesions are transient, 
appear in crops, and may be in a linear distribution after minor trauma 
such as scratching the surface of the skin (Koebner phenomenon). 
(From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediat­
ric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:206.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
823
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
over the trunk and proximal extremities. Because of these changes 
in distribution, families often confuse both of these rashes with urti­
caria. The malar rash of SLE is a fixed, erythematous, nonblanching 
patch over the cheeks and nasal bridge that tends to spare the nasola­
bial folds; SLE may also cause vasculitic rashes, as well as nonspecific 
erythematous macular or papular lesions. Vasculitic rashes consist of 
palpable purpura and can sometimes be ulcerative. The characteristic 
skin lesions in dermatomyositis are pathognomonic: heliotrope rash 
is a violaceous discoloration of the upper eyelid, often accompanied by 
edema. The heliotrope may sometimes be accompanied by more wide­
spread facial erythema (Fig. 44.5). Gottron papules are erythematous 
plaques or papules that appear on the extensor surface of the metacar­
pophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints of the hands (Fig. 
44.6) in individuals with dermatomyositis. These are sometimes scaly, 
are sometimes pale or atrophic, and can be confused with psoriasis or 
eczema if not for the distribution. Lesions similar to the Gottron pap­
ules occasionally appear on the extensor surfaces of the elbows and 
knees and over the medial malleoli. In addition, erythematous patches 
may appear on the shoulders, chest, or face (see Fig. 44.5C), where the 
appearance can cause confusion with the malar rash of SLE.
Erythema migrans occurs in up to 80% of cases of Lyme disease 
in children and appears days to weeks after the tick bite. The lesion 
expands, beginning as a small papule and then forming a large ery­
thematous, circular patch, usually at least 5 cm in diameter and often 
with some clearing in the center to produce a target-­like appearance 
(Fig. 44.7). If Lyme disease is left untreated, the lesion usually lasts for 
several weeks and then gradually resolves. If dissemination occurs, 
some individuals develop multiple secondary lesions that appear simi­
lar to the primary lesion.
Various mucocutaneous findings are present in up to half of patients 
with acute Chikungunya virus infection. Rash tends to be a generalized 
morbilliform maculopapular eruption that spares the face and appears 
within several days of the onset of fever, before subsiding within a 
week. Patients may also experience areas of hyperpigmentation, often 
in the centrofacial region and restricted to the nose, a finding termed 
the Chick sign. Up to a third of patients with acute Chikungunya will 
develop a chronic arthritis that may mimic JIA; therefore, inquiring 
about a remote history of characteristic skin findings, as well as consti­
tutional symptoms such as a brief febrile illness temporally correlated 
with travel to regions where Chikungunya is endemic, may prompt 
testing for prior exposure to Chikungunya.
The history of other types of rashes or skin lesions may suggest 
other diagnoses. Measles and parvovirus infections, for example, have 
characteristic rashes. A history of photosensitivity is suggestive of SLE. 
Petechiae may be seen with SLE, vasculitis, immune thrombocytope­
nia, or leukemia. Pallor or cyanosis of the digits, hands, and feet upon 
exposure to cold temperatures suggests Raynaud phenomenon, which 
is most often seen in those with no underlying systemic illness but may 
be associated with several rheumatic diseases, most commonly SLE, 
mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), and scleroderma. Sclero­
derma causes tightening, thickening, and the development of a waxy 
texture to the skin, and it frequently begins on the hands, feet, and face.
Additional Symptoms
Questioning the parents about cognitive difficulties, including declin­
ing school performance or memory loss, helps screen for the possibility 
of subtle central nervous system involvement that may be associated 
with SLE or central nervous system vasculitis. Seizures or frank psy­
chosis may also occur in these illnesses. Alopecia is frequently seen 
with SLE and may also occur with hypothyroidism. Ocular symptoms, 
such as pain or redness of the eye, may occur with uveitis or with non­
specific orbital inflammation (also known as orbital pseudotumor) 
potentially associated with a number of rheumatic diseases. Acute 
anterior uveitis (involving the iris and/or ciliary body) can be seen 
with reactive arthritis and enthesitis-­related arthritis. Chronic ante­
rior uveitis is most common in younger children with oligoarticular or 
polyarticular JIA and is usually asymptomatic. Sarcoidosis in children 
Fig. 44.5  Heliotrope rash with edema of the eyelids in juvenile der­
matomyositis. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et  al., eds. 
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016:359.)
Fig. 44.6  Symmetric, scaly, erythematous plaques and papules over 
the metacarpopharyngeal and proximal interphalangeal joints of the 
hands in juvenile dermatomyositis. C, Atrophic, pale lesions may also 
occur. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of 
Pediatric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:359.)
Fig. 44.7  Erythema migrans. Lesions begin as red macules that expand 
to form large rings that often have a typical “bull’s-­eye” appearance. 
(From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediat­
ric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:554.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
824
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
may be associated with both anterior and posterior uveitis. Ulcerations 
of the nose or hard palate may be present in SLE. Both uveitis and oral 
aphthous ulcerations can be seen with inflammatory bowel disease 
and also with Behçet disease, which can also include genital aphthous 
ulceration. Frequent sinusitis is often an early manifestation of granu­
lomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA).
Chest pain that is worse when the patient lies supine and improves 
with sitting up and leaning forward may represent pericarditis, which 
is most commonly associated with SLE and systemic-­onset JIA but may 
occur in rheumatic fever. Dysphagia suggests esophageal dysmotility, 
which may occur with inflammatory myopathies and scleroderma. 
Asking whether the child needs to cut food into small pieces, needs to 
drink an unusual amount of fluid with meals, or takes a long time to 
complete a meal are helpful ways of assessing dysphagia. Abdominal 
pain, vomiting, and diarrhea are nonspecific but if severe or associated 
with melena or hematochezia, might suggest Henoch-­Schönlein pur­
pura (HSP), also known as immunoglobulin A (IgA) vasculitis, as well 
as inflammatory bowel disease, polyarteritis nodosa with vasculitis of 
the intestine, or the rare intestinal vasculitis associated with SLE or 
dermatomyositis. Testicular pain is seen with some forms of vasculitis, 
particularly IgA vasculitis (HSP) and polyarteritis nodosa. Peripheral 
edema, sacral edema, or periorbital edema may be present with ill­
nesses causing glomerulonephritis, such as SLE and the antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-­associated vasculitides.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Observing the child ambulate or explore the examination room provides 
a sense of the severity of the illness and the degree of disability. Partic­
ularly with young children, this period of observation may give a better 
sense of the range of motion or the degree of discomfort in the joints 
than the formal examination, when the child may be uncooperative.
The examination begins by reviewing the vital signs. Fever, espe­
cially in the child with arthritis or localized extremity pain, may sug­
gest an infectious process. Systemic-­onset JIA is the only subtype of 
JIA associated with fever. Abnormalities in other vital signs are not 
expected with isolated arthritis and suggest that a systemic disease may 
be present. Tachycardia may be caused by fever, anxiety, pericarditis, or 
myocarditis. Tachypnea suggests the presence of cardiac or pulmonary 
disease, and hypertension increases the suspicion of renal involvement.
In any child with joint complaints, it is critical to examine all the 
joints, even those that are asymptomatic. Children or their parents may 
focus on the joint that is most painful or causes the most disability 
and are often unaware of the presence of arthritis in other joints. The 
neck and the joints of the upper extremities are best examined with the 
child in a sitting position. Children with inflammation in the joints of 
the cervical spine usually have limitations in extension, lateral flexion, 
and rotation. This is tested by asking the child to look up at the ceiling, 
touch each ear to the ipsilateral shoulder, and touch the chin to each 
shoulder.
Arthritis of the temporomandibular joint is common with poly­
articular JIA and might easily be overlooked. Children with chronic 
arthritis of these joints develop micrognathia and often retrognathia 
as a result of delayed mandibular growth. The oral opening is often 
decreased in size, and there may be pain with opening and closing of 
the jaw or tenderness to palpation directly over the joint.
Shoulder arthritis is identified by detecting limited range of motion 
and pain with motion. With the upper arm abducted to 90 degrees and 
the elbow flexed to 90 degrees, the clinician can then rotate the upper 
arm superiorly and inferiorly (external and internal rotation of the 
humerus, respectively), noting any limitation or pain. Alternatively, the 
patient can be asked to abduct and internally rotate the arm, reaching 
behind the head to touch the contralateral scapula, and then to adduct 
and internally rotate the arm, reaching behind the back and upward, 
again touching the contralateral scapula. The acromioclavicular joints 
and the sternoclavicular joints are occasionally affected by arthritis and 
should be palpated, noting any swelling or tenderness.
In the elbow, arthritis often produces detectable swelling and 
warmth, usually identified posteriorly, proximal to the olecranon. 
Elbow extension and flexion should also be tested, along with supi­
nation of the forearm and hand. Many children can normally hyper­
extend their elbows, and the degree of extension is variable; therefore, 
it is helpful to compare the range of motion of each elbow to the con­
tralateral side.
The wrists are inspected for swelling and palpated for warmth and 
tenderness. Many children with wrist arthritis develop swelling on the 
dorsal aspect of the wrist that is usually nontender. Extension tends 
to be more limited than flexion in wrist arthritis, and radial devia­
tion tends to be more limited than ulnar deviation. Children with 
wrist arthritis frequently complain of pain or withdraw their arm with 
maneuvers to test flexion and extension of the wrist.
The metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint and the proximal interpha­
langeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints should be indi­
vidually palpated, and any swelling, tenderness, or warmth should be 
noted (Fig. 44.8). The examiner should flex and extend the MCP joints, 
looking for limitations. To test the range of motion of the PIP and DIP 
joints, the child should try to supinate the hand and flex all the digits, 
attempting to touch the fingertips to the palm. To examine the first 
MCP and thumb interphalangeal joint, the child should try to touch 
the tip of the thumb to the base of the fifth finger. Grip strength is 
determined by having the child tightly squeeze two of the clinician’s 
fingers. Arthritis of the wrist or any of the small joints of the hand 
decreases grip strength.
The child should next lie in a supine position, either in the parent’s 
lap or on the examination table so that the lower extremities can be 
examined. Each hip is taken through its range of motion, beginning 
with flexion by trying to bring the knee as close to the chest as possible. 
Any pain or limitation is noted. With the hip and knee each flexed to 90 
degrees, internal and external rotation are tested by keeping the knee 
in a fixed position and turning the lower leg laterally and medially, 
thereby rotating the femur. The hip and knee are then extended back to 
a neutral supine position and abduction is tested. With the child in the 
prone position, the examiner evaluates hip extension by placing a hand 
Fig. 44.8  The joints of the wrists and hands of a 2-­year-­old male are 
swollen, warm, and painful with limited extension of the fingers. (From 
Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et  al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric 
Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:194.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
825
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
on the child’s ipsilateral iliac crest and lifting the child’s thigh posteri­
orly with the knee extended. Hip arthritis most often causes limitations 
with internal rotation and extension, usually in association with pain 
in the inguinal area.
The knee is inspected for effusions and other obvious deformities. 
Palpation of the knee assesses for warmth, a common finding in knee 
arthritis; synovial swelling (producing a “spongy” feel); or an effusion 
(often feels like a “water balloon”). Applying pressure in the suprapatel­
lar area with one hand while palpating on either side of the patella with 
the other allows for the detection of effusions more readily because this 
forces excessive joint fluid that has accumulated in the suprapatellar 
area into the synovial space lateral and medial to the patella. Small effu­
sions may be detected by eliciting a bulge sign. This is done by milk­
ing the medial and lateral depressions around the patella superiorly 
to push the fluid into the suprapatellar space and then gently pushing 
either medially or laterally just superior to the patella. This releases the 
fluid inferiorly, causing the area medial to the patella to bulge out. The 
popliteal fossa should be palpated, because fluid within the knee joint 
may track posteriorly as it accumulates, producing fullness in the pop­
liteal fossa and sometimes a frank cyst.
Palpating around the edges of the patella causes pain in many ado­
lescents with patellofemoral syndrome (also known as chondroma­
lacia patellae), a common cause of knee pain in active adolescents. In 
another maneuver that elicits pain in this syndrome, the patient relaxes 
the quadriceps muscles while the examiner displaces the patella inferi­
orly by pushing on the superior pole of the patella. While the examiner 
maintains pressure on the patella, the patient contracts the quadri­
ceps. In patients with patellofemoral syndrome, pain elicited by this 
maneuver is referred to as a positive patellar apprehension test, while 
a grinding sensation felt by the examiner constitutes a positive patellar 
grind sign. The tibial tubercle and patellar tendon should be inspected 
and palpated for swelling and tenderness associated with Osgood-­
Schlatter disease and patellar tendonitis, respectively.
Flexing and extending the knee tests range of motion. Most young 
children can normally touch their heel to their buttocks and can hyper­
extend the knee slightly. The examiner can detect subtle limitations in 
extension by standing at the foot of the table and lifting the heels of 
the child off the table as the child relaxes their legs in a fully extended 
position. If one knee is limited with extension, the patella on that side 
may appear slightly more elevated.
Swelling in the ankles is often best seen when inspecting and pal­
pating the posterior aspect of the ankle, where fullness on either side 
of the ankle may be appreciated between the Achilles tendon and the 
malleoli. Warmth is common with ankle arthritis. Testing range of 
motion in the ankle should include both the tibiotalar ankle joint and 
the subtalar talocalcaneal joint. Cupping the heel with one hand and 
using the other hand to grasp the forefoot allows the examiner to move 
the forefoot superiorly (dorsiflexion) and inferiorly (plantar flexion) to 
evaluate the tibiotalar joint. The hand cupping the heel is then rocked 
laterally and medially to check inversion and eversion associated with 
motion at the subtalar joint. Holding the heel firmly with a cupped 
hand and gently rotating the forefoot with the other hand tests the 
joints of the midfoot. Each of the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints 
is palpated along with each of the toes. The MTP joints are flexed and 
extended noting any limitations or pain, and as with other joints, also 
noting any asymmetry with the contralateral MTP joints. The toes are 
inspected for the presence of swelling. The plantar fascia and the Achil­
les tendon are palpated, and any tenderness or swelling is noted.
The child should stand so that the examiner can evaluate the back. 
The sacroiliac joints are palpated, any tenderness is noted, and the 
child is asked to keep the knees extended and bend forward, touching 
the hands to the ground if possible. The lumbar spine should curve 
forward normally without flattening. The modified Schober measure­
ment, which reveals whether the lumbar spine flexes normally, is done 
by marking the lumbar spine at a point where a horizontal line con­
necting the lateral lumbar indentations intersects the spine. Then the 
examiner measures 10 cm above and 5 cm below that spot while the 
child is standing. When the child bends forward, the distance between 
the top and bottom marks should increase to at least 21 cm as the ver­
tebral bodies separate during flexion. A shorter distance suggests lim­
itation in mobility of the spine and potential spondylitis. Scoliosis is 
detected by noting any asymmetric elevation of the shoulder and upper 
back while the child bends forward.
Hypermobility is a very common cause of pain associated with 
sports and other activities; it tends to improve with rest. Hypermobil­
ity, patellofemoral syndrome, frequent ankle sprains, and pes planus 
are frequently seen together. The hypermobile child or adolescent can 
hyperextend the knees and elbows, appose the thumb to the forearm 
while flexing the wrist, hyperextend the MCP joints so that the dig­
its are parallel to the forearm when the wrist is extended, and easily 
put the palms flat on the floor while bending forward from a stand­
ing position with the knees locked. Extreme hypermobility is seen in 
some individuals with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome or Marfan syndrome. 
Obtaining a Beighton score may help the examiner more objectively 
assess the degree of hypermobility (see Chapter 47).
Myofascial pain syndromes are often associated with the presence 
of specific trigger points, exquisitely tender, well-­localized points often 
detected in the following locations: the occiput, trapezius muscles, 
medial borders of the scapula, upper outer quadrant of the buttocks, 
the second cervical space anteriorly, the second costochondral space 
just distal to the lateral epicondyle on the forearm, the greater trochan­
ter in the proximal leg, and the medial aspects of the knees. Their pres­
ence in the older child with diffuse pain, fatigue, and difficulty sleeping 
is highly suggestive of a myofascial pain syndrome.
Proximal muscle strength testing and an evaluation of muscle 
bulk should be performed in any patient complaining of weakness or 
fatigue. The deltoids, biceps, triceps, psoas, quadriceps, and hamstrings 
are tested. Neck flexor weakness is common in dermatomyositis and 
polymyositis and is tested by having the child lie supine and lift only 
their head. Most children can lift and keep the head elevated, even if 
asked to resist pressure from the examiner’s hand against the forehead. 
To test proximal leg strength, the child rises from a sitting position on 
the floor. Chronic knee arthritis or hip disease leads to atrophy of the 
ipsilateral quadriceps. Similarly, ankle arthritis causes the gastrocne­
mius to atrophy; wrist arthritis leads to wasting of the forearm muscles; 
and elbow contractures cause atrophy of the triceps muscle. Atrophy is 
easily overlooked, and it is sometimes helpful to measure the circum­
ference of the thigh, calf, or upper arm to detect asymmetry.
The skin and mucous membranes should be examined carefully, as 
there may be clues to the presence of systemic disease (Table 44.3). Sys­
temic JIA, SLE, acute rheumatic fever, and dermatomyositis are associ­
ated with characteristic rashes. Petechiae or palpable purpura suggests 
vasculitis. Nodules are seen with acute rheumatic fever and polyartic­
ular rheumatoid factor–positive JIA. Thickening and tightening of the 
skin, particularly over the distal extremities and face, are suggestive 
of scleroderma. Nasal or palatal ulcers suggest SLE, whereas aphthous 
ulceration may be seen with inflammatory bowel disease or Behçet 
disease, the latter particularly if on the genitals in the absence of sexu­
ally transmitted infection. Alopecia, either localized or diffuse, may be 
apparent to the examiner without being recognized by the patient. The 
presence of peripheral or periorbital edema increases the suspicion of 
glomerulonephritis.
The remainder of the physical examination including head, eyes, 
ears, chest, heart, and abdomen should also be performed carefully, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
826
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
with attention to potential signs that might indicate systemic and/or 
organ-­specific disease.
LABORATORY STUDIES
Laboratory testing should be considered when the diagnosis is unclear and 
systemic disease is a concern. It is important to recognize that laboratory 
tests are not diagnostic of JIA. Tests frequently seen in “arthritis panels” 
such as those for antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), 
ESR, and CRP are not specific for arthritis and may be abnormal in healthy 
children or in those with infections and other coincidental diseases.
A CBC with manual differential is useful in decreasing the suspi­
cion of an acute infection or leukemia as the etiology of bone pain, 
joint pain, or even frank arthritis. A normal CBC is reassuring, but it is 
also helpful to compare the platelet count to the ESR when concerned 
about leukemia. Because platelets are an acute-­phase reactant, they 
should increase as the ESR increases. A normal or low platelet count in 
a child with markedly elevated ESR increases the suspicion of leukemia 
or another cause for platelet destruction or decreased bone marrow 
platelet production.
An elevated peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count is often 
present in septic arthritis or osteomyelitis but is neither sensitive 
nor specific for these infections. In systemic-­onset JIA, the WBC 
count may be markedly elevated to 20,000 WBCs/mm3 or greater 
and the hemoglobin may be as low as 6 or 7 g/dL; the platelet count 
is typically significantly elevated. For many of the other inflamma­
tory diseases that are associated with arthritis or extremity pain, a 
mild to moderate normocytic anemia and a mild thrombocytosis 
are common. SLE may be associated with anemia, leukopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia.
The ESR is helpful when physical examination is inconclusive for 
signs of inflammation. In children who are uncooperative or whose 
body habitus precludes adequate assessment, it may be difficult to 
detect small effusions or subtle limitations in the range of motion. In 
these instances, an elevated ESR increases the suspicion of arthritis, 
although a normal ESR does not exclude it. In children who clearly 
have rheumatic disease or infection, the ESR is not useful diagnosti­
cally, but it may be useful as a means of monitoring disease activity over 
time. CRP is often elevated in systemic-­onset JIA, polyarticular JIA, 
and infectious arthritis but is often normal in oligoarticular arthritis. 
Procalcitonin is typically normal in JIA and elevated in bacterial osteo­
articular infections.
Vasculitis or SLE may result in glomerulonephritis; proteinuria or 
red blood cell casts can be detected on urinalysis, and the serum creat­
inine level will be elevated if glomerulonephritis has resulted in renal 
insufficiency. Severe proteinuria will also lead to hypoalbuminemia. 
Kawasaki disease is associated with sterile pyuria.
Serum aminotransferases are elevated in patients with hepatitis and 
occasionally in patients with SLE. In those with myositis, elevations in 
aminotransferases often occur concomitantly with increased creatine 
kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and aldolase levels.
Antinuclear Antibody
The ANA test is a sensitive screen for SLE or overlap syndromes that 
include features of SLE, being positive in approximately 99% of these 
patients. The ANA is not a useful screen for any other rheumatic 
disease, including JIA, because it is neither sensitive nor specific 
enough for these other conditions; furthermore, the ANA is positive 
in many healthy children and adults, and it may be positive in infec­
tions and other autoimmune and systemic illnesses (Table 44.4). There­
fore, it does not necessarily indicate the presence of disease and should 
only be ordered as a diagnostic screening test when there is a strong 
suspicion of SLE or an overlap syndrome.
Those with SLE and overlap syndromes usually have high ANA 
titers, typically with values of 1:640 or higher, although there is no 
level of titer elevation that is sufficiently specific or sensitive enough 
to either diagnose or exclude the possibility of SLE, and further testing 
will be necessary in children with features of SLE and an elevated ANA. 
The pattern of the ANA is rarely helpful. Homogeneous and speckled 
patterns are the most common and are not specific. A peripheral or 
“rim” pattern is usually associated with anti–double-­stranded DNA 
(anti-­dsDNA) antibodies and is more specific for SLE. A nucleolar 
pattern suggests the presence of anti–Scl-­70 antibodies, which may be 
seen in patients with scleroderma.
Rheumatoid Factor
The RF test is not sensitive or specific for JIA. Only approximately 5% 
of children with JIA have a positive RF result, usually in teenagers with 
polyarticular arthritis. RF is an immunoglobulin M antibody directed 
against immunoglobulin G. In children with polyarthritis, the presence 
of RF is a poor prognostic factor; these children have a high likelihood 
of developing chronic, erosive arthritis. A positive test result for RF can 
be seen with other illnesses associated with the formation of immune 
complexes, including rheumatic diseases such as SLE or vasculitis, 
and with infectious diseases such as bacterial endocarditis, infectious 
mononucleosis, and hepatitis B or C. RF should not be ordered, and 
TABLE 44.3  Skin Manifestations of 
Rheumatic Disease
Physical Finding
Possible Disease
Petechiae, purpura
Vasculitis (may be palpable)
Leukemia
Meningococcemia
Other infections
SLE
Erythema nodosum
Inflammatory bowel disease
Streptococcal infection
Sarcoidosis
Drug reaction
Tuberculosis
Fungal infection
Gottron papules
Dermatomyositis
Alopecia
SLE, hypothyroidism
Calcification
Dermatomyositis, scleroderma
Subcutaneous nodules
Polyarticular JIA, rheumatic fever
Oral ulcers
SLE, Behçet disease, inflammatory bowel disease, 
reactive arthritis
Genital ulcers
Behçet disease
Digital ulcers
Vasculitis, SLE, scleroderma
Tight, thickened skin
Scleroderma
Livedo reticularis
Antiphospholipid syndrome, SLE, cutaneous 
polyarteritis nodosa
Nail dystrophy or pits
Psoriasis
Edema
SLE, vasculitis, scleroderma, eosinophilic fasciitis, 
serum sickness, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Desquamation
Kawasaki disease, scarlet fever
Cyanosis
Raynaud phenomenon, hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy
JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
827
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
will not be helpful diagnostically, in individuals who do not have poly­
arthritis on physical examination.
Additional Antibody Testing
If the history and physical examination findings suggest SLE and an 
individual has an elevated ANA, additional autoantibody testing is 
helpful (see Table 44.4). Anti-­dsDNA antibodies and anti-­Smith anti­
bodies are highly specific for SLE. Antiribonucleoprotein (anti-­RNP) 
antibodies may be seen in patients with SLE; anti-­RNP antibodies 
along with an elevated ANA and without anti-­dsDNA or anti-­Smith 
antibodies suggest the specific overlap syndrome mixed connective 
tissue disease, which has a combination of clinical features seen with 
SLE, dermatomyositis, and scleroderma. Anti–Sjögren syndrome type 
A (anti-­SSA; also known as anti-­Ro) and anti–Sjögren syndrome type 
B (anti-­SSB; also known as anti-­La) antibodies are occasionally seen 
in patients with SLE but are not specific. They are seen in Sjögren syn­
drome, an illness producing chronic inflammation of the salivary and 
lacrimal glands and resulting in xerostomia and xerophthalmia. These 
antibodies may also be seen in asymptomatic, healthy individuals.
Anticardiolipin antibodies, one of several antiphospholipid anti­
bodies, may be present in SLE, but they are also seen in asymptomatic 
individuals and in those with the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
in which clinical manifestations are a result of the hypercoagulable state 
associated with these antibodies. These manifestations include venous 
and arterial thromboses and recurrent spontaneous abortions. Many 
patients with SLE have a false-­positive Venereal Disease Research 
Laboratory (VDRL) test result because this test also detects antiphos­
pholipid antibodies. A positive direct Coombs test result, indicative of 
an autoimmune hemolytic anemia, is common in patients with SLE, 
although rarely is the hemolysis clinically significant.
GPA and the other ANCA-­associated vasculitides are the only types 
of vasculitis that can be diagnosed on the basis of serologic testing. 
Antiproteinase 3 antibodies, identified on immunofluorescence testing 
as cytoplasmic-­staining or c-­ANCA, are 95% sensitive and specific for 
GPA. The antimyeloperoxidase antibody (corresponding to peripheral-­
staining or p-­ANCA on immunofluorescence testing) is much less spe­
cific; it may be present in those with other vasculitides and also in those 
with a variety of infectious and inflammatory illnesses.
Viral infections such as human parvovirus B19, Epstein-­Barr virus, 
Chikungunya, and rubella may be associated with arthralgia or arthritis, 
and testing for antibodies to these viruses may be helpful in some situa­
tions. For diagnosing Lyme disease, the enzyme-­linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) is a very sensitive, but not specific, screening test. A posi­
tive ELISA should therefore be confirmed by Western blot (Table 44.5).
Complement
The complement proteins C3 and C4 are often depressed in patients 
with active SLE, which indicates consumption secondary to the for­
mation of immune complexes. Low levels of complement can be seen 
occasionally with some vasculitides and in other illnesses in which 
immune complexes form, such as bacterial endocarditis. The CH50 is a 
functional assay that measures the activity of the entire classical path­
way of complement. If any single complement protein is sufficiently 
depressed, this may cause a decrease in the CH50. The CH50 is less 
sensitive and less specific than testing for the individual complement 
components.
TABLE 44.4  Autoantibodies in Children
Test
Characteristics
Antinuclear antibody 
(ANA)
99% sensitive in SLE; very nonspecific; present 
in healthy children, endocarditis, autoimmune 
hepatitis, JIA, Hashimoto thyroiditis, 
lymphoma, psoriatic arthritis, dermatomyositis, 
scleroderma, mononucleosis
Anti–double-­stranded 
DNA (dsDNA)
Up to 80% sensitive for SLE; highly specific 
(nearly 100%)
Anti-­Smith (Sm)
Up to 50% sensitive in SLE; nearly 100% specific
Anti-­SSA (Anti-­Ro)
Up to 50% sensitive in SLE; seen in 
asymptomatic children; present in Sjögren 
syndrome and scleroderma; can be associated 
with neonatal lupus
Anti-­SSB (Anti-­La)
Up to 15% sensitive in SLE; seen in similar 
conditions as anti-­SSA; can be associated with 
neonatal lupus
Antiribonucleoprotein 
(RNP)
Up to 40% sensitive in SLE; also seen in mixed 
connective tissue disease
Antihistone
Drug-­induced SLE-­like syndromes
Rheumatoid factor (RF)
30% of SLE patients; 5% of JIA; also seen in 
infections
Antiproteinase 3 
(c-­ANCA)
90–95% sensitive and specific for granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis
Antimyeloperoxidase 
(p-­ANCA)
75% sensitive for microscopic polyangiitis; seen 
in other vasculitides, inflammatory bowel 
disease, other inflammatory diseases
Anti-­RBC membrane 
(Coombs positive)
Up to 50% sensitive in SLE; nonspecific, seen 
also in Evans syndrome, isolated hemolytic 
anemia
Anticardiolipin
Seen in SLE; nonspecific, seen in asymptomatic 
children and in those with antiphospholipid 
syndrome
ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; JIA, juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis; RBC, red blood cell; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SSA 
and SSB, Sjögren syndrome type A and type B.
TABLE 44.5  Criteria for Diagnosing Lyme 
Disease
Characteristic clinical presentation
 • Early localized disease: erythema migrans at the site of a recent tick bite, 
possible constitutional symptoms (malaise, headache, mild neck stiffness, 
myalgia, arthralgia), possible fever
 • Early disseminated disease: multiple erythema migrans lesions at sites 
distinct from initial lesion, cranial nerve palsies (particularly cranial nerve 
VII), lymphocytic meningitis, polyradiculitis, constitutional symptoms, 
carditis
 • Late disease: arthritis, polyneuropathy, encephalomyelitis
Exposure in an endemic area*
Positive Lyme EIA, confirmed by positive Western blot
Western blots are considered positive if the following are present:
For IgM, two of the following three bands must be present:
23, 39, 41 kD
For IgG, 5 of the following 10 bands must be present:
18, 21, 28, 30, 39, 41, 45, 58, 66, 93 kD
*Mid-­Atlantic and southern New England coastal regions, northwestern 
Wisconsin, and eastern Minnesota are considered the most endemic 
regions in North America. Even within these regions, the incidence of 
infection can vary widely.
EIA, enzyme immunoassay; Ig, immunoglobulin; kD, kilodaltons.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
828
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Radiographs
Plain radiographs of bones and joints may be useful to evaluate for 
potential infections, trauma, leukemia, or solid bone tumors. Acute 
osteomyelitis usually causes periosteal elevation, which may be seen on 
radiographs after approximately 1 week of illness. Chronic osteomyelitis 
causes abscesses of the bone that are often evident on plain radiographs. 
Fractures, including stress fractures and small avulsion fractures, are 
occasionally detected even when the clinical information is not strongly 
suggestive. Leukemia can cause lucency within the metaphyses of the 
long bones. Solid tumors, including osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and 
the benign osteoid osteoma, may all be identified on plain radiographs. 
Because knee pain may reflect referred pain from the hip, any child with 
unexplained knee or thigh pain should also have pelvis and hip radio­
graphs performed, including a “frog-­leg” view. The young, limping child 
may have Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease as a result of avascular necrosis of 
the femoral head. A slipped capital femoral epiphysis is classically seen in 
overweight patients in their early teens (see Chapter 45).
In the child with arthritis, soft tissue swelling or effusions within the 
joint may be identified on plain radiographs; however, normal radio­
graphs do not exclude the possibility of joint inflammation. Chronic 
arthritis may demonstrate bone erosions and juxta-­articular osteope­
nia. Radiographs can be useful in monitoring the course of the disease 
and can sometimes help guide management.
In children with suspected SLE, a chest radiograph may reveal an 
enlarged cardiac silhouette, suggestive of a pericardial effusion or the 
presence of pleural effusions. If GPA is a consideration, a chest radio­
graph may reveal bilateral cavitating pulmonary nodules. Pulmonary 
hemorrhage, with bilateral alveolar infiltrates, can be seen with GPA, 
SLE, microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), and rarely IgA vasculitis.
Ultrasound
Ultrasonography is a portable, convenient, noninvasive, and efficient 
tool for imaging joints, tendons, and soft tissues. It may be useful in 
identifying synovitis, tenosynovitis, and joint effusions when the phys­
ical examination is difficult or inconclusive. When used with Doppler, 
ultrasonography can also identify sites of increased blood flow, which 
might be an indication of active inflammation.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is useful when plain radiographs either are unrevealing or have 
poorly defined abnormalities. MRI, a sensitive test for septic arthritis, 
osteomyelitis, suppurative myositis, and avascular necrosis, can also 
reveal small joint effusions that are not apparent on physical exam­
ination. MRI helps distinguish hemarthrosis from other forms of 
joint swelling and detects ligamentous and meniscal tears. MRI pro­
vides better visualization and characterization of tumors than plain 
radiographs. If myositis is suspected, MRI may reveal increased signal 
within the muscle as a result of inflammation and can help determine 
a potential biopsy site. MRI is relatively sensitive for arthritis, allowing 
very good visualization of synovial tissue.
Bone Scan
A bone scan is useful when plain radiographs are unremarkable and 
when the source of pain cannot be adequately localized. It is a sensi­
tive test for inflammation in the bones and joints, and it can often help 
distinguish arthritis from osteomyelitis, fractures, and tumors. Bone 
scans, like plain radiographs, are not as sensitive for osteomyelitis if 
obtained very early in the disease process, and a second scan should 
be considered if the initial study is negative. A bone scan may detect 
osteoid osteomas that are not apparent on plain radiographs. Complex 
regional pain syndrome (CRPS) may be associated with an abnormal 
bone scan, often demonstrating asymmetric increased uptake on the 
affected side.
Additional Imaging Studies
Echocardiography is useful when acute rheumatic fever is a consid­
eration. Clinically silent valvulitis with resulting insufficiency, as seen 
in the context of rheumatic fever, may be detected only by echocar­
diography. The echocardiogram may also detect pericardial effusions 
in patients with SLE and coronary artery aneurysms in patients with 
Kawasaki disease.
Conventional angiography, CT with angiography, and magnetic 
resonance angiography are useful for the diagnosis of medium-­ or 
large-­vessel vasculitis such as polyarteritis nodosa or Takayasu arte­
ritis. High-­resolution CT of the chest without contrast is helpful in 
visualizing pulmonary nodules in patients with GPA and in detecting 
basilar lung fibrosis in those with scleroderma.
Joint Fluid Aspiration
Synovial fluid analysis in childhood is most helpful for confirming 
or excluding three possible problems: (1) infectious arthritis, (2) 
hemarthrosis (either secondary to trauma or a bleeding diathesis), 
and very rarely (3) crystal diseases such as gout or pseudogout. A 
fourth condition, the rare entity of pigmented villonodular syno­
vitis, is suggested by the aspiration of a “chocolate brown” synovial 
fluid from the knee.
Among these possibilities, only infection is a common consider­
ation in childhood and is typically suspected based on the history 
and physical examination findings. The child with septic arthritis is 
often febrile and has acute joint pain, swelling, warmth, and occa­
sionally erythema, most commonly in a single joint (Table 44.6), 
over a period of hours to days. When septic arthritis is suspected, 
arthrocentesis is necessary, and the joint fluid is sent for cell count, 
protein quantification, glucose measurement, Gram stain, and 
microbiologic studies, including bacterial culture and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) testing for Kingella kingae (Table 44.7). Addi­
tional microbiologic assays might include fungal culture and myco­
bacterial testing if suspected. Some infectious arthritides develop 
more indolently, such as gonococcal arthritis, tuberculous arthri­
tis, and opportunistic infections in immunocompromised hosts. 
Adolescents with monoarticular arthritis (Table 44.8) or with acute 
polyarthritis should undergo joint aspiration if they have risk fac­
tors for gonococcal disease. Likewise, if there has been exposure to 
tuberculosis or if a child is immunocompromised, joint fluid aspi­
ration should be considered.
If the child has sustained trauma and it is unclear from the history 
and physical examination whether a joint effusion is inflammatory or 
hemorrhagic, joint fluid analysis may be helpful. Similarly, if there is 
history of a bleeding disorder in the family or in the child, joint aspi­
ration should be considered (see Table 44.7), as should assessment of 
coagulation parameters if the child does not have an established history 
of a bleeding disorder but one is suspected based on presentation or 
family history.
Gout and pseudogout are unusual in childhood. Conditions that 
result in elevated serum uric acid levels predispose a child to gout, 
and if children with these conditions develop arthritis, the joint 
fluid should be analyzed for crystals. These conditions include leu­
kemia, tumor lysis syndrome, renal failure, Down syndrome, Lesch-­
Nyhan syndrome, and type I glycogen storage disease (von Gierke 
disease).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
829
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
Invasive Testing
If weakness is present, an electromyogram (EMG) and a nerve conduc­
tion study may distinguish myopathies and myositis from neuropathies. 
Children with inflammatory myositis have a characteristic, albeit nondi­
agnostic, abnormal EMG. Peripheral neuropathies confirmed by nerve 
conduction studies may suggest the presence of a vasculitis or SLE.
Biopsies are most helpful in confirming the presence of vasculitis 
(Table 44.9) and to determine the extent of renal disease in a child with 
SLE. Kawasaki disease, GPA, MPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (EGPA), Takayasu arteritis, polyarteritis, and IgA vasculitis 
are vasculitides that may be diagnosed on the basis of either clinical cri­
teria alone (Kawasaki disease, IgA vasculitis), a combination of clinical 
criteria and arteriography (Takayasu arteritis, polyarteritis), or clinical 
criteria and serologic profiles (antiproteinase 3 and antimyeloperoxi­
dase antibodies in GPA, MPA, and EGPA). Biopsies of affected tissue 
are often necessary to confirm a diagnosis for many of the vasculitides. 
The most accessible affected tissue is acquired for biopsy first. If there 
are no cutaneous lesions easily accessible for biopsy, muscle and nerve 
samples may be taken for biopsy when EMG and nerve conduction 
studies reveal the presence of myositis or neuropathy. If neither of these 
sites is affected, then the risks and benefits of biopsy of affected organs 
should be evaluated.
Synovial biopsy is rarely useful in the evaluation of arthritis. Biopsy 
may help to distinguish sarcoid arthropathy from JIA; sarcoid arthrop­
athy is suspected when the young child has erythema nodosum, uve­
itis, and arthritis, as well as particularly “boggy” synovial effusions. 
In rare cases, synovial tumors, chronic indolent infections, or foreign 
bodies may be detected by biopsy.
JUVENILE IDIOPATHIC ARTHRITIS
JIA is not a single disease, but rather a group of chronic diseases that 
share arthritis as a primary manifestation. JIA is categorized into sev­
eral different subtypes, each with characteristic clinical and laboratory 
TABLE 44.6  Frequency of Infected Joints in Children with Septic Arthritis (%)
Joint
Fink and Nelson 
(N = 591)
Welkon et al. 
(N = 95)
Speiser et al. 
(N = 86)
Wilson and Di Paola 
(N = 61)
Overall
Knee
40
46
30
29
39
Hip
23
25
29
40
25
Ankle
13
15
17
21
14
Elbow
14
5
11
3
12
Shoulder
4
4
2
3
4
Wrist
4
—­
1
1
3
PIP, MCP, MTP
1
—­
10
—
2
Other
1
5
—­
1
1
MCP, metacarpophalangeal; MTP, metatarsophalangeal; PIP, proximal interphalangeal.
Data from Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:534; Fink CW, 
Nelson JD. Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis in children. Clin Rheum Dis. 1986;12(2):423–435; Speiser JC, Moore TL, Osborn TG, et al. Changing 
trends in pediatric septic arthritis. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1985;15(2):132–138; Wilson NI, Di Paola M. Acute septic arthritis in infancy and 
childhood. 10 years’ experience. J Bone Joint Surg. 1986;68(4):584–587; Welkon CJ, Long SS, Fisher MC, et al. Pyogenic arthritis in infants and 
children: a review of 95 cases. Pediatr Infect Dis. 1986;5(6):669–676.
TABLE 44.7  Characteristics of Synovial Fluid
Appearance
Viscosity
Cells per mm3
% PMNs
Crystals
Microbiology
Normal
Transparent
High
<200
<10%
Negative
Negative
JIA
Translucent
Low
2,000–50,000
Variable
Negative
Negative
Reactive arthritis
Translucent
Low
2,000–50,000
Variable
Negative
Negative
Gout
Translucent to cloudy
Low
200 to >50,000
>90%
Needle-­shaped, 
negatively birefringent 
monosodium urate 
monohydrate crystals
Negative
Bacterial arthritis*
Cloudy
Variable
50,000 to >100,000
>90%
Negative
Usually positive
PVNS
Hemorrhagic or 
“chocolate brown”
Low
Variable
Variable
Negative
Negative
Hemarthrosis
Hemorrhagic
Low
Variable
Variable
Negative
Negative
Lyme disease
Xanthochromic or 
cloudy
Variable
500 to >100,000 
(average 25,000)
Predominantly PMNs
None
Negative
*Includes spirochetal, gonococcal, and mycobacterial infections.
JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; PMNs, polymorphonuclear neutrophils; PVNS, pigmented villonodular synovitis.
Modified from El-­Gabalawy HS. Synovial fluid analyses, synovial biopsy, and synovial pathology. In: Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013:755, Table 53-­1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
830
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
findings. The diagnosis of JIA is based on history and physical exam­
ination. The classification criteria define JIA and the subtypes, but it 
is important to note that these criteria are intended to be useful for 
research purposes and are less useful diagnostically (Table 44.10). 
According to these criteria, JIA is defined as inflammatory arthritis of 
unknown etiology beginning before age 16 years and persisting for at 
least 6 weeks. These criteria also specify that the determination of the 
subtype of JIA should be made based on the findings present 6 months 
after the onset of disease. Several noninflammatory conditions can 
closely mimic JIA and are listed in Table 44.11.
Oligoarticular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
This is the most common form of JIA, affecting approximately half of all 
children with JIA. Oligoarticular JIA can be further classified depend­
ing on whether fewer than four joints are affected for the entire course 
of the disease (“persistent”) or if more than four joints are affected after 
the first 6 months of disease (“extended”). Persistent oligoarticular JIA 
is the most common form and most often manifests as monoarticular 
arthritis of the knee. This subtype affects primarily young children 
with an average age of onset of 2 years. Affected children have morning 
stiffness, mild discomfort, swelling, and warmth of the affected joint 
or joints but usually remain functional and are systemically well. The 
arthritis has a good prognosis and in some cases may eventually remit. 
Most children with this subtype of JIA have a positive ANA test result 
and are at high risk for associated chronic anterior uveitis.
Polyarticular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
There are two subtypes of polyarticular JIA: RF positive and RF nega­
tive. RF-­positive disease is most likely the same disease as adult-­onset 
rheumatoid arthritis and tends to affect older children and adolescents. 
RF-­negative polyarticular JIA is much more common and affects all 
ages. The arthritis in these subtypes is symmetric and affects both small 
and large joints. Involvement of the small joints of the hands and feet, 
as well as the wrists, is very common. Chronic anterior uveitis may 
occur; it is more common in younger patients, especially if ANA test 
results are positive. The prognosis for those with polyarticular JIA is 
less favorable, with many children continuing to have some signs and 
symptoms of arthritis into adulthood.
Enthesitis-­Related Arthritis
The term spondyloarthropathy encompasses a group of diseases that 
potentially affect the spine and includes ankylosing spondylitis, pso­
riatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease–associated arthritis, and 
reactive arthritis. These diseases are grouped together because they 
share common clinical features such as male predominance, enthesi­
tis, dactylitis, peripheral oligoarticular disease, axial arthritis, acute 
symptomatic anterior uveitis, and an association with HLA-­B27. 
Within the current JIA classification criteria, psoriatic arthritis is 
TABLE 44.8  Differential Diagnosis of 
Monoarticular vs Polyarticular Arthritis and 
Arthralgia
Usually Monoarticular
Often Polyarticular
Common
Infectious arthritis
 • Bacterial
 • Mycobacterial
 • Fungal
Avascular necrosis
Hemarthrosis
Coagulopathy
Trauma/overuse
Oligoarticular JIA
Congenital hip dysplasia
Osteochondritis dissecans
Complex regional pain syndrome
Stress fracture
Osteomyelitis
Metastatic tumor (neuroblastoma, 
leukemia)
Polyarticular JIA
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis
Enthesitis-­related arthritis
 • Ulcerative colitis
 • Crohn disease
Serum sickness
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Viral arthritis
Immune complex–mediated post-­
bacteremia (Neisseria meningitidis, 
Haemophilus influenzae)
Hypermobility
Hemoglobinopathies
Rare
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Plant thorn synovitis
Familial Mediterranean fever
Synovioma
Synovial metastasis
Intermittent hydrarthrosis
Pancreatic fat necrosis
Gaucher disease
Behçet disease
Regional migratory osteoporosis
Amyloidosis
Synovial osteochondromatosis
Undifferentiated connective tissue 
disease
Relapsing polychondritis
Whipple disease
Sarcoidosis
Systemic JIA
Pulmonary hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy
Chondrocalcinosis-­like syndromes 
caused by ochronosis, 
hemochromatosis, Wilson disease
Acute rheumatic fever
Dialysis arthropathy
Crystal-­induced arthropathies
JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
Modified from McCune WJ. Monoarticular arthritis. In: Kelley WN, 
Harris ED, Ruddy S, et al., eds. Textbook of Rheumatology. 4th ed. Vol 
1. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993:369.
TABLE 44.9  Classification of Childhood 
Vasculitis
 • Predominantly large-­vessel vasculitis
 • Takayasu arteritis
 • Predominantly medium-­vessel vasculitis
 • Childhood polyarteritis nodosa
 • Cutaneous polyarteritis
 • Kawasaki disease
 • Predominantly small-­vessel vasculitis
 • Granulomatous
 
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
 
• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
 • Nongranulomatous
 
• Microscopic polyangiitis
 
• IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
 
• Isolated cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis
 
• Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
 • Other vasculitides
 • Behçet disease
 • Vasculitis secondary to infection (including hepatitis B–associated 
polyarteritis nodosa), malignancy, and medication (including 
hypersensitivity vasculitis)
 • Isolated vasculitis of the central nervous system
 • Cogan syndrome
 • Unclassified
IgA, immunoglobulin A.
Modified from Ozen S, Ruperto N, Dillon MJ, et al. EULAR/PReS 
endorsed consensus criteria for the classification of childhood 
vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006;65:936–941.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
831
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
classified separately, and the other spondyloarthropathies are desig­
nated as enthesitis-­related arthritis (ERA) because of the recognition 
that these forms of arthritis do not always affect the spine, especially 
during childhood. In addition to chronic arthritis, the JIA classifi­
cation criteria designate a patient as having ERA if they have two 
of the following criteria: persistent sacroiliac joint tenderness and/
or inflammatory lumbosacral pain, positive HLA-­B27 antigen, acute 
symptomatic anterior uveitis, presence of symptoms in a male over 6 
years of age, and, finally, a first-­degree relative with a history of anky­
losing spondylitis, ERA, sacroiliitis with inflammatory bowel disease, 
reactive arthritis, or acute anterior uveitis. This subtype of JIA affects 
older children and has a variable prognosis, with an increased risk of 
spondylitis over time.
Psoriatic Arthritis
The JIA criteria designate a patient with psoriatic arthritis if they have 
chronic arthritis accompanied either by a personal diagnosis of pso­
riasis or by a combination of two other clinical criteria (dactylitis, 
nail pitting/onycholysis, or psoriasis in a first-­degree relative). Psori­
atic arthritis in children may occur at any age and has an initial peak 
incidence between ages 2 and 3 years that appears clinically simi­
lar to oligoarticular JIA and a later peak incidence between ages 10 
and 12 years that appears clinically similar to ERA. The early-­onset 
form of psoriatic arthritis is more likely to affect females than boys, 
more often has associated dactylitis and a positive ANA, and is less 
often associated with a positive HLA-­B27. In contrast, the later-­onset 
form is more likely to occur in boys, is more often associated with 
TABLE 44.10  Classification Criteria for 
Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
General Definition of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
 • Arthritis that begins before the 16th birthday and persists for at 
least 6 wk
 • Other known causes of arthritis are excluded
Categories
Systemic Arthritis
 • Arthritis in one or more joints with or preceded by fever of at least 2-­wk 
duration that is documented to be daily (“quotidian”) for at least 3 days, 
and accompanied by one or more of the following:
 • Evanescent (nonfixed) erythematous rash
 • Generalized lymph node enlargement
 • Hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly
 • Serositis
Oligoarthritis
 • Arthritis affecting one to four joints during the first 6 mo of disease
 • Subcategories:
 • Persistent oligoarthritis: affecting not more than four joints throughout 
the disease course
 • Extended oligoarthritis: affecting a total of more than four joints after 
the first 6 mo of disease
Polyarthritis (RF Negative)
 • Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of disease
 • Negative test for RF
Polyarthritis (RF Positive)
 • Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of disease
 • Two or more positive tests for RF, separated by at least 3 mo during the 
first 6 mo of disease
Psoriatic Arthritis
 • Arthritis and psoriasis or suspicion of underlying psoriasis as 
evidenced by:
 • Formal diagnosis of psoriasis, or
 • At least two of the following:
 
• Dactylitis
 
• Nail pitting or onycholysis
 
• Psoriasis in a first-­degree relative
Enthesitis-­Related Arthritis
 • Arthritis and enthesitis, or
 • Arthritis or enthesitis with at least two of the following:
 • History of sacroiliac joint tenderness and/or inflammatory lumbosacral 
pain
 • Positive HLA-­B27 antigen
 • Onset of arthritis in a male over 6 yr of age
 • Acute (symptomatic) anterior uveitis
 • History of ankylosing spondylitis, enthesitis-­related arthritis, sacroiliitis 
with inflammatory bowel disease, reactive arthritis, or acute anterior 
uveitis in a first-­degree relative
Undifferentiated Arthritis
 • Arthritis that fulfills criteria in no category or in two or more of the above 
categories
HLA, human leukocyte antigen; RF, rheumatoid factor.
Criteria from Petty RE, Southwood TR, Manners P, et al. International 
League of Associations for Rheumatology classification of juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis: second revision, Edmonton, 2001. J Rheumatol. 
2004;31:391–392.
TABLE 44.11  Noninflammatory Mimics of 
Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
Disease
Distinguishing Features
Idiopathic multicentric 
osteolysis
Usually young children; restricted movement in 
wrists and ankles followed by rapid progressive 
resorption of carpal and tarsal bones; plain 
radiography with early extensive osteolytic 
changes
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Joint stiffness and contractures in the absence 
of systemic inflammation; characteristic facial 
features; multiorgan involvement
Fucosidosis
Polyarticular arthritis; developmental delay; joint 
findings may precede systemic features, such as 
visceromegaly, angiokeratomata, growth delay, 
recurrent infections
Camptodactyly–
arthropathy–coxa 
vara–pericarditis 
syndrome
Camptodactyly of the fifth fingers; swelling of 
interphalangeal joints, wrists, and knees without 
associated inflammation; lack of joint pain and 
morning stiffness; lack of systemic inflammation; 
progressive coxa vara; occasionally pericarditis
Progressive 
pseudorheumatoid 
dysplasia
Presentation in early childhood with progressive 
flexion contractures and stiffness of the 
interphalangeal joints, metaphyseal bony 
overgrowth of the metacarpals and phalanges, 
gradual but progressive involvement of remainder 
of axial skeleton and disproportionate short 
stature
Pachydermodactyly
Asymptomatic thickening and swelling of the 
skin and soft tissues around the proximal 
interphalangeal joints of the hands
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
832
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
a negative ANA and positive HLA-­B27, and is more likely to mani­
fest with enthesitis and axial arthritis. Psoriasis usually precedes the 
development of arthritis, but in some, arthritis can precede the skin 
disease, sometimes by many years. Up to 30% of patients with pso­
riasis will have associated arthritis, and patients with nail involve­
ment are more likely to develop arthritis. The severity of the arthritis 
does not typically correlate with the severity of the skin disease, and 
the prognosis is variable, with some having only occasional episodic 
arthritis in a few joints and others having severe, chronic arthritis in 
multiple joints.
Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
Systemic JIA (SJIA) affects children of all ages but is most commonly 
seen between the ages of 1 and 5 years. In SJIA, any number of joints 
may be affected, but most patients eventually develop polyarticular 
involvement. Children with SJIA initially have a characteristic quo­
tidian fever pattern, consisting of one or two high fever spikes each 
day with rapid return to normal or lower-­than-­normal temperature. 
An evanescent pink macular rash appears with the fever and may 
resolve completely as the child’s fever abates (see Figs. 44.3 and 44.4). 
Constitutional symptoms such as fatigue, poor appetite, and weight 
loss are common. Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatospleno­
megaly are also common; pericarditis or pleural effusions may occur. 
These children feel and appear ill during the fever spikes but may 
appear much improved once the fever abates. Peripheral leukocyto­
sis of 20,000 WBCs/mm3 or greater, anemia, and thrombocytosis are 
characteristic laboratory findings. Tests of ANA and RF are usually 
negative, and uveitis is very rare. In most patients, the fevers and 
rashes eventually subside and chronic arthritis persists as an isolated 
manifestation.
Patients with SJIA are at risk for macrophage activation syndrome, 
a life-­threatening complication of uncontrolled immune activation 
resulting in persistent, unremitting fever; petechial/purpuric rashes in 
some; hepatosplenomegaly; and potentially multiorgan dysfunction. 
Laboratory examination demonstrates elevated CRP and markedly ele­
vated ferritin with a paradoxically falling ESR due to consumption of 
fibrinogen. Cytopenias, particularly thrombocytopenia, are observed, 
as are hypertriglyceridemia and hypoalbuminemia. Hemophagocyto­
sis is observed in various tissues, most commonly in the bone marrow 
and cerebrospinal fluid. Diagnostic criteria for macrophage activation 
syndrome are presented in Table 44.12. If clinical suspicion for mac­
rophage activation syndrome remains high despite serum laboratory 
markers failing to satisfy diagnostic criteria, cerebrospinal fluid or 
bone marrow investigation for hemophagocytosis should strongly be 
considered.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of JIA and the determination of the subtype of JIA is 
based on clinical features (see Table 44.10). The differential diagnosis 
is broad (Tables 44.13 and 44.14; see Table 44.1). When there is iso­
lated monoarthritis of the knee and a child has been in an endemic 
area, Lyme disease should be considered (Table 44.15). Residing in or 
traveling to endemic areas, particularly if associated with a sugges­
tive prodromal illness, should prompt investigation for other infec­
tious arthritides (Table 44.16). Laboratory tests and imaging studies 
are used when necessary to exclude other illnesses. The RF and ANA 
tests are used to classify the subtype of JIA and to determine the risk 
of uveitis, but these tests are not sensitive or specific enough to be 
helpful as either screening tests or diagnostic tests for JIA. Oph­
thalmologic slit-­lamp evaluations are necessary at specific intervals 
to screen for anterior uveitis, because usually the uveitis is asymp­
tomatic and can progress to affect visual acuity before it causes other 
signs and symptoms.
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
In SLE, clinical manifestations are the result of increased production of 
both specific and nonspecific autoantibodies, with subsequent immune 
complex formation and deposition throughout the body. The cause of 
SLE is unknown; it is more common in females, Black individuals, 
and persons with a first-­degree relative with SLE. In childhood, the 
peak onset is during the early teen years and rarely occurs in children 
younger than 5 years. The potential clinical manifestations of SLE are 
numerous, and the illness demonstrates significant interindividual 
variability. Children with SLE have more severe disease than adults, 
with a greater incidence of renal involvement.
Diagnosis
SLE is suggested by the common manifestations of fever, malar 
rash (Fig. 44.9), photosensitivity, and arthritis. The arthritis is most 
often symmetric and polyarticular and frequently involves the small 
joints of the hands and feet. In contrast to JIA, the arthritis is typi­
cally nondeforming and does not result in erosions. The European 
League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and the American College of 
Rheumatology (ACR) classification criteria for SLE can be a guide to 
diagnosis (Fig. 44.10). Other clinical manifestations of SLE are listed 
in Table 44.17.
The ANA test is extremely sensitive, positive in more than 95% of 
children with SLE, and usually in a high titer; however, it is not spe­
cific. Testing for anti-­dsDNA antibodies, anti-­Smith antibodies, anti-­
RNP antibodies, and anti-­SSA and anti-­SSB antibodies should be 
performed in all children suspected of having SLE (see Table 44.4). 
Anti-­dsDNA antibodies and anti-­Smith antibodies are highly specific 
for SLE. Leukopenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and autoim­
mune hemolytic anemia, frequently with a positive direct Coombs 
test, are common. Urinalysis is mandatory to screen for nephritis, and 
proteinuria should increase the suspicion of associated glomerulone­
phritis. The complement proteins C3 and C4 are low in children with 
active SLE. Monitoring C3 and C4 levels helps guide therapy; the levels 
should increase to normal as the illness is better controlled.
Monogenic causes of SLE should be suspected in young children 
(younger than 5 years), in families with a history of SLE, and in patients 
with difficult-­to-­treat SLE. The most common genes associated with 
SLE are part of the type 1 interferonopathy group (Table 44.18). Mim­
ics of SLE are noted in Table 44.19.
TABLE 44.12  European League Against 
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology 
Classification Criteria for Macrophage Activation 
Syndrome Complicating Systemic Juvenile 
Idiopathic Arthritis (2016)
A febrile patient with known or suspected juvenile idiopathic arthritis is 
classified as having macrophage activation syndrome if the following 
criteria are met:
Ferritin >684 ng/mL and any two of the following:
 • Platelet count <181 × 109/L
 • Aspartate aminotransferase >48 units/L
 • Triglycerides >156 mg/dL
 • Fibrinogen <360 mg/dL
Laboratory abnormalities should not be otherwise explained by the patient’s 
condition, such as concomitant immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia, 
infectious hepatitis, visceral leishmaniasis, or familial hyperlipidemia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
833
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
TABLE 44.13  Differential Diagnosis of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: Rheumatic Disease
Rheumatic Fever
Juvenile Idiopathic 
Arthritis
Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus
Kawasaki Disease
Dermatomyositis
Sex predilection
None
Dependent on subgroup
Females > males
None
Girls 3:2
Age at onset
3 yr or older
1 yr or older
Usually >8 yr
4 yr or younger
2 yr or older
Joint manifestations
Transient migratory 
arthritis of primarily 
large joints
Oligoarticular or 
polyarticular; chronic 
(≥6 wk)
Arthralgia; transient 
arthritis; chronic 
arthritis
Pain and swelling 
of hands and feet; 
arthritis occasionally
Joint contractures; arthritis 
occasionally
Extra-­articular 
manifestations
Fever
Cardiac disease
Chorea
Rash
Nodules
Dependent on subgroup:
Systemic JIA: fever, rash, 
lymphadenopathy
Oligoarticular, 
polyarticular, psoriatic 
JIA: chronic iridocyclitis
Often multisystem 
disease, including 
nephritis
Fever
Conjunctivitis
Oral changes
Polymorphous rash
Lymphadenopathy
Coronary vasculitis
Rash
Muscle weakness
Myalgia
Gut vasculitis
Respiratory muscle weakness
Diagnostic studies
Prior streptococcal 
infection
Evidence of carditis on 
echocardiogram or ECG
May have ANA, RF
ANA
Autoantibodies
Low complement
Anti-­dsDNA antibody
Coronary dilatation 
or aneurysm on 
echocardiogram
Elevated muscle enzymes
Myopathic electromyography
Abnormal muscle biopsy
Pathogenesis
Poststreptococcal
Unknown
Immune complexes
Unknown
Unknown
Diagnosis
Clinical (Jones criteria)
Clinical (JIA criteria)
Clinical plus laboratory 
(EULAR/ACR criteria)
Clinical (Kawasaki 
criteria)
Clinical: rash plus myositis
Muscle biopsy
Natural history
Arthritis—transient
Carditis may cause 
permanent damage
Chronic: arthritis may be 
destructive
Chronic or recurrent
May be fatal
Self-­limited
Coronary vasculitis
May be fatal
Chronic
May be fatal
ANA, antinuclear antibody; anti-­dsDNA, anti–double-­stranded DNA; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; RF, rheumatoid factor; EULAR/ACR, European 
League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology.
Modified from Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:620.
TABLE 44.14  Differential Diagnosis of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: Nonrheumatic Disease
Septic Arthritis
Lyme Disease
Osteomyelitis
Viral 
Arthritis
Childhood 
Malignancy
Structural, 
Genetic
Growing 
Pains, 
Psychogenic
Sex predilection
None
None
None
Females > 
males
None
Dependent on 
condition
Growing pains: 
boys > girls
Psychogenic: 
girls > boys
Age at onset
Any
>2 yr
Any
More common 
in older 
children and 
adults
Any
Any
Growing pains: 
2–8 yr
Psychogenic: 
≥6 yr
Joint 
manifestations
85% monoarticular; 
joints swollen, red, 
hot, painful
Oligoarticular; 
episodic, 
recurrent
Sterile joint 
effusion adjacent 
to infected bone
Transient 
arthritis; often 
polyarticular
Severe bone/joint 
pain, night pains
Local bone/
joint pain or 
dysfunction
None or features 
of complex 
regional pain 
syndrome
Extra-­articular 
manifestations
Fever
SIRS
Other signs dependent 
on causative 
organism
Flulike illness
Erythema migrans
Meningitis
Cranial nerve 
palsies
Heart block
Fever
SIRS
Bone pain
Dependent on 
causative 
organism
Signs of underlying 
malignancy; 
no high fever, 
rash, or morning 
stiffness
Dependent on 
underlying 
condition
Dysmorphism
Structural 
abnormalities
Growing pains: 
none
Psychogenic: 
atypical
Diagnostic 
studies
Cultures: synovial 
fluid, blood, 
genital if Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae 
suspected
Serologic: 
antibody 
to Borrelia 
burgdorferi
Blood and bone 
culture
Bone scan
Viral culture/
PCR
Rise in antibody 
titers
Hematologic 
abnormalities
Abnormal 
radiograph or 
scan
Demonstration 
of abnormal 
structure or 
metabolic 
abnormality
Normal
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
834
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
DERMATOMYOSITIS
Dermatomyositis is characterized by perivascular inflammation in 
muscles and skin. Dermatomyositis is more common in females and 
can occur at any age, with an average age at onset of 8 years. The 
main manifestations include characteristic skin findings and proxi­
mal muscle weakness, specifically involving the neck flexors, deltoids, 
biceps, triceps, quadriceps, psoas, and hamstrings. These symptoms 
are occasionally accompanied by mild muscle pain, fatigue, or poor 
endurance. Early symptoms may include difficulties rising from the 
floor, climbing stairs, climbing in and out of a motor vehicle, and 
combing the hair; however, these symptoms are often subtle and not 
recognized early in the course of the disease. Some children with der­
matomyositis may have arthralgia or arthritis that is usually mild and 
transient.
Skin manifestations include Gottron papules, which are scaly, 
erythematous plaques or papules that appear over the MCP and PIP 
joints on the hands (see Fig. 44.6). Similar lesions are seen on the 
extensor surfaces of the elbows and knees and over the medial malle­
oli. The distribution of the rash is an early clue to the diagnosis. The 
periungual capillaries may become grossly dilated and may develop 
Septic Arthritis
Lyme Disease
Osteomyelitis
Viral 
Arthritis
Childhood 
Malignancy
Structural, 
Genetic
Growing 
Pains, 
Psychogenic
Pathogenesis
Direct synovial 
infection; immune 
complex deposition 
in gonococcal and 
meningococcal arthritis
Synovial and 
systemic 
infection with B. 
burgdorferi
Hematogenous 
infection of bone
Viral infection 
of synovium; 
immune 
complex 
deposition in 
some
Primary bone or 
periarticular 
tumor; bony 
metastasis
Idiopathic or 
genetic
No organic disease
Diagnosis
Demonstration of 
organisms in joint 
fluid
Clinical and 
serologic
Demonstration of 
organisms in blood/
bone; MRI of bone 
scan (early); plain 
radiographs (late)
Clinical; 
serologic; 
positive viral 
culture or PCR 
from synovial 
fluid
Bone marrow; 
tissue biopsy
Recognition of 
condition or 
syndrome; 
positive genetic 
or biochemical 
assay
Clinical
Natural history
Joint destruction
Self-­resolving
Bone/joint 
destruction
Self-­resolving
Joint 
manifestations 
may wax/wane
Chronic
Growing pains: 
benign
Psychogenic: may 
become chronic 
and disabling
PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Modified from Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:619.
TABLE 44.14  Differential Diagnosis of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: Nonrheumatic Disease—cont’d
TABLE 44.15  Manifestations of Lyme 
Disease by Stage
Early Localized Infection (occurs 3–30 days after tick bite)
Erythema migrans (EM) in 80–90% of patients; single lesion, occasionally 
associated with fever, malaise, neck pain or stiffness, arthralgia, and myalgia
Systemic symptoms noted above in the absence of EM during summer months
Borrelial lymphocytoma (rare, seen primarily in Europe)
Early Disseminated Infection (occurs weeks to months 
after tick bite)
Profound malaise and fatigue common
Multiple EM lesions with systemic symptoms similar to early localized infection
Migratory polyarthralgia and myalgia
Carditis (<3% of untreated patients)
Varying degrees of atrioventricular nodal block
Mild myopericarditis
Neurologic (<10% of untreated patients)
Cranial neuropathies (especially facial nerve palsy)
Lymphocytic meningitis
Radiculoneuropathies
Encephalomyelitis
Late Disease (occurs months to years after tick bite)
Arthritis (<10% of patients)
Acute monoarticular or migratory oligoarticular inflammatory arthritis, 
usually involving the knee
Chronic postinfectious arthritis (<10% of patients with arthritis)
Neurologic (very rare)
Peripheral neuropathies
Encephalomyelitis (primarily seen in Europe)
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans (primarily seen in Europe)
Modified from Bockenstedt LK. Lyme disease. In: Firestein GS, Budd 
RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013, Chapter 110, Table 110-­1.
TABLE 44.16  Infectious Mimics of 
Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
Nocardia
Brucella canis
Coxiella burnetii
Scrub typhus
Rickettsial diseases
Ehrlichiosis
Chikungunya virus
Zika virus
Dengue virus
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
835
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
thromboses that can be visualized either with the naked eye or with 
mild magnification. Heliotrope rash is a violaceous discoloration 
of the upper eyelids that is often accompanied by mild edema (see 
Fig. 44.5) and is pathognomonic for dermatomyositis. Some chil­
dren develop more extensive erythroderma that may appear over the 
shoulders, termed the shawl sign, or in a V-­neck distribution on the 
anterior upper chest. With severe disease, some patients also develop 
skin ulcerations.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is suggested by the rash and proximal muscle weakness 
detected on physical examination. Muscle enzymes are elevated in 
most, but not all, children with dermatomyositis. There may be eleva­
tions in only one or a few enzymes and therefore testing for aspartate 
aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, 
creatine kinase, and aldolase should be performed. The child with a 
characteristic rash, definite proximal muscle weakness, and elevated 
muscle enzyme levels does not require additional testing for diagno­
sis. If weakness is questionable, or if the rash is not characteristic, an 
EMG can confirm the presence of muscle inflammation. MRI is a sen­
sitive test for muscle inflammation and may be a less invasive method 
of evaluation. If there is any doubt regarding the diagnosis, a muscle 
biopsy is performed. The site for biopsy is determined by weakness on 
physical examination or localization by EMG or MRI. The quadriceps 
or the deltoids are the most commonly accessed biopsy sites. Involve­
ment of the muscle may be spotty, and a normal finding on muscle 
biopsy does not exclude dermatomyositis. Typical findings on biopsy 
include perivascular inflammation and perifascicular atrophy. Biopsy 
can help exclude other muscle diseases such as muscular dystrophies 
and metabolic myopathies.
SCLERODERMA
Scleroderma is classified into systemic sclerosis and localized sclero­
derma (Table 44.20). Localized scleroderma, which includes morphea 
and linear scleroderma, is limited to the skin and subcutaneous tissues, 
is much more common in childhood, and rarely progresses to involve 
internal organs. Systemic sclerosis can be life threatening, as it has the 
potential to involve internal organs and cause severe and widespread 
skin disease. Arthralgia is relatively common with scleroderma, but 
significant synovitis is unusual.
Morphea
Morphea is a patch of hardened skin that appears spontaneously on 
any part of the body. The skin becomes firm, stiff, atrophic, and discol­
ored. Hair is absent. Initially, the lesion appears violaceous, but then it 
fades to a yellowish-­brown or dusky appearance in most individuals. 
The patches are nontender, and children are otherwise asymptomatic. 
The natural history of morphea lesions is to gradually fade and soften 
after an initial period of expansion. Biopsy reveals excessive amounts 
of collagen in the dermis with absent hair follicles and diminished vas­
cular structures.
Linear Scleroderma
Linear scleroderma is histologically similar to morphea, though lesions 
consist not of isolated patches, but rather of bands that may extend 
through an entire limb, through part of the limb, or across the scalp 
and face, a finding termed a coup de sabre lesion. Cosmetically and 
functionally, linear scleroderma is much more severe than morphea, as 
the impacted areas may involve the face or limit limb use. Growth of 
the limb may be affected, and involvement of the digits can cause sig­
nificant functional difficulty. Coup de sabre lesions may be associated 
with neurologic abnormalities such as seizures; children with these 
lesions should have a careful neurologic examination and brain MRI 
as part of their evaluation.
Systemic Sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis typically begins with severe Raynaud phenome­
non, followed by thickening and tightening of the skin over the digits 
and hands and then the face, and then by varying degrees of progres­
sive skin changes over the extremities and trunk. Difficulty opening 
the mouth and decreased facial expression are signs of facial involve­
ment. As the skin over the hands tightens and hardens, pigment 
changes may occur, and flexion contractures of the small joints may 
develop. Renal disease, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, 
esophageal and gut dysmotility, and cardiac disease may all occur. 
Anti–Scl-­70 antibodies (antitopoisomerase I) are present in approx­
imately 30–40% of patients with systemic sclerosis and are very 
specific. There are no other helpful serologic tests. High-­resolution 
CT of the chest, esophagography, and echocardiography should be 
performed to screen for organ involvement and repeated at peri­
odic intervals. The course of systemic sclerosis is variable; patients 
with rapid progression tend to have a less favorable outcome. The 
CREST syndrome (calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal 
dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasias) has less severe cutane­
ous involvement than systemic sclerosis; however, these patients can 
develop life-­threatening pulmonary hypertension. CREST syndrome 
is associated with anticentromere antibodies.
RHEUMATIC FEVER
Acute rheumatic fever is a poststreptococcal illness, resulting 
from a cross-­reactive immune response to group A streptococcal 
Fig. 44.9  The malar rash of systemic lupus erythematosus crosses 
the nasal bridge and spares the nasolabial folds, a distribution that is 
referred to as a “butterfly rash.” (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley 
CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2016:299.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
836
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
If absent, do not classify as SLE
If present, apply additive criteria
Entry criterion
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) at a titer of ≥1:80 on HEp-2 cells or an equivalent positive test (ever)
Additive criteria
Do not count a criterion if there is a more likely explanation than SLE.
Occurrence of a criterion on at least one occasion is sufficient.
SLE classification requires at least one clinical criterion and ≥10 points.
Criteria need not occur simultaneously.
Within each domain, only the highest weighted criterion is counted toward the total score.§
Total score:
Classify as systemic lupus erythematosus with a score of 10 or more if entry criterion fulfilled.
Clinical domains and criteria
Constitutional
   Fever
Antiphospholipid antibodies
   Anti-cardiolipin antibodies OR
   Anti-β2GP1 antibodies OR
   Lupus anticoagulant
Complement proteins
   Low C3 OR low C4
   Low C3 AND low C4
SLE-specific antibodies
   Anti-dsDNA antibody* OR
   Anti-Smith antibody
Hematologic
   Leukopenia
   Thrombocytopenia
   Autoimmune hemolysis
Neuropsychiatric
   Delirium
   Psychosis
   Seizure
Mucocutaneous
   Non-scarring alopecia
   Oral ulcers
   Subacute cutaneous OR discoid lupus
   Acute cutaneous lupus
Serosal
   Pleural or pericardial effusion
   Acute pericarditis
Musculoskeletal
   Joint involvement
Renal
   Proteinuria >0.5g/24h
   Renal biopsy class II or V lupus nephritis
   Renal biopsy class Ill or IV lupus nephritis
2
2
6
5
6
4
8
10
6
2
2
4
6
3
4
4
3
4
2
3
5
Weight
Immunology domains and criteria
Weight
Fig. 44.10  Classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). *In an assay with ≥90% specificity 
against relevant disease controls. §Additional criteria items within the same domain will not be counted. (From 
Aringer M, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of 
Rheumatology classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2019;71[9]:1400–
1412.)
pharyngitis (see Chapters 2 and 9). It is most common in children 
older than 5 years and occurs more often after infection with cer­
tain serotypes of group A streptococci. There may also be genetic 
reasons that predispose some children and adults to the illness. 
Signs and symptoms of rheumatic fever typically develop 1–3 weeks 
after streptococcal pharyngitis. Clinical manifestations have been 
grouped according to the Jones criteria, which separate major from 
minor criteria (Table 44.21).
The arthritis of rheumatic fever is usually very painful and is dis­
proportionate to the degree of swelling on physical examination. It is 
usually a migratory arthritis of the large joints, rarely affecting the fin­
gers, spine, or toes, tending to last in one joint for several days and then 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
837
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
migrating to a different joint. The duration of joint symptoms is rarely 
longer than 3–4 weeks in untreated patients. If patients are treated with 
NSAIDs, the arthritis usually responds dramatically within 1–2 days. 
When rheumatic fever is a consideration and the diagnosis is unclear, 
it may be helpful to avoid NSAID use early in the course to avoid diag­
nostic confusion.
In the absence of carditis, rheumatic fever may be difficult to dis­
tinguish from early SJIA, Kawasaki disease, and viral-­induced fever, 
rash, and joint pain. The diagnosis is clinical. The Jones criteria were 
developed as a diagnostic aid and include echocardiographic evidence 
of valvulitis and, in populations with a higher risk of rheumatic fever, 
monoarthritis or polyarthralgia as less stringent major criteria (see 
Table 44.21). The presence of two of the major criteria or of one major 
and two minor criteria plus evidence of recent streptococcal infec­
tion is consistent with acute rheumatic fever. Either a positive throat 
culture or elevations of the antistreptococcal antibodies (i.e., anti–
streptolysin O, anti–DNase B) are the standard indicators of potential 
recent streptococcal infection. Fulfilling these criteria is not specific 
for rheumatic fever, especially when the evidence of recent strep­
tococcal infection is based on mildly elevated serologic test results. 
Conversely, there are children with isolated chorea or classic rheu­
matic carditis who have rheumatic fever without necessarily fulfilling 
the Jones criteria. When a diagnosis of rheumatic fever is considered 
in a child with joint symptoms, it is important to distinguish arthritis 
from arthralgia and to evaluate the nature of the arthritis when pres­
ent. If the arthritis is nonmigratory and is not exquisitely tender, or if 
it involves unusual joints such as those in the hands, feet, or spine or 
lasts longer than 1 week in a single joint, then alternative diagnoses 
are more likely.
Careful consideration of the diagnosis is especially important 
because of future implications regarding prognosis and treatment. 
Children with rheumatic fever may develop carditis with future epi­
sodes of streptococcal pharyngitis; each episode of carditis can produce 
additional heart valve damage. Therefore, prophylactic antibiotic treat­
ment is recommended to minimize streptococcal infections, even for 
patients who do not have carditis with the initial attack.
IGA VASCULITIS/HENOCH-­SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA
IgA vasculitis is an acute self-­limited systemic vasculitis of children char­
acterized by palpable purpura and often arthritis, gastrointestinal symp­
toms, and nephritis. It occurs most commonly between the ages of 3 and 
15 years. The presence of palpable purpura is essential for the diagnosis 
of HSP. Typically, the rash presents as petechiae that coalesce into larger 
purpura on dependent areas such as the buttocks and legs. The rash is 
often edematous and on occasion can become ulcerative. Arthritis occurs 
in up to 80% of children with HSP, is typically acute with significant pain 
and limitation of range of motion, and usually resolves within days to a 
week. Large joints tend to be affected and the arthritis is nonmigratory. 
In most cases, the rash of HSP precedes the development of arthritis, but 
occasionally, the arthritis may occur a few days before the rash. Other 
features that might suggest a diagnosis of HSP are gastrointestinal symp­
toms, nephritis, or angioedema. Gastrointestinal symptoms result from 
gut vasculitis causing intestinal edema and potentially ischemia and 
infarction of the gut. Gastrointestinal disease often presents as episodic 
abdominal pain from intussusception or with abdominal angina (post­
prandial abdominal pain related to intestinal ischemia). Rarely, hemato­
chezia or currant jelly–like stools can result from intestinal necrosis. In 
up to a third of cases, abdominal pain will precede the rash. Nephritis 
may occur at any time up to 6 months after the initial presentation and 
may manifest with hypertension or with proteinuria, hematuria, or casts 
on urinalysis. As such, serial urinalysis is recommended until 6 months 
after the initial presentation to screen for the development of nephri­
tis. Angioedema can occur on the dorsum of the hands or feet, scalp, 
forehead, eyelids, and scrotum. The acute manifestations of HSP usually 
resolve in 1–2 weeks and may recur episodically for several weeks after. 
Nephritis is potentially the most concerning complication that requires 
longer monitoring and prompt referral to a pediatric nephrologist if uri­
nary abnormalities persist.
MYALGIA
In the child with extremity pain, muscle pain needs to be distinguished 
from joint pain, bone pain, and the less common neuropathic pain. If the 
complaint is localized to the muscles, the differential diagnosis is narrowed 
considerably. Intermittent benign bilateral myalgia of the calves or thighs is 
one of the more common muscle pain presentations encountered in young 
children. These pains occur in an active child who has normal physical 
examination findings without evidence of weakness or systemic illness. 
Symptoms typically occur in the evening and resolve with massage or mild 
analgesics such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, usually within an hour. 
The frequency of pain can vary and in some children may escalate period­
ically. Additional evaluation or treatment is unnecessary in most children, 
and eventually the pains resolve completely.
TABLE 44.17  Additional Manifestations of 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Target Organ Potential Clinical Manifestations
Constitutional
Fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, fever, lymphadenopathy
Musculoskeletal
Arthritis, myositis, tendonitis, arthralgia, myalgia, 
avascular necrosis, osteoporosis
Skin
Malar rash, discoid (annular) rash, photosensitive rash, 
cutaneous vasculitis (petechiae, palpable purpura, digit 
ulcers, gangrene, urticaria), livedo reticularis, periungual 
capillary abnormalities, Raynaud phenomenon, alopecia, 
oral and nasal ulcers, panniculitis, chilblains, alopecia
Renal
Hypertension, proteinuria, hematuria, edema, nephrotic 
syndrome, renal failure
Cardiovascular
Pericarditis, myocarditis, conduction system 
abnormalities, Libman-­Sacks endocarditis
Neurologic
Seizures, psychosis, cerebritis, stroke, transverse 
myelitis, depression, cognitive impairment, headaches, 
migraines, pseudotumor, peripheral neuropathy 
(mononeuritis multiplex), chorea, optic neuritis, cranial 
nerve palsies, acute confusional states, dural sinus 
thrombosis, aseptic meningitis, anxiety disorder
Pulmonary
Pleuritis, interstitial lung disease, pulmonary hemorrhage, 
pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolism
Hematologic
Immune-­mediated cytopenias (hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, or leukopenia), anemia of chronic 
inflammation, hypercoagulability, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic microangiopathy
Gastroenterology Hepatosplenomegaly, pancreatitis, vasculitis affecting the 
bowel, protein-­losing enteropathy, peritonitis
Ocular
Retinal vasculitis, scleritis, episcleritis, papilledema, dry 
eyes, optic neuritis
Modified from Sadun RE, Ardoin SP, Schanberg LE. Systemic lupus 
erythematosus. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al., 
eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:1275, Table 183.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
838
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
TABLE 44.18  Reviewed Proteins and Genes Associated with Monogenic Forms of Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus
Protein
Gene
Inheritance
Mechanism
Female-­to-­Male 
Patient Ratio
Associated Symptoms
C1q
C1QA, C1QB, 
C1QC
Autosomal recessive
Complement deficiency
1:1
SLE (cutaneous, renal, CNS, 
arthritis, ANA), young age onset, 
recurrent bacterial infections
C1r/s
C1R, C1S
Autosomal recessive
Complement deficiency
1:1
SLE (fever, cutaneous, arthritis, 
renal, ANA, ENA), recurrent 
infections, encapsulated 
bacteria, Hashimoto thyroiditis
C2
C2
Autosomal recessive
Complement deficiency
7:1
SLE (cutaneous, arthritis), young 
age onset, type 1 diabetes
C4
C4A, C4B
Autosomal recessive
Complement deficiency
1:1
SLE (severe photosensitive rash, 
renal, ANA, Ro), young age onset
TREX1
TREX1
Autosomal dominant (FCL), autosomal 
recessive and dominant (AGS)
Abnormal DNA clearance leading 
to IFN activation
Likely 1:1
FCL, AGS, SLE
MDA5
IFIH1
Autosomal dominant
Activation of IFN production
Likely 1:1
AGS, SLE, FCL, IgA deficiency
SAMHD1
SAMHD1
Autosomal recessive and dominant
Abnormal DNA or RNA clearance 
leading to IFN production
Likely 1:1
AGS, SLE, FCL, photosensitivity
RNaseH2
RNASH2
Autosomal dominant and recessive
Abnormal RNA clearance leading 
to IFN production
Likely 1:1
AGS, SLE
ADAR1
ADAR1
Mainly autosomal dominant
Abnormal RNA clearance leading 
to IFN production
Likely 1:1
AGS, SLE
STING
TMEM173
Autosomal dominant
Activation of IFN production
1:1
SAVI, FCL, SLE
DNase I
DNASE1
Autosomal dominant
Abnormal DNA clearance-­break 
intolerance
Female
SLE (dsDNA), adolescent onset, 
Sjögren syndrome
DNase 
1-­like-­3
DNASE1L3
Autosomal recessive
Abnormal DNA clearance-­break 
intolerance
1:2
SLE (hypocomplementemia, 
dsDNA, cANCA, renal), HUVS
AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CNS, central nervous system; dsDNA, 
double-­stranded DNA; ENA, extractable nuclear antigen antibody; FCL, familial chilblain lupus; HUVS, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis 
syndrome; IFN, interferon; IgA, immunoglobulin A; SAVI, STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Hiraki LT, Silverman ED. Genomics of systemic lupus erythematosus: insights gained by studying monogenic young-­onset systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2017;43:415–434 (Table 1, p. 417).
TABLE 44.19  Mimics of Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus
Drug induced (medication or biologic agents)
Kikuchi disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenopathy)
Evans syndrome (autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia)
Castleman disease (multicentric)
Lymphoma
Type 1 interferonopathy
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Prolidase deficiency
Graft versus host disease
Parvovirus B19
Endocarditis
TABLE 44.20  Classification of Scleroderma
Systemic Sclerosis
 • Diffuse cutaneous: systemic fibrosis, including widespread skin 
involvement (face, trunk, and both proximal and distal extremities) and 
internal organ involvement (lungs, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, heart)
 • Limited cutaneous (includes CREST syndrome): skin fibrosis limited to the 
distal extremities, face, and neck; internal organ involvement occurs late, 
if at all, with pulmonary hypertension often being the most significant 
development
 • Overlap: features of a second rheumatic disease
Localized Scleroderma
 • Morphea: a single, discrete patch of fibrotic skin; no organ involvement
 • Generalized morphea: multiple discrete patches of fibrotic skin; no organ 
involvement
 • Linear scleroderma: band of fibrosis on the face (coup de sabre) or along an 
extremity, sometimes extending the entire length; no organ involvement
 • Mixed
 • Pansclerotic: severe joint contractures
CREST, calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, 
sclerodactyly, and telangiectasias.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
839
CHAPTER 44  Arthritis
As myalgia may accompany polymyositis and dermatomyositis, 
every child complaining of muscle pain should undergo careful muscle 
strength testing. Myalgia may also be seen with vasculitis and SJIA. 
Many children with acute-­onset diffuse myalgia have a transient viral 
illness, and pain usually resolves within several days; however, infec­
tion with influenza can cause an exquisitely painful myositis of the 
gastrocnemius muscles with difficulty ambulating. This condition is 
usually distinguished easily from a chronic inflammatory muscle dis­
ease by the sudden onset and localization to these specific muscles. The 
creatine kinase level may be very elevated. Myoglobinuria may ensue 
and potentially affect renal function; therefore, affected children should 
undergo urinalysis to determine if myoglobinuria is present. Myoglo­
bin in the urine will yield positive results for heme in the absence of 
erythrocytes on microscopic examination. The myositis associated 
with influenza and other viruses typically resolves within 1 week and 
treatment is symptomatic.
COMPLEX REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME
Complex regional pain syndrome is rare in childhood and poorly 
understood (see Chapter 33). After a seemingly minor injury, affected 
children develop intense pain in an extremity or part of an extremity. 
Additional symptoms include intermittent autonomic changes such 
as discoloration, coolness, and localized excessive sweating. The pain 
leads to progressive disability of the extremity, occasionally resulting 
in fixed posturing of a hand, foot, or limb. Severely affected children 
become disabled, are unable to ambulate at times, and are often unable 
to attend school. Psychosocial comorbidity is common. The treatment 
is analgesia, intense physical and occupational therapy, education, and 
psychologic counseling. Some children improve dramatically within a 
few days of instituting therapy, whereas in others, the pain and disabil­
ity persist, and the process lasts indefinitely. In some instances, sympa­
thetic nerve blockade is helpful.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
The differential diagnosis of arthritis is extensive. Thorough history 
and physical examination, especially repeated over time, are essential 
in establishing a diagnosis and initiating a treatment plan. Potential 
diagnostic pitfalls are noted in Table 44.22. Red flags include man­
ifestations suggestive of septic arthritis (fever, single joint involve­
ment, erythema, extreme tenderness, leukocytosis), malignancy 
(severe polyarthralgia, night pain, nonarticular bone pain, absence 
of obvious swelling or stiffness, positive radiographic changes, and 
cytopenias), and Lyme disease. The presence of associated systemic 
signs and symptoms are an indication that the joint complaints are 
potentially part of a systemic rheumatic disease such as SLE, JIA, 
MAS, or rheumatic fever.
A variety of noninflammatory conditions may mimic JIA; further­
more, several infectious entities may produce arthritis and systemic 
TABLE 44.21  Jones Criteria for Diagnosis 
of Rheumatic Fever
All patient populations must demonstrate evidence of a preceding GAS 
infection
Initial ARF: two major manifestations OR one major plus two minor 
manifestations
Recurrent ARF: two major OR one major and two minor OR three minor 
manifestations
Major Criteria
Carditis: clinical (audible murmur) or subclinical (echocardiographic evidence 
of valvulitis)
Subcutaneous nodules
Erythema marginatum
Chorea
Low-­risk populations*: polyarthritis
Moderate-­ and high-­risk populations: polyarthritis, monoarthritis, or 
polyarthralgia†
Minor Criteria
Fever (≥38.5°C)
Peak ESR ≥30 mm/hr and/or CRP ≥3.0 mg/dL‡
Prolonged P-­R interval, after accounting for age variability (unless carditis is 
a major criterion)
Low-­risk populations: polyarthralgia
Moderate-­ and high-­risk populations: monoarthralgia
*Low-­risk populations are those with an ARF incidence ≤2/100,000 
school-­aged children or an all-­age rheumatic heart disease prevalence 
of ≤1/1000 population per year.
†Polyarthralgia should only be considered as a major manifestation in 
moderate-­ to high-­risk populations after exclusion of other causes. As in 
past versions of the criteria, erythema marginatum and subcutaneous 
nodules are rarely “stand-­alone” major criteria. Additionally, joint man­
ifestations can only be considered in either the major or minor catego­
ries, but not both in the same patient.
‡The CRP value must be greater than the upper limit of normal for the 
laboratory. Because ESR may evolve during the course of ARF, peak 
ESR values should be used.
ARF, acute rheumatic fever; GAS, group A streptococcal.
Modified from Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the 
Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of 
Doppler echocardiography. Circulation. 2015;131:1806–1818.
TABLE 44.22  Potential Pitfalls in Diagnosis
Do
	1.	Examine all joints.
	2.	Order radiographs of both affected and contralateral joints.
	3.	Ask parents to photograph swelling and rashes.
	4.	Explore the complete history including the psychosocial history in all 
patients.
	5.	Perform a thorough physical examination.
	6.	Consider the presence of MAS in patients with JIA or SLE.
Do Not
	1.	Indiscriminately order ANA tests, RF tests, or Lyme antibody tests 
in patients who do not have clinical features consistent with SLE, 
polyarthritis, or Lyme disease, respectively.
	2.	Confuse arthralgia (joint pain) with arthritis (inflammation).
	3.	Treat with prednisone before a diagnosis is clear, or before malignancy 
has been excluded.
	4.	Assume laboratory test results are accurate; repeat tests if necessary.
	5.	Be impatient; many illnesses associated with arthritis take time to either 
resolve or evolve; patience is often required to make an accurate diagnosis.
ANA, antinuclear antibody; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MAS, mac­
rophage activating syndrome; RF, rheumatoid factor; SLE, systemic 
lupus erythematosus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
840
SECTION 8  Musculoskeletal Disorders
symptoms that mimic SJIA. The child with a history of injury and 
the acute onset of extremity pain may have a fracture or traumatic 
hemarthrosis, which requires prompt evaluation and management. 
Any child with extremity pain, including children with arthritis, may 
have leukemia or neuroblastoma. Systemic symptoms, such as fatigue 
and poor appetite with weight loss, may accompany the pain and 
increase suspicion of malignancy. Deep bone pain caused by marrow 
invasion may not be accompanied by any obvious physical findings. 
A normal or slightly low platelet count with an elevated ESR increases 
the suspicion of malignancy. If leukemia is suspected, a CBC should 
be obtained, a peripheral smear reviewed, and a bone marrow aspira­
tion performed. This is particularly important if treatment with ste­
roids or other immunosuppressive medications is being considered. 
Steroids may alleviate inflammation and discomfort but may also 
place a child with leukemia at risk for relapse with steroid-­resistant 
disease.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
840.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley and Firestein’s Textbook of 
Rheumatology. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017.
Freira S, Fonseca H, Dias Ferreira P, et al. SAPHO syndrome in an adolescent: 
a clinical case with unusual severe systemic impact. J Adolesc Health. 
2014;55:304–306.
Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Silman AJ, et al., eds. Rheumatology. 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.
Martinez-­Rios C, Jariwala MP, Highmore K, et al. Imaging findings of sterile 
pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum and acne (PAPA) syndrome: 
differential diagnosis and review of the literature. Pediatr Radiol. 
2019;49:23–36.
Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric 
Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
Al-­Mayouf SM. Noninflammatory disorders mimic juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis. Intern J Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2018;5(1):1–4.
Chu H, Song J, Kim DY. Pachydermodactyly: a benign cutaneous 
condition that may be misdiagnosed as a joint disorder. J Rheumatol. 
2016;43(8):1615–1616.
Crayne CB, Beukelman T. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Pediatr Clin N Am. 
2018;65:657–674.
Fathalla BM, Goldsmith DP. Pachydermatodactyly mimics polyarticular 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis. J Pediatr. 2009;155:931–933.
Giancane G, Consolaro A, Lanni S, et al. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis: diagnosis 
and treatment. Rheumatol Ther. 2016;3(2):187–207.
Grom A, Horne A, De Benedetti F. Macrophage activation syndrome in the era 
of biologic therapy. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2016;12(5):259–268.
Hersh AO, Prahalad S. Immunogenetics of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a 
comprehensive review. J Autoimmun. 2015;64:113–124.
Kumar S, Vaidyanathan B, Gayathri S, et al. Systemic onset juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis with macrophage activation syndrome misdiagnosed as Kawasaki 
disease: case report and literature review. Rheumatol Int. 2013;33:1065–
1069.
Ravelli A, Minoia F, Davì S, et al. 2016 classification criteria for macrophage 
activation syndrome complicating systemic juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis: a European League Against Rheumatism/American College of 
Rheumatology/Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials Organisation 
collaborative initiative. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016;75(3):481–489.
Shenoi S. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis – changing times, changing terms, 
changing treatments. Ped Review. 2017;38(5):221–232.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Calixto OJ, Franco JS, Anaya JM. Lupus mimickers. Autoimmun Rev. 
2014;13:865–872.
Chasset F, Richez C, Martin T, et al. Rare diseases that mimic systemic lupus 
erythematous (lupus mimickers). Joint Bone Spine. 2019;86:165–171.
Hiraki LT, Silverman ED. Genomics of systemic lupus erythematosus: insights 
gained by studying monogenic young-­onset systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2017;43:415–434.
Lahita RG. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. 5th ed. London: Elsevier; 2011.
Lee-­Kirsch MA. The type I interferonopathies. Annu Rev Med. 2017;68:297–
315.
Martin A, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against 
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2019;71(9):1400–1412.
Onengiya H, Shima Y, Brunner H. Childhood-­onset systemic lupus 
erythematosus: a review and update. J Pediatr. 2018;196:22–30.
Shenoi S, Ou J-­N, Ni C, et al. Comparison of biomarkers for systemic juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis. Pediatr Res. 2015;78(5):554–559.
Volpi S, Picco P, Caorsi R, et al. Type 1 interferonopathies in pediatric 
rheumatology. Pediatr Rheumatol. 2016;14:35.
Wynne E, Wynne K, Cleary M, Brogan PA. Fucosidosis mimicking juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis. Rheumatol Adv Pract. 2018;2(2):rky040.
Infectious Arthritis
American Academy of Pediatrics. Lyme disease. In: Kimberlin DW, Brady 
MT, Jackson MA, et al., eds. Red Book: 2018 Report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. 31st ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2018:515–523.
Day MJ, Breitschwerdt E, Cleaveland S, et al. Surveillance of zoonotic 
infectious disease transmitted by small companion animals. Emerg Infect 
Dis. 2012;18(12).
Gutierrez KM. Infectious and inflammatory arthritis. In: Long SS, Prober CG, 
Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 5th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.
Kapur N, Adib N, Grimwood K. Nocardia brasiliensis infection 
mimicking juvenile idiopathic arthritis in a 4-­year-­old girl. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(5):e1424–e1427.
Miner JJ, Aw-­Yeang H-­X, Fox JM, et al. Chikungunya viral arthritis in the 
United States: a mimic of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis & 
Rheumatol (Hoboken, NJ). 2015;67(5):1214–1220.
Singal A. Chikungunya and skin: current perspective. Indian Dermatol Online 
J. 2017;8(5):307–309.
Sood SK. Lyme disease in children. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2015;29(2):281–294.
Steere A, Strle F, Wormser G, et al. Lyme borreliosis [published correction 
appears in Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Aug 03;3:17062]. Nat Rev Dis 
Primers. 2016;2:16090.
Dermatomyositis
Dimachkie MM, Barohn RJ, Amato A. Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. 
Neurol Clin. 2014;32(3):595–628.
Rider L, Nistala K. The juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: 
pathogenesis, clinical and autoantibody phenotypes, and outcomes. J Intern 
Med. 2016;280(1):24–38.
Scleroderma
Torok KS. Pediatric scleroderma-­systemic and localized forms. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 2012;59(2):381–405.
Torok KS, Li S, Jacobe H, et al. Immunopathogenesis of pediatric localized 
scleroderma. Front Immunol. 2019;10:908.
Van den Hoogen F, Khanna D, Fransen J, et al. 2013 classification criteria 
for systemic sclerosis: an American College of Rheumatology/European 
League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheum. 
2013;65:2737–2747.
Other Causes of Arthritis and Extremity Pain
Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the 
diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography. 
Circulation. 2015;131(20):1806–1818.
Nocton J. Usual and unusual manifestations of systemic and central nervous 
system vasculitis. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64(1):185–204.
Weissmann R, Uziel Y. Pediatric complex regional pain syndrome: a review. 
Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2016;14(1):29.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
