1091
Hypoglycemia, although rare in children beyond the newborn period, 
is an acute, life-­threatening medical emergency that may result in sei­
zures, permanent brain injury, or even sudden death. Hypoglycemia 
may represent a serious underlying disorder due to hormonal deficien­
cies, metabolic defects, genetic disorders, drugs, or toxins. Therefore, to 
evaluate hypoglycemia either in a child or newborn, a comprehensive 
strategy for diagnosis and treatment is crucial. Hypoglycemia occurs 
when there is a disruption in the normal response of the metabolic 
and endocrine systems during the transition from fed to fasted state 
resulting in an imbalance in glucose homeostasis, either excessive glu­
cose removal from the circulation or deficient glucose delivery into the 
circulation, or both. To make the accurate diagnosis, it is essential to 
obtain labs at the time of hypoglycemia that includes plasma and urine 
specimens for critical hormones, as well as metabolic products before 
initiating treatment. However, treatment should never be delayed if 
there is uncertainty as to what critical labs are required. Obtaining a 
“red top” and “green top” blood collection tube will allow for most all 
studies to be run.
DEFINITION OF HYPOGLYCEMIA
The precise definition of hypoglycemia, one applicable to all age groups, 
is controversial. Historically, a working definition for significant hypo­
glycemia was initially developed based on the clinical manifestations of 
low blood sugars in neonates.
Attempts have been made to define hypoglycemia by using oper­
ational thresholds or a clinical approach. An operational threshold is 
based on the glucose in plasma or whole blood that prompts the inter­
vention and is defined as blood glucose <40 mg/dL (plasma glucose 
levels <45 mg/dL); the clinical approach defines the blood glucose 
concentration threshold at which clinical signs and symptoms appear 
(and disappear by correcting the low glucose concentration). The wide 
range of blood glucose concentrations at which clinically overt signs 
may appear has led to uncertainty in definition.
Regardless of the wide fluctuations in glucose levels (between 
fed and fasting states), plasma blood glucose is normally maintained 
within a very narrow range of 70–100 mg/dL. A plasma glucose value 
below 40 mg/dL is commonly taken as the clinical definition of hypo­
glycemia. However, subtle signs and symptoms of neuroglycopenia 
can be documented at plasma glucose levels below 70 mg/dL and are 
more apparent at glucose levels below 60 or 50 mg/dL. For provocative 
tests, such as fasting studies, a glucose level of 50 mg/dL can be taken 
as sufficiently low for judging fuel and hormonal responsiveness. The 
response to a given level of plasma glucose can vary, depending on the 
underlying disorder. Patients with glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency 
(type 1 glycogen storage disease) may appear asymptomatic at glu­
cose levels below 40 mg/dL because they have concomitant elevations 
of plasma lactate and ketones, which can partially spare the glucose 
utilization by the brain. On the other hand, children with defects in 
fatty acid oxidation can become very ill at plasma glucose levels as high 
as 60 mg/dL because they have no alternative fuels (ketones) to glucose 
as a substrate for the brain, heart, and skeletal muscle.
When comparing reported glucose values, the clinician must recog­
nize some technical factors. Unless a free-­flow blood sample is obtained 
from the infant with minimal pain, the glucose values are likely to be 
unreliable. Second, whole blood glucose values are slightly lower than 
those of plasma because of the dilution by the fluid in the red blood 
cells. Finally, hematocrit also influences the blood glucose concentra­
tion. This is particularly important in newborns whose hematocrit val­
ues are higher than older infants and children. A high hematocrit level 
results in lower blood glucose concentration; the opposite is true for 
low hematocrit values.
It was once common practice to accept lower standards for glucose 
levels in newborns because of the high frequency of low plasma glu­
cose levels on the day of birth. It should be stressed that these lower 
values represent a purely “statistical” definition of normal; there is no 
evidence that the neonatal brain has less need for glucose than do the 
brains of older children or adults. Specific maturational delays in sev­
eral of the fasting systems (metabolic, endocrine) adequately explain 
why neonates have such a high risk of hypoglycemia during the first 
12–24 hours after delivery. The use of different glucose standards for 
newborns should be discouraged, and the same treatment goals for 
hypoglycemia should be applied to newborns and older children: that 
is, to maintain plasma glucose levels above 60 mg/dL.
REGULATION OF BLOOD GLUCOSE 
CONCENTRATION
The brain is solely dependent upon glucose as a primary source of 
energy. However, during the period of starvation, it can also use ketones 
as an alternative (but not sole) source for energy production. Glucose is 
derived from either the intestinal absorption of dietary carbohydrates 
(exogenous source) or endogenous production (glycogenolysis or glu­
coneogenesis). Within 2–3 hours after a meal, glucose absorption from 
the intestine ceases, and the liver becomes the major source of glucose 
for the brain and other tissues. The liver produces glucose through a 
combination of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis (Fig. 57.1). Gluco­
neogenesis provides approximately 25% of hepatic glucose production 
in the early phases of fasting; the rate of gluconeogenesis is determined 
largely by rates of proteolysis and remains constant throughout fasting. 
Hepatic glycogenolysis provides most of the glucose production early 
in a fast, but by 12 hours, liver glycogen stores become depleted. The 
body must then begin to depend on release of fatty acids by lipolysis 
from stores of fat in adipose tissue. Most tissues can oxidize free fatty 
acids (FFAs) directly and thus minimize their use of glucose. The major 
exception is the brain, which is unable to directly oxidize FFAs because 
Hypoglycemia
Alvina R. Kansra
57
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1092
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
FFAs cannot cross the blood-­brain barrier. Partial oxidation of FFAs 
in the liver produces ketones (β-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate), 
which are readily oxidized by the brain, thus sparing cerebral glucose 
consumption.
Metabolic systems and hormones normally prevent hypoglycemia 
during fasting (Tables 57.1 and 57.2). The integration of these systems 
is demonstrated by the changes in plasma concentrations of the major 
fuels and hormones during fasting (Fig. 57.2). Plasma glucose concen­
trations gradually decline over the course of the fast as liver glycogen 
reserves are depleted. In infants and young children, with their larger 
ratio of brain to body mass, glucose levels fall faster than in older chil­
dren and adults and may reach 50 mg/dL by 24–30 hours of fasting. 
Plasma levels of lactate, a representative gluconeogenic precursor, 
decline while fasting as hepatic gluconeogenesis is stimulated and 
Glycogen
Glucose-1-P
Glucose-6-P
Glucose
Plasma
glucose
Plasma lactate,
alanine
Plasma free
fatty acids
G-6-Pase
F-1,6-Pase
GLUT2
Fructose-6-P
Fructose-1,6-P
Triose-phosphates
Fructose, glycerol
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
Phosphorylase
kinase
Phosphorylase
Galactose
Debrancher
+
Brancher
Glycogen synthase
PEP
carboxykinase
Pyruvate
carboxylase
Acetyl-CoA
Carnitine cycle
HMG-CoA synthase
HMG-CoA lyase
Mitochondrial
membrane
Plasma
membrane
β-Oxidation
Electron transport
β-Hydroxybutyrate
acetoacetate
Oxaloacetate
Amino acids
TCA cycle
Citrate
Fig. 57.1  Metabolic systems of fasting adaptation. Shown are the pathways of hepatic gluconeogenesis, 
glycogenolysis, and ketogenesis. Key enzyme steps are in boldface. Enzyme steps in gluconeogenesis: 
pyruvate carboxylase, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxykinase, fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphatase (F-­1,6-­Pase), 
glucose-­6-­phosphatase (G-­6-­Pase), and the plasma membrane glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2). Enzyme steps 
in glycogenolysis: glycogen synthase, glycogen brancher enzyme, glycogen phosphorylase kinase, glycogen 
phosphorylase, and glycogen debrancher enzyme. Steps in ketogenesis include a series of enzyme steps 
in the carnitine cycle for transporting fatty acids across the mitochondrial membrane, enzymes of the β-­
oxidation cycle, enzymes of electron transport, and enzymes of ketone synthesis (3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­
coenzyme A [HMG-­CoA] synthase and HMG-­CoA lyase). P, phosphate; TCA, tricarboxylic acid.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1093
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
protein turnover slows. Plasma FFA levels begin to rise quickly after 
12–20 hours of fasting in response to the fall in insulin concentrations 
as glucose levels decline. The increased availability of FFAs is accompa­
nied by a 10-­ to 20-­fold rise in plasma ketone levels as hepatic oxidation 
of FFAs is activated. Determining the circulating levels of these fuels 
and hormones at the point of hypoglycemia provides the most critical 
information for diagnosing the cause of hypoglycemia.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
A variety of signs and symptoms may occur in patients with hypogly­
cemia (Table 57.3). They can be divided into two categories. Those in 
the first category result from activation of the autonomic nervous sys­
tem and release of the counter-­regulatory hormone epinephrine (neu­
rogenic). Those in the second category are secondary to inadequate 
delivery of glucose to the brain (neuroglycopenia).
CAUSES OF TRANSIENT NEONATAL 
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Hypoglycemia is a common problem in newborns. Most cases are 
transient, although the neonatal period is also the time when inher­
ited disorders are most likely to manifest. The differential diagnosis of 
hypoglycemia is extensive (Tables 57.4 and 57.5).
Normal Newborns
As many as 30% of normal, full-­term newborns and those appropriate 
for gestational age may be unable to maintain plasma glucose levels 
above 50 mg/dL if they fast during the first 6 hours after delivery. By 
the second day of life, the frequency of plasma glucose concentrations 
below 50 mg/dL decreases to <1%, which indicates a rapid maturation 
of fasting metabolic adaptation. The poor fasting tolerance on the day 
of birth can be explained by lack of development of key enzymes in 
the pathways of both hepatic gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis. Tran­
scription of these genes is delayed until after delivery but becomes well 
activated by the end of the first 24 hours. Glucagon and cortisol may 
be important for activation of enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis. 
Ingestion of long-­chain fats (e.g., in colostrum) may be important for 
triggering transcription of the two enzymes of ketogenesis. Thus, on 
the day of birth, all newborns can be viewed as having impaired fast­
ing adaptation. In the absence of other risk factors, hypoglycemia in 
the first day may necessitate only feeding and follow-­up blood glucose 
determination to ensure that further work-­up is not necessary. Breast­
fed babies are at special risk for hypoglycemia when there are problems 
initiating milk production.
Newborns Small for Gestational Age and Premature 
Infants
Hypoglycemia is significantly more common in premature infants and 
those small for gestational age because of decreased stores of glycogen, 
fat, and protein. In addition, the enzymes necessary for gluconeogene­
sis may be less developed than in normal full-­term infants.
Infants of Diabetic Mothers
Infants born to mothers with any type of diabetes, including gestational 
diabetes, are at risk for hypoglycemia due to increased insulin secretion 
before birth that persists for the first few days after delivery. This tran­
sient neonatal hyperinsulinemia occurs because maternal hyperglyce­
mia stimulates fetal insulin secretion and, after delivery, affected infants 
have difficulty in downregulating insulin secretion to adapt to the with­
drawal of the hyperglycemia. Because of the growth-­stimulating effects 
of insulin on the fetus, infants of diabetic mothers are often large for 
gestational age. Blood glucose levels should be monitored after birth 
until they stabilize in the normal range. Enteral feedings should be ini­
tiated as soon as possible to prevent fasting hypoglycemia. Hypoglyce­
mia should be treated with intravenous glucose; the problem should 
resolve promptly, within 1–2 days. Prolonged hyperinsulinism (HI) 
in infants of diabetic mothers should raise the suspicion of either a 
genetic form of HI or perinatal stress-­induced HI.
Perinatal Stress-­Induced Hyperinsulinism
Some infants with birth asphyxia or intrauterine growth restriction 
may have severe problems with hypoglycemia for prolonged periods, 
ranging from a few days to a few months after birth. This form of tran­
sient HI has not been well characterized, but it is probably not rare. The 
mechanism appears to be HI; oral diazoxide, which decreases insulin 
secretion, provides good control of hypoglycemia in these infants.
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
An association between hypoglycemia and erythroblastosis fetalis 
caused by Rh incompatibility occurs in infants who are anemic at birth 
(cord hemoglobin <10 g/dL). The low blood glucose levels in these 
TABLE 57.1  Metabolic Systems and 
Hormones Regulating Blood Glucose
Metabolic Systems
Hepatic gluconeogenesis
Hepatic glycogenolysis
Adipose tissue lipolysis
Fatty acid oxidation (liver and peripheral organs) and hepatic ketogenesis
Hormonal Systems
Insulin
Counter-­regulatory hormones
Glucagon
Cortisol
Growth hormone
Epinephrine
TABLE 57.2  Hormonal Regulation of Fasting Metabolic Systems
Hormone
Hepatic Glycogenesis
Hepatic Glucogenesis
Adipose Tissue Lipolysis
Hepatic Ketogenesis
Insulin
Inhibits
Inhibits
Inhibits
Inhibits
Glucagon
Stimulates
—
—
—
Cortisol
—
Stimulates
—
—
Growth hormone
—
—
Stimulates
—
Epinephrine
Stimulates
Stimulates
Stimulates
Stimulates
From Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2002.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1094
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
infants have been attributed to high plasma insulin concentration. The 
cause of these high insulin levels remains undefined. The current pre­
vention and management of Rh sensitization have markedly reduced 
the incidence of erythroblastosis and of fetal and neonatal anemia. 
Nonetheless, such infants require careful monitoring of plasma glucose 
concentration soon after birth.
Intrapartum Maternal Glucose Administration
Administration of excessive glucose quantities to the mother during 
labor results in maternal as well as fetal hyperglycemia. Increased fetal 
glucose concentration causes increased fetal insulin secretion and fetal 
HI. If the glucose has been administered to the mother immediately 
before the infant’s birth, the infant is born with high insulin levels. An 
acute administration of large amounts of glucose-­containing fluids to 
prevent hypotension in women receiving conduction anesthesia could 
result in acute fetal hyperglycemia, HI, and metabolic acidosis due to 
increased lactate concentration, resulting in transient HI that leads to 
hypoglycemia in a fetus. This effect is more pronounced if the mother 
has received glucose infusion for a prolonged period of time.
Maternal Drug Therapy
The various pharmacologic agents administered to the mother for the 
treatment of medical problems that can influence blood glucose levels 
in the newborn can be divided into two broad categories:
	1.	 Some drugs, including oral hypoglycemic agents, can directly affect 
blood glucose. Oral hypoglycemic agents, such as chlorpropamide, 
metformin, and sulfonylureas, are administered by some physi­
cians for the treatment of gestational diabetes. These drugs are 
easily transported across the placenta, and the infant is born with 
a certain amount of drug present in the circulation. These drugs, 
particularly those with prolonged effects, may result in profound 
hypoglycemia that tends to persist until the drug is removed, either 
by its own clearance or by exchange transfusion.
	2.	 Some drugs are administered to the mother with indirect effects 
(the more common contributor to neonatal hypoglycemia). β-­
Sympathomimetic agents commonly used for the prevention and 
treatment of premature labor can result in maternal hyperglycemia 
by increasing hepatic glucose production and decreasing glucose uti­
lization. Maternal hyperglycemia, in turn, can initiate fetal hypergly­
cemia and HI, which can cause hypoglycemia in the newborn.
Beckwith-­Wiedemann Syndrome
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth and cancer 
predisposition disorder with macrosomia, macroglossia, abdominal wall 
defects, hemihypertrophy, and hypoglycemia in the neonatal period. 
Most cases of BWS are sporadic, although approximately 15% have auto­
somal dominant inheritance. BWS appears to be caused by abnormal 
genomic imprinting involving multiple genes at chromosome 11p15.
Approximately 50% of newborns with BWS have hypoglycemia; 80% 
of cases are mild and transient. The remaining 20% of cases are more 
prolonged and difficult to control. Early recognition of hypoglycemia is 
extremely important for appropriate clinical management because there is 
an association in BWS between hypoglycemia and intellectual impairment. 
Any infant born with an omphalocele should be monitored for potential 
hypoglycemia. HI is the principal mechanism of the hypoglycemia in BWS 
Time (hr)
0
0
5
Glucose
FFA
Lactate
BOB
10
15
20
25
30
4
3
2
1
5
6
Plasma fuels (mmol/L)
Fig. 57.2  Changes in plasma levels of key fuels during fasting in a nor­
mal child. Note that plasma glucose declines toward hypoglycemic val­
ues by 24 hours as hepatic glycogen reserves become depleted. Plasma 
levels of lactate, a representative gluconeogenic substrate, decline 
gradually during the fast as hepatic gluconeogenesis is activated. Late 
in fasting, levels of plasma free fatty acids (FFAs) increase as lipoly­
sis is stimulated, followed by a dramatic rise in β-­hydroxybutyrate that 
reflects the increase in the rates of hepatic fatty acid oxidation and 
ketone synthesis. BOB, β-­hydroxybutyrate.
TABLE 57.3  Symptoms of Hypoglycemia
Neurogenic Symptoms Due to Activation of Autonomic 
Nervous System*
Sweating
Shakiness, trembling
Tachycardia
Anxiety, nervousness
Weakness
Hunger
Nausea, vomiting
Pallor
Hypothermia
Neuroglycopenic Symptoms Due to Decreased Cerebral 
Glucose Use
Headache
Visual disturbances
Lethargy, lassitude
Restlessness, irritability
Difficulty with speech and thinking, inability to concentrate
Mental confusion
Somnolence, stupor, prolonged sleep
Loss of consciousness, coma
Hypothermia
Twitching, convulsions, “epilepsy”
Bizarre neurologic signs
Motor disturbances
Sensory disturbances
Loss of intellectual ability
Personality changes
Bizarre behavior
Outburst of temper
Psychologic disintegration
Manic behavior
Depression
Psychoses
Permanent mental or neurologic damage
*Some features may be attenuated by β-­adrenergic blocking agents.
From Langdon DR, Stanley CA, Sperling, MA. Hypoglycemia in the 
toddler and child. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:922.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 57.4  Classification of Hypoglycemia in Infants and Children
NEONATAL TRANSITIONAL (ADAPTIVE) HYPOGLYCEMIA
Associated with Inadequate Substrate or Immature 
Enzyme Function in Otherwise Normal Neonates
Prematurity
Small for gestational age
Normal newborn
Transient Neonatal Hyperinsulinism
Infant of diabetic mother
Small for gestational age
Discordant twin
Birth asphyxia
Rhesus hemolytic disease
Infant of toxemic mother
HNF4A/HNF1A
NEONATAL, INFANTILE, OR CHILDHOOD 
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIAS
Recessive KATP channel HI
Recessive HADH (hydroxyl acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase) variant HI
Recessive UCP2 (mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2) variant HI
Focal KATP channel HI
Dominant KATP channel HI
Atypical congenital hyperinsulinemia (no variants in ABCC8 or KCNJ11 genes)
Dominant glucokinase HI
Dominant glutamate dehydrogenase HI (hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia 
syndrome)
Dominant variants in HNF-­4A and HNF-­1A (hepatic nuclear factors 4α and 1α) 
HI with monogenic diabetes of youth later in life
Dominant variant in SLC16A1 (the pyruvate transporter)—exercise-­induced 
hypoglycemia
Acquired islet cell adenoma
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Factitious disorder: insulin administration (Munchausen syndrome by proxy)
Oral sulfonylurea drugs
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Exercise-­induced hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Counter-­Regulatory Hormone Deficiency
Panhypopituitarism
Isolated growth hormone deficiency
Adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency
Addison disease
Epinephrine deficiency
Glycogenolysis and Gluconeogenesis Disorders
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency (GSD 1a)
Glucose-­6-­phosphate translocase deficiency (GSD 1b)
Amylo-­1,6-­glucosidase (debranching enzyme) deficiency (GSD 3)
Liver phosphorylase deficiency (GSD 6)
Phosphorylase kinase deficiency (GSD 9)
Glycogen synthetase deficiency (GSD 0)
Fructose-­1,6-­diphosphatase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Galactosemia
Hereditary fructose intolerance
GLUT 1-­2-­3 transporter defects
Lipolysis Disorders
Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders
Carnitine transporter deficiency (primary carnitine deficiency)
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­1 deficiency
Carnitine translocase deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­2 deficiency
Secondary carnitine deficiencies
Long-­, medium-­, short-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies
Disorders of ketone synthesis/utilization
OTHER ETIOLOGIES
Substrate-­Limited
Ketotic hypoglycemia
Poisoning—drugs
Salicylates
Alcohol
Oral hypoglycemic agents
Insulin
Propranolol
Pentamidine
Quinine
Disopyramide
Ackee fruit (unripe)—hypoglycin
Vacor (rat poison)
Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (with renal failure)
Liver Disease
Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Hepatoma
AMINO ACID AND ORGANIC ACID DISORDERS
Maple syrup urine disease
Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Tyrosinemia
Glutaric aciduria type 2
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaric aciduria
Adenosine kinase deficiency
Mitochondrial disorders
SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Sepsis
Carcinoma/sarcoma (secreting insulin-­like growth factor 2)
Heart failure
Malnutrition
Malabsorption
Anti-­insulin receptor antibodies
Anti-­insulin antibodies
Neonatal hyperviscosity
Renal failure
Diarrhea
Burns
Shock
Postsurgical
Pseudohypoglycemia (leukocytosis, polycythemia)
Excessive insulin therapy of insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus
Factitious
Nissen fundoplication (dumping syndrome)
Falciparum malaria
GSD, glycogen storage disease; HI, hyperinsulinemia; KATP, regulated potassium channel.
From Sperling MA. Hypoglycemia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016:776.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1096
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
and occurs in 30–60% of children. Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the 
islet of Langerhans have been observed. Hypoglycemia in children with 
BWS is usually transient, lasting for a few days. In some patients, HI hypo­
glycemia may persist longer and will require continuous feeding, medical 
therapy, or, in rare cases, partial pancreatectomy. Medical treatment gen­
erally includes diazoxide and octreotide, and if managed medically, the 
hypoglycemia eventually resolves over weeks to months of care.
CAUSES OF PERSISTENT HYPOGLYCEMIA IN 
INFANTS AND CHILDREN
Hyperinsulinism
Congenital HI is the most common cause of persistent hypoglycemia 
in infants and children. It was previously referred to as nesidioblastosis, 
leucine-­sensitive hypoglycemia, or idiopathic hypoglycemia of infancy. 
Most affected patients present during infancy; macrosomia may be 
present at birth because of high fetal insulin levels, which act as a 
growth factor in utero. Excessive insulin secretion during fasting sup­
presses all the fasting systems, including hepatic glucose production, 
lipolysis, and ketogenesis. Hypoglycemia is a consequence of increased 
utilization and underproduction of glucose. Because lipolysis and keto­
sis are inhibited, alternative fuel levels remain low, which increases the 
risk of seizures and permanent brain injury. There are several genetic 
defects of pancreatic β-­cell insulin secretion in children with HI (Fig. 
57.3 and Table 57.6; see also Table 57.4). In the presence of severe hypo­
glycemia, there is often an inappropriately normal plasma insulin level 
but low FFA and ketone levels. The response to glucagon demonstrates 
an increase in blood glucose levels of >30 mg/dl; the glucose infusion 
rate is often very high (>8 mg/kg/min) (Table 57.7).
TABLE 57.5  Syndromic Forms of Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia*
Syndrome Name
Gene (Location)
Genetic Etiology
Clinical Characteristics
Pre-­ and Postnatal Overgrowth (Macrosomia)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann
(11p15)
Macroglossia, abdominal wall defects, ear lobe pits/creases, 
hemihypertrophy, tumor risk
Sotos
NSD1 (5q35)
Macrocephaly, frontal bossing, pointed chin, developmental delay, 
tumor risk
Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel
GPC3 (Xq26), GPC4 (Xp22)
Coarse facial features, broad feet, polydactyly, cryptorchidism, 
hepatomegaly, tumor risk
Perlman
DIS3L2 (2q37)
Inverted V-­shaped upper lip, prominent forehead, developmental delay, 
hypotonia, tumor risk
Postnatal Growth Failure (Short Stature)
Kabuki
KMT2D (12q13), KDM6A (Xp11.3)
Arched eyebrows, long eyelashes, developmental delay, fetal finger 
pads, scoliosis, heart defects, hypotonia
Costello
HRAS (11p15)
Deep palmar/plantar creases, developmental delay, coarse facial 
features, heart abnormalities, papillomas, tumor risk
Chromosomal Abnormality
Mosaic Turner
(Loss of X in some cells)
Milder Turner syndrome phenotype (short stature, coarctation of aorta, 
gonadal dysgenesis)
Patau
Trisomy 13
Developmental delay, microphthalmia, heart and neural defects
Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation
Types 1a, 1b, and 1d
PMM2 (16p13.2), MPI (15q24.1), ALG3 (3q27.1)
Developmental delay, hypotonia, growth failure
Contiguous Gene Deletion Affecting the ABCC8 Gene
Usher
11 genes
Hearing loss, visual impairment
Abnormalities in Calcium Homoeostasis
Timothy
CACNA1C (12p13.33)
Long QT syndrome, syndactyly, developmental delay, immune 
deficiency
Insulin Receptor Variant
Insulin resistance syndrome 
(leprechaunism)
INS (19p13)
Hypo-­ and hyperglycemia, pre-­ and postnatal growth restriction, elfin-­
like features, hirsutism
Other Syndromes
Congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome
PHOX2B (4p13)
Central hypoventilation, “box-­shaped” face, neurocristopathies 
(Hirschsprung disease, tumor risk)
*Various developmental syndromes have been described with the gene/s linked to the condition and the common clinical features.
From Guemes M, Rahman SA, Kapoor RR, et al. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in children and adolescents: recent advances in understanding of 
pathophysiology and management. Rev Endocrine Metabol Dis. 2020;21:577–597 (Table 2, p. 583).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1097
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
TABLE 57.6  Correlation of Clinical Features with Molecular Defects in Persistent Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia in Infancy
Type
Macrosomia
Hypoglycemia/
Hyperinsulinemia
Family 
History
Molecular 
Defects
Associated Clinical, 
Biochemical, or 
Molecular Features
Response 
to Medical 
Management
Recommended 
Surgical Approach
Prognosis
Sporadic
Present at birth
Moderate/severe in first 
days to weeks of life
Negative
ABCC8/KCNJ11A 
gene variants not 
always identified in 
diffuse hyperplasia
Loss of heterozygosity in 
microadenomatous tissue
Generally poor; may 
respond better to 
somatostatin than 
to diazoxide
Partial pancreatectomy 
if frozen section shows 
β-­cell crowding with 
small nuclei—suggests 
microadenoma
Subtotal >95% 
pancreatectomy if 
frozen section shows 
giant nuclei in β 
cells—suggests diffuse 
hyperplasia
Excellent if focal 
adenoma is removed, 
thereby curing 
hypoglycemia and 
retaining sufficient 
pancreas to avoid 
diabetes
Guarded if subtotal 
pancreatectomy 
(>95%) is performed; 
diabetes mellitus 
develops in 50% of 
patients; hypoglycemia 
persists in 33%
Autosomal 
recessive
Present at birth
Severe in first days to 
weeks of life
Positive
ABCC8/KCNJ11A
Consanguinity a feature in 
some populations
Poor
Subtotal pancreatectomy
Guarded
Autosomal 
dominant
Unusual
Moderate onset usually 
post–6 mo of age
Positive
Glucokinase 
(activating)
Some cases gene 
unknown
None
Very good to 
excellent
Surgery usually not required
Partial pancreatectomy only 
if medical management 
fails
Excellent
Autosomal 
dominant
Unusual
Moderate onset usually 
post–6 mo of age
Positive
Glutamate 
dehydrogenase 
(activating)
Modest hyperammonemia
Very good to 
excellent
Surgery usually not required Excellent
Beckwith-­
Wiedemann 
syndrome
Present at birth
Moderate, spontaneously 
resolves post–6 mo of age
Negative
Duplicating/
imprinting in 
chromosome 
11p15.1
Macroglossia, omphalocele, 
hemihypertrophy
Good
Not recommended
Excellent for 
hypoglycemia; 
guarded for possible 
development 
of embryonal 
tumors (Wilms 
hepatoblastoma)
Congenital 
disorders of 
glycosylation
Not usual
Moderate/onset post–3 mo 
of age
Negative
Phosphomannose 
isomerase 
deficiency
Hepatomegaly, vomiting, 
intractable diarrhea
Good with mannose 
supplement
Not recommended
Fair
From Sperling MA. Hypoglycemia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:778.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1098
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Recessive KATP Channel Hyperinsulinism
This is the most severe form of congenital HI. Affected infants are usu­
ally large for gestational age and present with symptoms of hypoglycemia 
in the first days after birth. The hypoglycemia is often incredibly severe, 
and treatment may require intravenous glucose infusions at 20–30 mg/
kg/min (4–6 times normal) to maintain plasma glucose in the normal 
range of 70–100 mg/dL. This disorder is caused by genetic defects of the 
β-­cell plasma membrane adenosine triphosphate–dependent potassium 
(KATP) channel (Fig. 57.4). The channel is encoded by two adjacent 
genes located on chromosome 11p: ABCC8, which encodes the sulfo­
nylurea receptor type 1 (SUR1) protein subunit, and KCNJ11A, which 
encodes the potassium channel, inwardly rectifying, Kir6.2 subunit. 
Common founder variants of ABCC8 have been identified in Ashkenazi 
Jews and in Finland, but most affected patients have one of many “pri­
vate” (rare and unique) variants. Medical management with diazoxide or 
octreotide (which acts like somatostatin) may be tried (see Figs. 57.3 and 
57.4) but is rarely effective. Most infants require surgical near-­total (98%) 
pancreatectomy to achieve control of hypoglycemia. Approximately 50% 
of infants with severe HI who require surgery have diffuse disease caused 
by these recessive KATP channel variants; the remainder have focal 
lesions that are potentially curable by partial surgical resection.
Focal KATP Channel Hyperinsulinism
Approximately half the infants with severe neonatal-­onset HI have focal 
lesions of the pancreas that are potentially curable by surgical resec­
tion. The molecular defect in these infants involves the same KATP 
channel genes as in recessive KATP channel HI through a two-­hit 
mechanism: loss of heterozygosity for the maternal chromosome 11p 
and expression of a paternally derived ABCC8 or KCNJ11A variants. 
Histologically, the focal lesions usually appear as adenomatosis. The 
clinical features are identical to those of infants with recessive KATP 
channel HI, including diazoxide unresponsiveness and hypoglycemia 
that is extremely difficult to control. Methods to diagnose and local­
ize focal pancreatic adenomatosis preoperatively include acute insu­
lin response tests to secretagogues such as calcium and tolbutamide, 
selective pancreatic arterial calcium stimulation of insulin release with 
pancreatic venous sampling, and PET.
Dominant KATP Channel Hyperinsulinism
HI caused by a dominantly expressed variant of the ABCC8 gene, 
rather than the usual recessive disease inheritance, is reported in one 
family previously.
Dominant Glutamate Dehydrogenase Hyperinsulinism
Dominantly expressed gain-­of-­function variants of glutamate dehy­
drogenase have been identified in children with the unusual combina­
tion of HI plus asymptomatic hyperammonemia (HI/HA). Most cases 
arise from de novo variants, and only 20% are familial. Hypoglycemic 
symptoms often do not manifest in the neonatal period, and the disor­
der may not be recognized until the affected patient is an adult. Birth­
weights of affected infants are normal.
In addition to hypoglycemia, affected individuals have persistent 
but asymptomatic HA in the range of 70–150 μmol/L (see Fig. 57.3). 
The variants affect the pathway of leucine-­stimulated insulin secretion, 
and patients can have protein-­sensitive hypoglycemia, as well as fasting 
hypoglycemia. Diazoxide is effective in controlling hypoglycemia.
Dominant Glucokinase Hyperinsulinism
This rare disorder causes mild fasting hypoglycemia as a result of a 
dominant gain-­of-­function variant of islet glucokinase (see Fig. 57.3). 
Birthweights of affected infants are normal, and the age at onset of 
hypoglycemic symptoms ranges from infancy to adulthood. Diazoxide 
therapy has been effective in controlling plasma glucose levels.
Insulinoma
Acquired insulinomas are the most common form of HI in adults but 
are rare in childhood, especially in early infancy. These are usually iso­
lated, benign tumors, but multiple adenomas may be associated with 
familial multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes. In contrast 
to focal congenital HI, insulinomas may be detectable by imaging pro­
cedures such as CT, MRI, PET scans, or transduodenal ultrasonogra­
phy. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice.
Insulin Reaction, Oral Hypoglycemic Agents, and 
Surreptitious Insulin Administration
Insulin-­induced hypoglycemia is a common occurrence in insulin-­
treated diabetic patients and may also occur in patients with type 2 
diabetes who are taking oral hypoglycemic agents, such as glyburide, 
that stimulate insulin secretion. Surreptitious insulin administration 
should always be included in the differential diagnosis of unexplained 
hypoglycemia and, in young children, may occur as part of factitious 
disorder by proxy (Munchausen syndrome by proxy). Exogenous 
human or animal insulin use can be demonstrated by assays show­
ing elevated plasma insulin values with simultaneous suppression of 
TABLE 57.7  Diagnostic Criteria for HH: 
Cutoff Values for Each Analyte to Aid in 
Diagnosis of HH
Serum Analyte
Result in Patients with HH
Blood Glucose <3.0 mmol/L (54 mg/dL) and
Insulin
Detectable
C-­peptide
Detectable (≥0.5 ng/mL)
Free fatty acids
Low or suppressed (<1.5 mmol/l* or < 1.7 mmol/l†)
Ketone bodies
Low or suppressed (3-­β-­hydroxybutyrate 
<2 mmol/l* or < 1.8 mmol/l†)
IGFBP-­1
Low (≤110 ng/mL†) as insulin negatively 
regulates IGFBP-­1 expression
Ammonia
Normal; can be raised in HI/HA syndrome
Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine
Normal; raised in HH due to HADH variant
Cortisol, growth hormone
Raised; generally cortisol >20 μg/dL (500 nmol/L); 
growth hormone >7 ng/mL—younger children 
might have poor counter-­regulatory response
Amino acids and urine 
organic acids
Normal; leucine, isoleucine, and valine may be 
suppressed in HH
Proinsulin
>20 pmol/L
Additional Information When Diagnosis of HH Uncertain
Glucose infusion rate
>8 mg/kg/min to achieve euglycemia
IM or IV glucagon 
administration 
or SC octreotide 
administration
30 mg/dL (positive glycemic response)
HI/HA, hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia/hyperammonemia syndrome; 
HADH: short-­chain L-­3-­hydroxyacil-­CoA dehydrogenase; IGFBP-­1, insu­
lin growth factor–binding protein-­1; IM: intramuscular; IV, intravenous; 
SC, subcutaneous.
*Low.
†Suppressed.
From Guemes M, Rahman SA, Kapoor RR, et al. Hyperinsulinemic 
hypoglycemia in children and adolescents: recent advances in 
understanding of pathophysiology and management. Rev Endocrine 
Metabol Dis. 2020;21:577–597 (Table 3, p. 585).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1099
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
plasma C peptide (use of insulin lispro may not be detectable with 
some insulin immunoassays).
Counter-­Regulatory Hormone Deficiencies
Hypopituitarism
Isolated deficiency of growth hormone, or both growth hormone and 
adrenocorticotropin hormone deficiency, predisposes to fasting hypo­
glycemia. In affected older infants, hypoglycemia may occur after 10–14 
hours of fasting. Newborns with hypopituitarism sometimes present with 
much more severe hypoglycemia, which can closely mimic the KATP 
channel form of congenital HI, including increased glucose requirements 
of 10–20 mg/kg/min and an inappropriate glycemic response to gluca­
gon when patients are hypoglycemic. A liver disease resembling pro­
gressive cholestatic jaundice may occur in these newborns and does not 
resolve until replacement therapy is begun for the deficient hormones. 
Hypotonia and, in affected boys, a small phallus may also be present.
Several syndromes, such as midline craniofacial defects, septo-­optic 
dysplasia, and Russell-­Silver dwarfism, may be associated with hypo­
pituitarism. Infant boys characteristically have microphallus, which is 
a useful diagnostic sign.
Isolated Cortisol Deficiency
Fasting hypoglycemia may occur in infants and children with adre­
nal insufficiency of various causes, including adrenocorticotropin 
hormone deficiency and primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison 
disease), or because of adrenal suppression resulting from exoge­
nous glucocorticoid administration. Hypoglycemia is uncommon 
in the presentation of newborns with congenital adrenal hyperpla­
sia, but once glucocorticoid replacement treatment is begun, these 
children are also at risk for adrenal crises and hypoglycemia if not 
given supplemental doses during intercurrent illness.
Epinephrine Deficiency
Catecholamine deficiency is extremely rare and has been described as 
secondary to adrenal hemorrhage in infants small for gestational age. 
These patients may present for the first time during childhood with 
hypoglycemia during fasting. The diagnosis is confirmed by measure­
ment of plasma or urinary catecholamine levels. Some affected chil­
dren may show evidence, on abdominal films, of previous adrenal 
hemorrhage in the form of adrenal calcification.
Fasting hypoglycemia has been observed occasionally in children 
treated with β-­blocking agents, such as propranolol. The mechanism 
appears to be suppression of lipolysis because of the interference with 
epinephrine stimulation of adipose tissue; this suppression impairs the 
third stage of fasting adaptation. Hypoglycemia may occur after 12 or 
more hours of fasting. Hypoglycemic attacks may be associated with 
acute hypertension because of the unopposed α-­adrenergic effects of 
epinephrine.
Diazoxide
Ca2+
Insulin
Insulin
SUR
Kir 6.2
Tolbutamide
Glucose
ATP/ADP
GK
K+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
α-Ketoglutarate
α-Ketoglutarate
+
NH3
Urea
GTP
GDH
GDH
CPS
Glutamate
Glutamate
N-Acetylglutamate
ADP
Leucine
Liver
β-Cell
Fig. 57.3  Pathways of pancreatic β-­cell insulin secretion. Increases in plasma concentrations of glucose lead 
to increased pancreatic β-­cell glucose oxidation rates and elevations of intracellular adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP). The increase in the ratio of ATP to adenosine diphosphate subsequently acts via the sulfonylurea 
receptor type 1 (SUR1) component of the ATP-­sensitive potassium (KATP) channel to inhibit potassium efflux, 
resulting in membrane depolarization and activation of a voltage-­gated calcium ion channel. The rise in intra­
cellular calcium triggers the release of insulin from secretory granules into the plasma. Genes involved in 
congenital hyperinsulinism include glucokinase; glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH); SUR1; and the ion pore 
component of the KATP channel, Kir6.2. Note that leucine triggers β-­cell insulin secretion by allosterically acti­
vating GDH to increase oxidation of glutamate, which subsequently leads to inhibition of the KATP channel. 
As shown in the inset of liver pathways of glutamate metabolism, in the hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia 
syndrome, overactivity of GDH leads to excessive ammonia production from glutamate and also decreases 
the availability of glutamate for synthesis of N-­acetylglutamate, a required allosteric activator of the first step 
in ureagenesis. Note that SUR1 mediates both tolbutamide activation of insulin release and diazoxide inhi­
bition of insulin release. Somatostatin inhibits insulin release at a more distal site in the pathway. ADP, ade­
nosine diphosphate; CPS, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase; GK, glucokinase; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; 
SUR, sulfonylurea receptor.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1100
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Metabolic Enzyme Defects
Hepatic Gluconeogenesis
The genetic metabolic defects in hepatic gluconeogenesis lead to fast­
ing hypoglycemia associated with increased plasma concentrations of 
gluconeogenic precursors, such as lactate and alanine.
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency (glycogen storage disease type 
1a and type 1b). This is the most common form of the glycogen storage 
disorders, although (see Fig. 57.1) deficiency of glucose-­6-­phosphatase 
is a gluconeogenic defect because it blocks the release of glucose from 
both gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Hypoglycemia occurs within 
2–3 hours after a meal, once intestinal carbohydrate absorption is 
complete. Affected infants usually do not present with symptomatic 
hypoglycemia, because the associated elevations of lactate provide an 
alternative fuel for the brain when the glucose level is low. Instead, 
the manifestation is usually growth failure late in the first year. The 
liver is massively enlarged because of fat and glycogen deposition 
and extends into the left upper quadrant and down into the pelvis. 
Associated abnormalities include elevations of plasma triglyceride 
(up to 2,000–4,000 mg/dL) and hyperuricemia due to shunting of the 
excessive glucose-­6-­phosphate via other pathways, causing excessive 
production of lactic acid, lipid synthesis, and hyperuricemia. Treatment 
is aimed at avoiding fasting hypoglycemia by using a combination 
of high-­carbohydrate meals and uncooked cornstarch or continuous 
intragastric dextrose infusions to prevent growth failure. Carbohydrates 
that cannot be converted to glucose, such as galactose in milk, fructose 
in fruits, and sucrose, should be limited. The type 1b variant is caused 
by deficiency of the microsomal glucose-­6-­phosphate translocase and 
is associated with the additional problem of neutropenia, leading to 
mouth ulcers and skin infections. Treatment with granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor has been beneficial in these patients.
Glucose transporter 2 deficiency (Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome). A 
small number of infants have been described with a combination of 
hepatomegaly, increased liver glycogen store, renal Fanconi syndrome, 
and galactose intolerance. Pathogenic variants that cause this recessive 
inherited disorder are in the gene SLC2A2, which encodes glucose 
transporter 2 (GLUT2), a plasma membrane glucose transporter 
expressed in liver, kidney, and pancreatic β cells. GLUT2 is necessary 
to export free glucose from the cytosol into the plasma (see Fig. 57.1). 
The deficiency of GLUT2 interferes with glucose release from the liver 
not only from glycogenolysis but also from gluconeogenesis and from 
other sugars, such as galactose and fructose.
Fructose-­1,6-­diphosphatase deficiency. This defect blocks gluco­
neo­genesis immediately above the triose-­phosphates (see Fig. 57.1). 
Affected children present in the first year or the neonatal period 
with life-­threatening attacks of hypoglycemia and lactic acidemia 
provoked by fasting stress. Moderate fatty hepatomegaly is commonly 
seen together with hyperuricemia. Fructose ingestion can precipitate 
hypoglycemia and lactic acidemia. During controlled fasting, plasma 
glucose can be maintained in the normal range until 8–12 hours, 
because glycogenolysis remains normal. Treatment with avoidance 
of prolonged fasting and restriction of fructose-­containing foods and 
glycerol is effective in avoiding hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia
Send genetic testing
Focal or
diffuse KATP
Initiate therapy for HI:
diazoxide 10-15 mg/kg/day
Focal
18F-fluoro-L-
DOPA
scan
Diffuse
Local resection
98% pancreatectomy
GDH, GCK,
HNF4A, dom
KATP
Obtain critical sample & glucagon stim
testing with BG < 50 mg/dL
2 mL/kg D10% IV bolus     continuous
infusion of dextrose
(–) Diazoxide
response
(+) Diazoxide
response
(+) Glucagon
response
Evaluate critical sample
& start appropriate
therapy:
• hormonal replacement
  (hypopituitarism)
• frequent feedings &
  cornstarch (GSD)
• avoidance of fasting &
  starting IVF during
  illness (FAO defects)
(–) Glucagon
response
Fig. 57.4  Diagnostic and treatment approach in cases of hyperinsulinism. BG, blood glucose; D, dextrose; 
dom, dominant; FAO, fatty acid oxidation; GCK, glucokinase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GSD, glyco­
gen storage disease; HNF4A, hepatic nuclear factor 4-­alpha; IV, intravenous; IVF, intravenous fluids; KATP, 
adenosine triphosphate–dependent potassium channel. (From De León DD, Thornton PS, Stanley CA, et al. 
Hypoglycemia in the newborn infant. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2014:171, Fig. 6.8.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1101
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. Pyruvate carboxylase is one of 
the four key gluconeogenic enzymes (see Fig. 57.1). It also plays an 
important role in pyruvate oxidation because it generates oxaloacetate 
needed to maintain tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle activity. The clinical 
features are often dominated by the defect in pyruvate oxidation and 
include those of Leigh syndrome and congenital lactic acidemia. 
However, affected infants are also susceptible to the development of 
symptomatic hypoglycemia after 8–10 hours of fasting.
Hepatic Glycogenolysis
Defects in hepatic glycogenolysis are associated with abbreviated fast­
ing tolerance, leading to hypoglycemia and hyperketonemia. Defects 
can occur in either the synthesis or breakdown of hepatic glycogen (see 
Fig. 57.1). Debrancher enzyme deficiency is the most severe of these 
defects.
Debrancher enzyme deficiency (type 3 glycogen storage disease). 
Children with this disorder usually present in the first year of life with 
growth delay and massive hepatomegaly. Symptomatic hypoglycemia 
is not common, because plasma ketone levels are usually elevated and 
provide the brain with alternative substrate when the glucose level is low. 
Hypoglycemia develops quickly, often within 3–6 hours after a meal. 
Treatment with uncooked cornstarch to prolong glucose absorption is 
useful in preventing hypoglycemia and improving growth. Problems 
caused by hypoglycemia are ameliorated later in childhood as body 
mass increases. However, half or more of patients with debrancher 
enzyme deficiency are at risk for developing progressive muscle 
weakness and/or cardiomyopathy by the second and third decades of 
life.
Phosphorylase/phosphorylase kinase deficiency. The manifes­
tations of either of these two enzyme defects clinically resemble a 
very mild form of debrancher enzyme deficiency. Affected infants 
present with enlarged livers, often in association with impaired 
growth. Symptomatic hypoglycemia is unusual. Fasting tests show a 
pattern of accelerated starvation with early onset of hyperketonemia. 
Treatment to reduce fasting intervals to less than 4–6 hours (e.g., 
with uncooked cornstarch) is helpful in correcting the failure to 
thrive. As in debrancher enzyme deficiency, the fasting disturbance 
becomes less apparent as body mass increases, and the hepatomegaly 
and growth delay may totally resolve by the end of the first decade. 
Liver phosphorylase deficiency is recessively inherited; both recessive 
inheritance and X-­linked inheritance have been reported for 
phosphorylase kinase deficiency.
Glycogen synthase deficiency. A small number of patients with 
deficiency of glycogen synthase have been reported. They have 
presented with episodes of symptomatic, hyperketotic hypoglycemia 
after fasts of 10–12 hours. Mild hepatomegaly may be present because 
of the increased deposition of triglycerides that is common in all of 
the glycogenoses. Treatment with uncooked cornstarch at bedtime 
may be helpful in avoiding symptomatic episodes of early-­morning 
hypoglycemia.
Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders
Genetic defects in fatty acid oxidation interfere with the ketotic phase 
of fasting adaptation. The most common of the disorders is medium-­
chain acyl-­coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency. 
Children with MCAD deficiency present with acute attacks of life-­
threatening coma and hypoketotic hypoglycemia that are usually 
precipitated by fasting stresses of 12 hours or longer. Attacks are 
triggered by intercurrent illnesses that impair feeding, especially 
gastroenteritis. The clinical features mimic Reye syndrome, with 
coma, elevated liver transaminase levels, and mild hepatomegaly 
with steatosis. More severe forms of fatty acid oxidation disorders 
also involve skeletal and cardiac muscle and may manifest with 
cardiomyopathy and chronic muscle weakness or acute episodes of 
rhabdomyolysis. More than 12 different defects in the pathway of 
fatty acid oxidation have been identified; all are recessively inher­
ited. Many states have neonatal screening programs in which dual 
tandem mass spectrometry of blood spot acyl-­carnitine profiles are 
used to detect MCAD deficiency and several of the other fatty acid 
oxidation disorders. This is important for presymptomatic detection 
and treatment because the mortality rate at the first presentation may 
be higher than 25%.
Other Metabolic Causes of Hypoglycemia
Glucose transporter 1 deficiency. Isolated hypoglycorrhachia 
(low cerebrospinal fluid glucose level) in association with normal 
concentrations of plasma glucose has been demonstrated in several 
infants with intractable seizures in early infancy caused by a deficiency 
of glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1). GLUT1 is the plasma membrane 
carrier protein responsible for glucose transport across the blood-­
brain barrier, as well as into red blood cells. Affected patients are 
heterozygous for a GLUT1 variant and have persistently low levels of 
spinal fluid glucose, ranging from 20 to 30 mg/dL. Seizures may begin 
in the neonatal period and respond poorly to treatment with antiseizure 
drugs. Progressive brain damage, microcephaly, and developmental 
delay occur in untreated patients. Several patients have been reported 
to respond very well to treatment with a ketogenic diet, which restricts 
carbohydrates and keeps plasma levels of ketones elevated to 3–6 
mEq/L.
Hereditary fructose intolerance. Hereditary fructose intolerance 
is caused by a recessively inherited deficiency of hepatic fructose-­
aldolase, which transforms fructose-­1-­phosphate to the triose-­
phosphates. Affected patients cannot metabolize dietary fructose or 
sucrose (table sugar) in the liver or intestinal mucosa for conversion 
to glucose. Chronic fructose intake in young infants may cause 
liver dysfunction, acidemia, failure to thrive, hyperuricemia, and, 
ultimately, liver failure. In affected older children, ingestion of 
fructose causes severe abdominal pain, and these children may 
learn by experience to avoid fructose and thus escape identification. 
Fasting tolerance is normal, but ingestion of large amounts of fructose 
may provoke postprandial hypoglycemia by tying up intracellular 
phosphate and thus blocking glycogenolysis. Treatment is avoidance 
of dietary sources of fructose.
Galactosemia (galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyl transferase defici­
ency). This is a serious inborn error of metabolism wherein many of 
the long-­term consequences of the metabolic defect can potentially 
be prevented by early intervention. For this reason, all infants born in 
the United States are screened for galactosemia in the neonatal period. 
Absence of galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyl transferase prevents the con­
version of galactose to glucose and results in accumulation of galactose-­
1-­phosphate in the liver and other tissues. It has been suggested that 
accumulation of this metabolite inhibits the enzyme involved in the 
conversion of glucose-­1-­phosphate to glucose-­6-­phosphate and thus 
decreases the production of glucose from glycogen, thereby produc­
ing hypoglycemia. Depending on the magnitude of the defect, affected 
infants may present in the immediate neonatal period or later in infancy. 
The patients do not tolerate galactose or lactose. Intolerance to lactose in 
milk, the major nutrient containing galactose, is evident soon after birth 
when feedings are initiated. The infant may present with vomiting, fail­
ure to thrive, hepatomegaly, and indirect or direct hyperbilirubinemia. 
In severe or untreated cases, lenticular opacities, aminoaciduria, and 
intellectual disability may occur. In untreated patients, progressive hep­
atomegaly, cirrhosis, and hepatic failure may develop. Affected infants 
are at increased risk for Escherichia coli sepsis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1102
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Any infant with persistent jaundice, hepatomegaly, and failure to 
thrive should be tested for galactosemia. A presumptive diagnosis can 
be made by the presence of reducing sugar (Clinitest positive) that is 
not glucose (i.e., the glucose enzyme test result is negative) in the urine. 
This test should be performed while the infant is being fed a galactose-­
containing formula. The diagnosis should be confirmed by measuring 
the enzyme activity in the red blood cells.
Treatment consists of elimination of galactose from the diet. Despite 
treatment, which results in prevention of hepatic disease and of intel­
lectual disability, many affected older children demonstrate learning 
and behavior problems.
Reactive Hypoglycemia
Reactive or postprandial hypoglycemia is extremely rare in the pediat­
ric age range and, even in adults, may be overdiagnosed. Three situa­
tions in infants and children present with reactive hypoglycemia:
Glutamate dehydrogenase-­hyperinsulinism, hyperinsulinism/
hyperammonemia syndrome. Affected children have fasting 
hypoglycemia but, because of their leucine sensitivity, may also 
develop symptomatic hypoglycemia within 30–90 minutes of 
eating a high-­protein meal.
Post–Nissen fundoplication hypoglycemia (late dumping syn­
drome). Like patients who have had gastric surgery, infants who have 
undergone Nissen fundoplication procedures for gastroesophageal 
reflux can develop recurrent attacks of postprandial hypoglycemia. The 
hypoglycemia may be severe enough to produce seizures and perma­
nent brain damage. The mechanism is thought to involve rapid gastric 
emptying that leads to a rapid rise in plasma glucose accompanied by 
a delayed but excessive insulin response, which is followed by a pre­
cipitous fall in plasma glucose to hypoglycemic levels 30–90 minutes 
after a meal.
Hereditary fructose intolerance. Patients with this disorder develop 
acute abdominal discomfort and hypoglycemia within a short period 
of time after an oral load of fructose (e.g., fruit, fruit juice, or sucrose).
Ketotic Hypoglycemia
Idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia (IKH) is the most frequent cause of 
hypoglycemia in children between 1 and 5 years of age and typically 
occurs after a period of poor food intake. Due to the overlap with signs 
of other common diseases like psychiatric disorders, migraine, gastric 
disorders, or visual disturbances, diagnosis of IKH is often delayed. If a 
child with normal growth and psychomotor development presents with 
a first episode of symptomatic hypoglycemia that improves quickly with 
glucose administration, IKH should be considered. Obtaining urinary 
ketones to assess for ketonuria at the time of hypoglycemia is helpful 
to make the diagnosis and other hormonal and metabolic work-­up can 
safely be deferred. However, if the child presents with frequent recur­
rences, extensive work-­up to assess for adrenal insufficiency or growth 
hormone deficiency or metabolic pathway defects (glycogen storage 
disease) should be considered. Hypoglycemic attacks secondary to 
IKH can be prevented by supplying frequent snacks containing com­
plex carbohydrates, so-­called “slow sugars,” particularly at bedtime.
DIAGNOSIS OF HYPOGLYCEMIA
Critical Samples
Tests on the specimens of blood and urine obtained at the time of 
hypoglycemia provide the key information for diagnosis (Tables 57.7 
and 57.8 and Fig. 57.5). Ideally, these specimens are collected during 
hypoglycemia, immediately before treatment is begun. It is best to col­
lect some extra tubes of plasma and urine just before giving intrave­
nous dextrose, to set aside for later decisions about which other tests 
to order. Tests should include plasma glucose measurement and vari­
ous metabolic precursors and hormones involved in glucose counter-­
regulation, including glucose, bicarbonate, insulin, growth hormone, 
cortisol, lactate, pyruvate, ammonia, β-­hydroxybutyrate, FFA, carni­
tine, acyl-carnitine profile, and a urine sample for organic acid analysis 
and ketones. Additional tests to consider include transaminases, uric 
acid, triglycerides, and creatinine kinase levels. Fig. 57.5 shows a para­
digm for diagnosis of different hypoglycemic disorders that is based on 
analysis of the critical samples.
Fasting Study
In some cases, a formal fasting test is advised to establish the etiology 
of hypoglycemia. This should only be done in a well-­controlled setting 
with adequate monitoring by experienced medical and nursing staff. 
Fasting is usually begun at 8 p.m. after bedtime snack or sometimes in 
the morning, especially in younger patients, to make sure that there is 
enough supervision and staff available during the time hypoglycemia 
occurs.
Useful “Casual Specimen” Tests
Only a few tests are informative except at times of hypoglycemia. These 
include plasma acyl-­carnitine profiles and plasma total and free car­
nitine levels (for suspected fatty acid oxidation defects) and plasma 
ammonia (for the HI/HA syndrome).
Glucagon Stimulation
If HI is suspected, a glucagon stimulation test at the onset of hypogly­
cemia (50 mg/dL) may be confirmatory. A glycemic response exceed­
ing 30 mg/dL is consistent with HI, because the normal response 
would be to have depleted liver glycogen reserves well before reaching 
hypoglycemia.
Acute Insulin Response Tests for Hyperinsulinism
β-­Cell responsiveness to different secretagogues (calcium, leucine, glu­
cose, tolbutamide) can be used to define specific genetic forms of HI 
and to distinguish focal from diffuse pancreatic disease preoperatively.
Plasma Acyl-­Carnitine Profile
Dual tandem mass spectrometry methods have been developed for 
analyzing plasma acyl-­carnitine profiles and other metabolites in small 
samples, such as filter paper blood spots. These assays are useful for 
screening for most of the genetic fatty acid oxidation disorders (e.g., 
MCAD deficiency) and should be performed before patients sus­
pected to have such a defect begin a formal fasting test. Many states 
incorporate these methods for neonatal screening of up to 30 differ­
ent inborn errors of metabolism. Some fatty acid oxidation defects do 
not cause abnormal acyl-­carnitine profiles; examples include carnitine 
palmityl-­transferase 1 deficiency, carnitine transporter deficiency, and 
β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. These 
disorders must be investigated with additional in vivo and in vitro tests.
Urinary Organic Acid Quantitation
Assays of urinary metabolites by gas chromatography–mass spectrom­
etry are also useful in identifying specific defects in fatty acid oxidation. 
Abnormalities are most pronounced during activation of lipolysis, such 
as at the end of a diagnostic fasting test or in the “critical sample” urine 
collected at the time of an acute illness.
Cultured Cells
For in vitro diagnosis of fatty acid oxidation defects, cultured cells from 
patients, such as skin fibroblasts or lymphoblasts, may be useful for test­
ing overall pathway activity, for assaying activities of candidate enzymes, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1103
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
TABLE 57.8  Clinical Manifestations and Differential Diagnosis in Childhood Hypoglycemia
Condition
Hypoglycemia
Urinary 
Ketones or 
Reducing 
Sugars
Hepatomegaly
SERUM
EFFECT OF 24–36-­HR FAST ON PLASMA
GLYCEMIC 
RESPONSE 
TO GLUCA­
GON
GLYCEMIC 
RESPONSE TO 
INFUSION OF
Lipids
Uric Acid Glucose Insulin
Ketones Alanine
Lactate Fed
Fasted
Alanine
Glycerol
Normal
0
0
0
Normal
Normal
↓
↓
↑
↓
Normal
↑
↓
Not 
indicated
Hyperinsulinemia
Recurrent severe
0
0
Normal 
or ↑
Normal
↓↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
Normal
↑
↑
Not 
indicated
Ketotic 
hypoglycemia
Severe with 
missed meals
Ketonuria 
+++
0
Normal
Normal
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
↑
↓↓
Not 
indicated
Fatty acid 
oxidation 
disorder
Severe with 
missed meals
Absent
0 to + Abnormal 
liver function test 
results
Abnormal
↑
Contraindicated
↑
↓
Not 
indicated
Hypopituitarism
Moderate with 
missed meals
Ketonuria ++
Normal
Normal
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
↑
↓↓
↑
↑
Adrenal 
insufficiency
Severe with 
missed meals
Ketonuria ++ 0
Normal
Normal
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
↑
↓↓
↑
↑
Enzyme 
deficiencies
Severe-­constant
Ketonuria 
+++
+++
↑↑
↑↑
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
0
0-­↓↓
0
0
Glucose-­6-­
phosphatase 
debrancher
Moderate with 
fasting
++
++
Normal
Normal
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
↑
0-­↓↓
↑
↑
Phosphorylase
Mild-­moderate
Ketonuria ++ +
Normal
Normal
↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓
Normal
0-­↑
0-­↓↓
↑
↑
Fructose-­1, 
6-­diphosphatase
Severe with 
fasting
Ketonuria 
+++
+++
↑↑
↑↑
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑
0-­↓↓
↓
↓
Galactosemia
After milk or milk 
products
0 Ketones; 
(s) +
+++
Normal
Normal
↓
↓
↑
↓
Normal
↑
0-­↓↓
↑
↑
Fructose 
intolerance
After fructose
0 Ketones; 
(s) +
+++
Normal
Normal
↓
↓
↑
↓
Normal
↑
0-­↓↓
↑
↑
Details of each condition are discussed in the text.
0, absence; ↑ or ↓, small increase or decrease, respectively; ↑↑ or ↓↓, large increase or decrease, respectively; +, less likely; ++, likely; +++, definitively.
From Sperling MA. Hypoglycemia. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St. Geme JW III, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:780.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1104
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
or as a source of DNA for variant analysis. Most enzymes in the pathway 
are expressed in cultured cells, except for 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl–
CoA synthase, which is restricted to liver, intestine, and kidney.
Genetic Analysis
Genetic variant identification is useful for confirmation of diagnosis and 
genetic counseling. In a limited number of disorders, common variants 
that can be easily screened for as a primary diagnostic test have been 
identified. These include MCAD deficiency, glucose-­6-­phosphatase 
deficiency, and hyperinsulinemia due to ATP-­binding cassette trans­
porter 8 (ABCC8), ATP sensitive inward rectifier potassium channel 
11 (KCNJ11A), mitochondrial glutamate dehydrogenase 1 (GLUD1), 
hepatic nuclear factor 4-­alpha (HNF4A), glucokinase (GCK), mitochon­
drial hydroxyacyl-­coenzyme A (HADH), and mitochondrial uncoupling 
protein 2 (UCP2). Easy access to information about disease-­associated 
variants is available through the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM) website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/).
TREATMENT OF HYPOGLYCEMIA
The initial treatment of hypoglycemia is to promptly raise the plasma 
glucose level to normal and maintain it in the range of 80–100 mg/dL. 
Hypoglycemia: PG≤50 mg/dL
Maternal & Infant
History, Physical Exam
Obtain critical labs if blood sugar
<50 mg/dL from glucometer: serum glucose
(to confirm hypoglycemia), GH, cortisol,
insulin, FFA, β OHB, lactate, urinary ketones
Acidosis
High lactate
Ketosis
No ketosis & no FFA
No ketones, high FFA
Short fasting period
-Glycogen storage disease
• Glucose-6-phosphatase
   deficiency (type 1 GSD)
-Defects in glycogenolysis
(type 3, 6, 9 GSD)
-Normal child
-Ketotic hypoglycemia
-Growth hormone or
 cortisol deficiency
-Normal neonate
-Ethanol ingestion
-IDDM or insulin therapy
-Oral hypoglycemic agents
-SGA & birth asphyxia
-Neonatal hypopituitarism
-Infants of diabetic mothers
-Congenital hyperinsulinism
-Genetic defects in fatty acid
oxidation
&
ketogenesis
-Defects in hepatic
gluconeogenesis
• Fructose-1.6-
diphosphatase deficiency
• Pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency
• Phosphoenolpyruvate
deficiency
Moderate fasting period
Short to moderate fasting period
Prolonged fasting period
No acidosis
• Debrancher
• Liver phosphorylase
• Phosphorylase
  kinase deficiencies
Fig. 57.5  Diagnostic algorithm for determining the etiology of hypoglycemia in children. OHB, hydroxybutyr­
ate; FFA, free fatty acid; GH, growth hormone, GSD, glycogen storage disease; PG, plasma glucose. (Mod­
ified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 
14th ed. Elsevier; 2020:1547, Fig. 38.14.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1105
CHAPTER 57  Hypoglycemia
For long-­term management, the minimum goal of therapy is always to 
keep the plasma glucose level above 60 mg/dL.
Whenever treatment begins in a patient with new-­onset hypogly­
cemia, every effort should be made to collect the critical samples for 
diagnosis. One extra tube of 5 mL of plasma or serum (green-­top or 
red-­top tube) is sufficient to measure key chemistry levels, fuels, and 
hormones. An extra tube of 10 mL or more of urine should also be 
collected for urinary organic acid quantitation.
For emergency treatment of hypoglycemia, an intravenous bolus of 
dextrose, 200 mg/kg, is given rapidly, and then a continuous intrave­
nous infusion is begun to run at a rate equal to at least normal hepatic 
glucose output (about 4–6 mg/kg/min). With 10% dextrose solutions, 
this means a bolus of 2 mL/kg followed by continuous infusion at 
maintenance rates. Infants with HI may require considerably higher 
rates of dextrose infusion, up to 20–30 mg/kg/min. Infants with fatty 
acid oxidation disorders should receive sufficient dextrose to ensure 
that insulin secretion is stimulated enough to suppress lipolysis—that 
is, 10% dextrose at 8–10 mg/kg/min—and to maintain all plasma glu­
cose levels slightly above 100 mg/dL. Glucagon may be used to treat 
hypoglycemia on an emergency basis, but only if the hypoglycemia is 
known to be caused by HI; a dose of 1 mg should be used at all ages to 
avoid undertreatment.
   	 SUMMARY AND RED FLAGS
Hypoglycemia has many manifestations and must be thought of as a cause 
of nonspecific signs in newborns. It is a readily treatable cause of lethargy, 
coma, and seizures. Other affected children have signs of catecholamine 
excess. Untreated symptomatic hypoglycemia is life-­threatening and can 
produce significant, irreversible central nervous system injury.
Red flags include metabolic acidosis (inborn errors of metabo­
lism, sepsis); a positive family history (inborn errors of metabolism, 
hyperinsulinism, hypoglycemic agents); hypoketonuria (hyperinsu­
linemia, fatty acid oxidation defects) and high glucose infusion rates 
(hyperinsulinism); onset during adolescence (drugs or alcohol); hep­
atomegaly (glycogen storage disease, other inborn errors of metab­
olism); feeding intolerance (galactosemia); or recurrent or a family 
history of emesis, lethargy, coma, or sudden infant death syndrome 
(medium-­chain acyl dehydrogenase deficiency).
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1105.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Cornblath M, Hawdon JM, Williams AF, et al. Controversies regarding 
definition of neonatal hypoglycemia: suggested operational thresholds. 
Pediatrics. 2000;105:1141–1145.
Drachmann D, Hoffmann E, Carrigg A, et al. Towards enhanced 
understanding of idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia: a literature review 
and introduction of the patients organization, Ketotic Hypoglycemia 
International. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021;16:173.
Gandhi K. Approach to hypoglycemia in infants and children. Transl Pediatr. 
2017;6(4):408–420.
Kaplowitz P, Sekizkardes H. Clinical and laboratory characteristics and follow 
up of 62 cases of ketotic hypoglycemia: a retrospective study. Int J Pediatr 
Endocrinol. 2019:3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13633-­019-­0066-­9.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Omim/.
Scriver CR, Sly WS, Childs B, et al., eds. The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of 
Inherited Disease. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2001.
Stanley CA, Baker L. The causes of neonatal hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med. 
1999;340:1200–1201.
Stanley CA, Thornton PS, Finegold DN, et al. Hypoglycemia in neonates and 
infants. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 2002.
Thornton PS, Finegold DN, Stanley CA, et al. Hypoglycemia in the infant 
and child. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 2002.
Thornton PS, Stanley CA, De Leon DD, Pediatric Endocrine Society, et al. 
Recommendations from the Pediatric Endocrine Society for evaluation 
and management of persistent hypoglycemia in neonates, infants, and 
children. J Pediatr. 2015;167(2):238–245.
Hyperinsulinism
Aynsley-­Green A, Hussain K, Hall J, et al. Practical management of hyper­
insulinism in infancy. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2000;82:F98–F107.
Collins JE, Leonard JV, Teale D, et al. Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in 
small for dates babies. Arch Dis Child. 1990;65:1118–1120.
De Leon DD, Stanley CA. Congenital hypoglycemia disorders: new aspects 
of etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes. Pediatr Diabetes. 
2017;18(1):3–9.
DeVivo DC, Trifiletti RR, Jacobson RI, et al. Defective glucose transport 
across the blood-­brain barrier as a cause of persistent hypoglycorrhachia, 
seizures, and developmental delay. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:703–709.
Ferry Jr RJ, Kelly A, Grimberg A, et al. Calcium-­stimulated insulin secretion 
in diffuse and focal forms of congenital hyperinsulinism. J Pediatr. 
2000;137:239–246.
Glaser B, Kesavan P, Heyman M, et al. Familial hyperinsulinism caused by an 
activating glucokinase mutation. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:226–230.
Glaser B, Thornton P, Otonkoski T, et al. Genetics of neonatal hyper­
insulinism. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2000;82:F79–F86.
Grimberg A, Ferry RJ, Kelly A, et al. Dysregulation of insulin secretion in 
children with congenital hyperinsulinism due to sulfonylurea receptor 
mutations. Diabetes. 2001;50:322–328.
Huopio H, Reimann F, Ashfield R, et al. Dominantly inherited hyper­
insulinism caused by a mutation in the sulfonylurea receptor type 1. J Clin 
Invest. 2000;106:897–906.
MacMullen C, Fang J, Hsu BYL, et al. Hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia 
syndrome in children with regulatory mutations in the inhibitory GTP 
binding domain of glutamate dehydrogenase. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2001;86:1782–1787.
Munns CFJ, Batch JA. Hyperinsulinism and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. 
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2001;84:F67–F69.
Santer R, Schneppenheim R, Dombrowski A, et al. Mutations in GLUT2, the 
gene for the liver-­type glucose transporter, in patients with Fanconi-­Bickel 
syndrome. Nat Genet. 1997;17:324–326.
Stanley CA. Hyperinsulinism in infants and children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1997;44:363–374.
Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders
Stanley CA, Hale DE. Genetic disorders of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. 
Curr Opin Pediatr. 1994;6:476.
Treem WR, Shoup ME, Hale DE, et al. Acute fatty liver of pregnancy, hemol­­
ysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome, and long chain 
3-­hydroxyacyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency. Am J Gastroenterol. 
1996;91:2293–2300.
Ziadeh R, Hoffman EP, Finegold DN, et al. Medium chain acyl-­CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency in Pennsylvania: neonatal screening shows 
high incidence and unexpected mutation frequencies. Pediatr Res. 
1995;37:675.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
