431
The term disorders of sex development (DSD) replaces the former terms 
intersex and hermaphroditism (Table 26.1). The most common present­
ing symptom of DSD is atypical (ambiguous) genitalia at birth. Other 
presenting signs and symptoms include lack of some or all aspects of 
pubertal development, postnatal virilization of a phenotypic female, 
or infertility. The classification of DSD is based on broad categories 
related to blood sex chromosome composition and gonadal structure. 
These categories include 46,XX DSD, 46,XY DSD, ovotesticular DSD, 
and sex chromosome DSD (Table 26.2).
The terms atypical or ambiguous genitalia, in a broad sense, refer 
to any case in which the external genitalia do not appear completely 
male or completely female. Although there are standards for genital 
size dimensions, variations in size of these structures do not always 
constitute ambiguity.
Development of the external genitalia begins with the potential to 
be either male or female (Fig. 26.1 and Table 26.3). Virilization of a 
female, the most common form of DSD, results in varying phenotypes 
(Fig. 26.2) that develop from the basic bipotential genital appearances 
of the embryo (see Fig. 26.1). Degrees of virilization at birth are often 
classified using the Prader stages (Fig. 26.3).
OVERVIEW OF SEX DIFFERENTIATION
In typical differentiation from the sexually undifferentiated early 
fetus, the final phenotype of the external and internal genitalia is 
consistent with a normal sex chromosome complement (either XX 
or XY). The process of sex differentiation and development follows 
a consistent timeline (Fig. 26.4). A 46,XX complement of chro­
mosomes as well as genetic factors, including DAX1, the signaling 
molecule WNT-­4, CTNNB1, and R-­spondin 1, are among the many 
factors needed for the development of normal ovaries and müllerian 
(paramesonephric) ducts (uterus, fallopian tubes, and upper vagina). 
Development of the male phenotype requires the product of a Y chro­
mosome gene called SRY (Sex-­determining Region on the Y chromo­
some), which, in concert with products of other genes such as SOX9, 
SF1, WT1, and FGF9, directs the undifferentiated gonad to become 
a testis. SRY acts as a transcriptional regulator to increase cellular 
proliferation, attract interstitial cells from adjacent mesonephros into 
the genital ridge, and stimulate testicular Sertoli cell differentiation. 
Sertoli cells act as an organizer of steroidogenic and germ cell lines 
and produce antimüllerian hormone that causes the female (parame­
sonephric) duct system to regress. Aberrant genetic recombinations 
may result in X chromosomes carrying SRY, resulting in XX males 
(46,XX testicular DSD), or Y chromosomes that have lost SRY, result­
ing in XY females (46,XY DSD due to gonadal dysgenesis). Epigene­
tic causes of abnormal sex differentiation have been shown in plants, 
invertebrates, and vertebrates and will likely be shown to contribute 
to human DSD as well.
Antimüllerian hormone (AMH) from the ipsilateral fetal testis 
causes the müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts to regress. In its absence, 
they persist as the uterus, fallopian tubes, cervix, and upper vagina. By 
about 8 weeks of gestation, the Leydig cells of the testis begin to produce 
testosterone. During this critical period of male differentiation, testos­
terone secretion is stimulated by placental human chorionic gonadotro­
pin (hCG), which peaks at 8–12 weeks. In the latter half of pregnancy, 
lower levels of testosterone are maintained by luteinizing hormone 
(LH) secreted by the fetal pituitary. Testosterone produced locally ini­
tiates development of the ipsilateral wolffian (mesonephric) duct into 
the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicle. Development of the 
external genitalia also requires dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the more 
active metabolite of testosterone. DHT is produced largely from cir­
culating testosterone and is necessary for fusion of the genital folds to 
form the penis and scrotum. DHT is also produced via an alternative 
biosynthetic pathway from androstanediol, and this pathway must also 
be intact for normal and complete prenatal virilization to occur. A func­
tional androgen receptor, produced by an X-­linked gene, is required 
for testosterone and DHT to produce the androgen effects.
In the XX fetus with normal long and short arms of the X chro­
mosomes, the bipotential gonad develops into an ovary by about the 
10th–11th week. This occurs only in the absence of SRY, testosterone, 
and AMH and requires a normal gene in the DSS (Dosage Sensitive Sex 
reversal) locus of DAX1 (DSS Adrenal hypoplasia congenital region on 
X, also known as NROB1), WNT-­4, and R-­spondin 1. A female exter­
nal phenotype will develop even in the absence of fetal gonads. Unlike 
development of the male external phenotype, which requires androgen 
production and its action, estrogen is unnecessary for normal female 
prenatal sex differentiation. This is demonstrated by 46,XX patients who 
lack estrogen due to a deficiency of aromatase, the enzyme required for 
conversion of androgen to estrogen. Development of the ovary was once 
thought to be a passive process in the absence of SRY. Although the mor­
phologic changes in the developing ovary are less marked than in the 
testis, there are a number of sequentially expressed genes and pathways 
that are required for complete ovarian development as well as mainte­
nance of ovarian integrity postnatally. One of these genes is R-­spondin 
1, which, if variants result in abnormal function, can result in testicular 
or ovotesticular development in 46,XX individuals. Once developed, the 
ovary requires FAX12 to preserve its differentiation and stability.
Several genes important to the pathoetiology of DSD are listed in 
Table 26.4.
OVERVIEW OF GONADAL FUNCTION
Testes
Levels of placental hCG peak at 8–12 weeks of gestation, and in males 
hCG stimulates the fetal Leydig cells to secrete testosterone, the main 
hormonal product of the testis. In the classical androgen biosynthetic 
Disorders of Sex Development
Patricia A. Donohoue
26
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
432
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
pathway (Fig. 26.5), testosterone is then converted by the enzyme 5α-­
reductase to its more potent metabolite, DHT. This early period is crit­
ical for virilization of the XY fetus including fusion of the midline to 
form the scrotum and extension of the urethral meatus to distal penile 
opening (see Fig. 26.1). Defects in this process lead to various devia­
tions from typical male development. After virilization, fetal levels of 
testosterone decrease but are maintained at lower levels in the latter half 
of pregnancy by LH secreted by the fetal pituitary. This LH-­mediated 
testosterone secretion is required for continued penile growth and, to 
some degree, for testicular descent.
As part of the normal transition from intrauterine to extrauterine 
life, perhaps related to the sudden withdrawal of maternal and placen­
tal hormones, newborns and young infants experience a transient surge 
of gonadotropins and sex steroids. This is the so-­called minipuberty.
In males, LH and testosterone peak at 1–2 months of age and then 
decline to reach prepubertal levels by 4–6 months of age. Follicle-­
stimulating hormone (FSH), along with inhibin B, peaks at 3 months 
and declines to prepubertal levels by 9 and 15 months, respectively. The 
LH rise is more dominant than that of FSH.
The neonatal surge may be important for postnatal maturation of 
the gonads, for stabilization of male external genitalia, and perhaps 
TABLE 26.1  Revised Nomenclature
Previous
Currently Accepted
Intersex
Disorders of sex development (DSD)
Male pseudohermaphrodite
46,XY DSD
Undervirilization of an XY male
46,XY DSD
Undermasculinization of an XY male
46,XY DSD
46,XY intersex
46,XY DSD
Female pseudohermaphrodite
46,XX DSD
Overvirilization of an XX female
46,XX DSD
Masculinization of an XX female
46,XX DSD
46,XX intersex
46,XX DSD
True hermaphrodite
Ovotesticular DSD
Gonadal intersex
Ovotesticular DSD
XX male or XX sex reversal
46,XX testicular DSD
XY sex reversal
46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis
From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on 
management of intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500.
TABLE 26.2  Etiologic Classification of Disorders of Sex Development
46,XX Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)
Androgen Exposure
Fetal/Fetoplacental Source
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
21-­Hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency
11β-­Hydroxylase (CYP11B1) deficiency
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II (HSD3B2) deficiency
Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR)
Aromatase (CYP19) deficiency
Glucocorticoid receptor gene pathogenic variant
Maternal Source
Virilizing ovarian tumor
Virilizing adrenal tumor
Androgenic drugs
Disorders of Ovarian Development
XX gonadal dysgenesis
Testicular DSD
Undetermined Origin/Associated with Genitourinary and 
Gastrointestinal Tract Defects
Cloacal exstrophy
MURCS association
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome
46,XY DSD
Defects in Testicular Development
WT-­1 defects
Denys-Drash syndrome
Frasier syndrome
WAGR syndrome
Campomelic syndrome and SOX9 pathogenic variant
SF1 pathogenic variant
Variants in SRY gene (XY pure gonadal dysgenesis, Swyer 
syndrome)
XY gonadal agenesis (embryonic testicular regression syndrome)
Deficiency of Testicular Hormone Production
Leydig cell aplasia/hypoplasia
Variants in luteinizing hormone receptor
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (CYP11A1) deficiency; pathogenic variant in 
StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein)
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II (HSD3B2) deficiency
17-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase (CYP17A1) deficiency
17β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-­HSD) or 17-­ketosteroid 
reductase deficiency
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (defect in conversion of 
7-­dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol [DHCR7])
Persistent Müllerian Duct Syndrome Due to Antimülle­
rian Hormone Gene Variants, or Receptor Defects for 
Antimüllerian Hormone
Defect in Androgen Action
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) deficiency
5α-­Reductase II (SDR5A2) pathogenic variants
3α-­Reductase (AKR1C2/AKR1C4) pathogenic variants
Androgen receptor defects
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS)
Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS)
Undetermined Causes, Including Those Associated with 
Other Congenital Defects
Ovotesticular DSD
XX
XY
XX/XY chimeras
Sex Chromosome DSD
45,X (Turner syndrome and variants)
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome and variants)
45,X/46,XY (mixed gonadal dysgenesis, sometimes a cause of ovotesticular DSD)
46,XX/46,XY (chimeric, sometimes a cause of ovotesticular DSD)
From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
433
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
also for gender identity and sexual behaviors. The postnatal surge in 
LH and testosterone is absent or blunted in infants with hypopituita­
rism, cryptorchidism, and complete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(CAIS). The development of nocturnal pulsatile secretion of LH marks 
the advent of puberty.
AMH, inhibin, and activin are members of the transforming 
growth factor-­β (TGF-­β) superfamily of growth factors. AMH is the 
earliest secreted product of the Sertoli cells of the fetal testis. The 
AMH receptor is expressed in Sertoli cells. In the female it is present 
in fetal müllerian duct cells and in granulosa cells (fetal and postna­
tal). During sex differentiation in males, AMH causes involution of the 
müllerian ducts. AMH is secreted in males by Sertoli cells during both 
fetal and postnatal life. In females, it is secreted by ovarian granulosa 
cells from 36 weeks of gestation to menopause, but at lower levels. The 
serum concentration of AMH in males is highest at birth, whereas in 
females it is highest at puberty. After puberty, both sexes have similar 
serum concentrations of AMH. Its role in postnatal life is not yet fully 
characterized.
Genital tubercle
Urethrolabial fold
Anus
Genital groove
Labioscrotal fold
Male
Male
Female
Female
Sexual appearance of fetus at second to third month of pregnancy
Sexual appearance of fetus at third to fourth month of pregnancy
Sexual appearance of fetus at time of birth
Genital
tubercle
(penis)
Urethral fold
Urethral groove
Scrotal swelling
Anus
Penis
Urethral raphe
(joining line of
urethral fold)
Scrotal raphe
(joining line of
scrotal swelling)
Scrotum
Anus
Genital
tubercle
(clitoris)
Inner labial fold
Vulval groove
Outer labial
swelling
Anus
Clitoris
Urethral
opening
Labia minora
Labia majora
Vaginal opening
Anus
Fig. 26.1  Schematic illustration of differentiation of normal male and female genitalia during embryogenesis. 
(From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 4th ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2002:328.)
TABLE 26.3  Embryologic Origins of Female 
and Male Reproductive Structures
Precursor
Female
Male
Undifferentiated 
bipotential gonad
Ovary
Testis
Internal ducts
Wolffian (mesone­
phric)
Involution
Epididymis, vas defer­
ens, seminal vesicles
Müllerian (parameso­
nephric)
Fallopian tubes, uterus, 
cervix, upper vagina
Involution, prostatic 
utricle
Urogenital sinus
Lower vagina, urethra
Urethra
External genitalia
  Genital tubercle
Clitoris
Penile corpora cavernosa
  Labioscrotal folds
Labia majora
Scrotum
  Labiourethral folds
Labia minora
Penile urethra
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
434
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Inhibin is another glycoprotein hormone secreted by testicular 
Sertoli cells and ovarian granulosa and theca cells. Inhibin A consists 
of an α subunit disulfide linked to the β-­A subunit, whereas inhibin 
B consists of the same α subunit linked to the β-­B subunit. Activins 
are dimers of the B subunits, either homodimers (BA/BA, BB/BB) or 
heterodimers (BA/BB). Inhibins selectively inhibit, whereas activins 
stimulate pituitary FSH secretion. Inhibin A is absent in males and is 
present mostly in the luteal phase in women. Inhibin B is the principal 
form of inhibin in males, and in females during the follicular phase. 
Inhibin B is useful as a marker of Sertoli cell function in males. FSH stim­
ulates inhibin B secretion in females and males, but only in males is 
there also evidence for gonadotropin-­independent regulation. In males 
with delayed puberty, inhibin B may be a useful screening test to differ­
entiate between constitutional delay of puberty and hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism (HH). In HH the serum inhibin B level has been shown 
to be very low to undetectable.
Like inhibin and activin, follistatin (a single-­chain glycosylated 
protein) is produced by gonads and other tissues such as the hypo­
thalamus, kidney, adrenal gland, and placenta. Follistatin inhibits FSH 
secretion principally by binding activins, thereby blocking the effects of 
activins at the level of both the ovary and pituitary.
Many additional peptides act as mediators of the development and 
function of the testis. They include neurohormones such as growth 
hormone–releasing hormone, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone, 
corticotropin-­releasing hormone, oxytocin, arginine vasopressin, 
somatostatin, substance P, and neuropeptide Y; growth factors such as 
insulin-­like growth factors (IGFs) and IGF-­binding proteins, TGF-­β, 
and fibroblast, platelet-­derived, and nerve growth factors; vasoactive 
peptides; and immune-­derived cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor 
and interleukins IL-­1, IL-­2, IL-­4, and IL-­6.
Testicular development is marked by major maturational changes 
at puberty (see Chapter 55). Clinical patterns of pubertal changes vary 
widely. In 95% of boys, enlargement of the genitals, which is typically 
the first sign of puberty, begins between 9.5 and 13.5 years, reaching 
maturity at 13–17 years. In a minority of normal boys, puberty begins 
after 15 years of age. In some boys, pubertal development is completed 
in less than 2 years, but in others it may take longer than 4.5 years. 
Pubertal development and the adolescent growth spurt occur at an 
older age in boys than in girls.
The median age of sperm production (spermarche) is 14 years. This 
event occurs in mid-­puberty as judged by pubic hair, testis size, evi­
dence of growth spurt, and testosterone levels. Nighttime levels of FSH 
are in the adult male range at the time of spermarche; the first con­
scious ejaculation occurs at about the same time.
Ovaries
In the normal female, the undifferentiated gonad can be identified 
histologically as an ovary by 10–11 weeks of gestation (see Fig. 26.4), 
after the upregulation of R-­spondin 1. Oocytes are present from the 4th 
month of gestation and reach a peak of 7 million by 5 months of ges­
tation. For normal maintenance, oocytes need granulosa cells to form 
primordial follicles. Functional FSH (but not LH) receptors are present 
in oocytes of primary follicles during follicular development. Two nor­
mal X chromosomes are needed for maintenance of oocytes. In con­
trast to somatic cells, in which only one X chromosome is active, both 
Xs are active in germ cells. At birth, the ovaries contain about 1 million 
active follicles, which decrease to 0.5 million by menarche. Thereafter, 
they decrease at a rate of 1,000/month, and at an even higher rate after 
the age of 35 years.
The hormones of the fetal ovary are provided mostly by the fetopla­
cental unit. As in males, peak gonadotropin secretion occurs in fetal 
life and then again at 2–3 months of life, with the lowest levels at about 
6 years of age. In contrast to males, the FSH surge predominates over 
LH in females. FSH peaks around 3–6 months of age, declines by 12 
months, but remains detectable for 24 months. Under LH influence, 
estradiol peaks at 2–6 months of age. The inhibin B response is variable, 
peaking at between 2 and 12 months and remaining above prepubertal 
levels until 24 months. In both infancy and childhood, gonadotropin 
levels are higher in females than in males.
The most important estrogens produced by the ovary are estradiol-­
17β (E2) and estrone (E1); estriol is a metabolic product of both, and 
all three estrogens may be found in the urine of mature females. Estro­
gens arise from androgens produced by the adrenal glands, the ovaries, 
or the testes (see Fig. 26.5). This conversion explains why in certain 
types of 46,XY DSD, feminization occurs at puberty. In HSD17B3 defi­
ciency (see later), for example, the enzymatic block results in markedly 
A
B
D
C
E
F
Fig. 26.2  Virilization of external genitalia in 46,XX congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (21-­hydroxylase deficiency A–D). A, There is a mild to mod­
erate degree of virilization, with primarily clitoral hypertrophy and signif­
icant fusion of the labia. B, Virilization is moderate, with clitoromegaly, 
labial fusion, and rugation of labial folds. C, D, Complete masculin­
ization is evident. E, F, Asymmetric external genitals with left unilat­
eral descended testis (E), penoscrotal hypospadias, and chordee (F). 
Asymmetric external genital development or gonadal descent would be 
characteristic of mixed gonadal dysgenesis or ovotesticular disorder of 
sexual development (E, F). (From Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s 
Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:1371, 
Figs. 97.6 and 97.7.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
435
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
increased secretion of androstenedione, which is converted in the 
peripheral tissues to estradiol and estrone. These estrogens, in addition 
to those directly secreted by the testis, result in breast development. 
Estradiol produced from testosterone in CAIS causes complete femini­
zation in these XY individuals.
Plasma levels of estradiol increase slowly but steadily with advanc­
ing sexual maturation and correlate well with clinical progression of 
pubertal development, skeletal age, and rising levels of FSH. Levels of 
LH do not rise measurably until secondary sexual characteristics are 
present. Estrogens, like androgens, inhibit secretion of both LH and 
FSH (negative feedback). In females, estrogens also provoke the surge 
of LH secretion that occurs in the mid-­menstrual cycle and results in 
ovulation. The capacity for this positive feedback is another matura­
tional milestone of puberty.
The average age at menarche in White American girls is about 12.5–
13 years, but the range of “normal” is wide, and 1–2% of normal girls 
have not menstruated by 16 years of age (see Chapter 55). The age at 
onset of pubertal signs is about 2 years before menarche. This age var­
ies, with some studies suggesting earlier ages than previously thought, 
especially in the U.S. African-­American population. Menarche gener­
ally correlates closely with skeletal age. Maturation and closure of the 
epiphyses is partially estrogen dependent, as demonstrated by a very 
tall 28-­year-­old normally masculinized male with continued growth 
due to incomplete closure of the epiphyses, who proved to have com­
plete estrogen insensitivity due to an estrogen-­receptor defect.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH 
ATYPICAL OR AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA
Infants with ambiguous or atypical genitalia should be evaluated and 
treated at a center with multidisciplinary experience in DSD. The 
appearance of the external genitalia is rarely diagnostic of a particular 
disorder, and thus does not often allow distinction among the various 
forms of DSD. Some clues are noted in Table 26.5. The most com­
mon causes of 46,XX DSD are virilizing forms of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH). It is important to note that in 46,XY DSD, the 
specific diagnosis is not found in up to 50% of cases. At one experi­
enced center, the six most common diagnoses accounted for 50% of 
the cases. These included virilizing CAH (14%), androgen insensitivity 
syndrome (10%), mixed gonadal dysgenesis (8%), clitoral/labial anom­
alies (7%), hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (6%), and 46,XY small-­
for-­gestational age males with hypospadias (6%). The etiology in cases 
of 46,XY DSD without a known diagnosis can be further delineated 
using exome sequencing technologies.
The difficulty of establishing a diagnosis in 46,XY DSD and the 
resulting lack of specific management emphasizes the need for thor­
ough diagnostic evaluations (Fig. 26.6). These include biochemical 
Fig. 26.3  Method of staging the degree of virilization of the external genitalia of females as proposed by 
Prader (1958). In type I, the only abnormality is a slight enlargement of the clitoris. In type V, there is a 
markedly enlarged phallus with a penile urethra. (Redrawn from Prader A. Vollkommen männliche äussere 
gentialentwicklung und salzverlustsyndrom bei madchen mit kongenitalem adrenogenitalem syndrom. Helv 
Paediat Acta. 1958;13:5.)
2
4
6
8
10
Weeks of gestation
12
Vagina
Urogenital
sinus
Vagina reaches
perineum
Prostate
Utricle
14
16
18
20
24
22
Labia majora & minora
External
genitalia
Ventral flexion
of phallus
Urethral closure, fusion
Labioscrotal folds
Penile growth
Vagina, uterus
Mullerian
ducts
Fusion
Regression
Regression
Wolffian
ducts
Vas, epididymis, ejaculatory ducts, seminal vesicles
Gonads
Follicles
Oocytes
Oogonia
Testicular
descent
Leydig cells
Sertoli cells
Fig. 26.4  Timing of development of external and internal genitalia. The 
solid dot shows the age at onset of the various developmental changes. 
Male differentiation is shown above each line, with female differentia­
tion below. (From White PC, Speiser PW. Congenital adrenal hyperpla­
sia due to 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Endocr Rev. 2000;21:245–291.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
436
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
TABLE 26.4  Genes Associated with in Disorders of Sex Development
Gene
Protein
OMIM #
Locus
Inheritance Gonad
Müllerian 
Structures
External Genitalia Associated Features/Variant Phenotypes
46,XY DSD
Disorders of Gonadal (Testicular) Development: Single-­Gene Disorders
WT1
TF
607102
11p13
AD
Testicular 
dysgenesis
±
Female or ambiguous
Wilms tumor, renal abnormalities, gonadal tumors (WAGR, Denys-­Drash, 
and Frasier syndromes)
SF1 
(NR5A1)
Nuclear receptor TF
184757
9q33
AD/AR
Testicular 
dysgenesis
±
Female or ambiguous
More severe phenotypes include primary adrenal failure; milder pheno­
types have isolated partial gonadal dysgenesis; mothers who carry SF1 
pathogenic variant have premature ovarian insufficiency
SRY
TF
480000
Yp11.3
Y
Testicular 
dysgenesis 
or ovotestis
±
Female or ambiguous
SOX9
TF
608160
17q24-­25
AD
Testicular 
dysgenesis 
or ovotestis
±
Female or ambiguous
Campomelic dysplasia (17q24 rearrangements; milder phenotype than 
point pathogenic variants)
DHH
Signaling molecule
605423
12q13.1
AR
Testicular 
dysgenesis
+
Female
The severe phenotype of one patient included minifascicular neuropathy; 
other patients have isolated gonadal dysgenesis
ATRX
Helicase (?chromatin 
remodeling)
300032
Xq13.3
X
Testicular 
dysgenesis
–
Female, ambiguous, 
or male
α Thalassemia, developmental delay
ARX
TF
300382
Xp21.13
X
Testicular 
dysgenesis
–
Ambiguous
X-­linked lissencephaly, epilepsy, temperature instability
MAP3K1
613762
5q11.2
AD
Dysgenetic 
testes
Streak 
ovaries, 
uterus can 
be normal
Female or ambiguous 
male (rare)
Sparse axillary and pubic hair, gonadoblastoma
Disorders of Gonadal (Testicular) Development: Chromosomal Changes Involving Key Candidate Genes
DMRT1
DMRT2
TF
602424
9p24.3
Monosomic 
deletion
Testicular 
dysgenesis
±
Female or ambiguous
Developmental delay
Rib/vertebral malformations
DAX1 
(NR0B1)
Nuclear receptor TF
300018
Xp21.3
dupXp21
Testicular 
dysgenesis 
or ovary
±
Female or ambiguous
WNT4
Signaling molecule
603490
1p35
dup1p35
Testicular 
dysgenesis
+
Ambiguous
Developmental delay
DMRT3
OAS3
Regulate ESR1 
expression
603351
9p24.3
12q24
Digenic with 
DMRT3 and 
OAS3
Testicular 
dysgenesis
Female or ambiguous
Disorders in Hormone Synthesis or Action
LHGCR
G-­protein receptor
152790
2p21
AR
Testis
–
Female, ambiguous, or 
micropenis
Leydig cell hypoplasia
DHCR7
Enzyme
602858
11q12-­13
AR
Testis
–
Variable
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome: coarse facies, 2nd–3rd toe syndactyly, failure 
to thrive, developmental delay, cardiac and visceral abnormalities
StAR
Mitochondrial mem­
brane protein
600617
8p11.2
AR
Testis
–
Female
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (primary adrenal failure), pubertal 
failure
CYP11A1
Enzyme
118485
15q23-­24
AR
Testis
–
Female or ambiguous
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (primary adrenal failure), pubertal failure
HSD3B2
Enzyme
201810
1p13.1
AR
Testis
–
Ambiguous
CAH, primary adrenal failure, partial androgenization due to ↑ DHEA
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
437
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
TABLE 26.4  Genes Associated with in Disorders of Sex Development—cont’d
Gene
Protein
OMIM #
Locus
Inheritance Gonad
Müllerian 
Structures
External Genitalia Associated Features/Variant Phenotypes
CYP17
Enzyme
202110
10q24.3
AR
Testis
–
Female ambiguous or 
micropenis
CAH, hypertension due to ↑ corticosterone and 11-­deoxycorticosterone 
(except in isolated 17,20-­lyase deficiency)
POR (P450 
oxidore­
ductase)
CYP enzyme electron 
donor
124015
7q11.2
AR
Testis
–
Male or ambiguous
Mixed features of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase 
deficiency, and aromatase deficiency; sometimes associated with Antley-­
Bixler skeletal dysplasia
HSD17B3
Enzyme
605573
9q22
AR
Testis
–
Female or ambiguous
Partial androgenization at puberty, ↑ androstenedione:testosterone ratio
SRD5A2
Enzyme
607306
2p23
AR
Testis
–
Ambiguous or micrope­
nis
Partial androgenization at puberty, ↑ testosterone:DHT ratio
AKR1C4
Enzyme
600451
10p15.1
Unclear
Testis
–
Ambiguous or micrope­
nis
DHT deficiency in patients once thought to have 17,20-­lyase deficiency; 
dose effect with AKR1C2 pathogenic variant is possible
AKR1C2
Enzyme
600450
10p15.1
Unclear
Testis
–
Ambiguous or micrope­
nis
DHT deficiency in patients once thought to have 17,20-­lyase deficiency; 
dose effect with AKR1C2 pathogenic variant is possible
AMH
Signaling molecule
600957
19p13.3-­13.2
AR
Testis
+
Normal male
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome; male
AMH 
receptor
Serine–threonine 
kinase transmem­
brane receptor
600956
12q13
AR
Testis
–
Normal male
External genitalia, bilateral cryptorchidism
Androgen 
receptor
Nuclear receptor TF
313700
Xq12
X
Testis
–
Female, ambiguous, 
micropenis, or 
normal male
Phenotypic spectrum from complete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(female external genitalia) and partial androgen insensitivity (ambiguous) 
to normal male genitalia/infertility
46,XX DSD
Disorders of Gonadal (Ovarian) Development
SRY
TF
480000
Yp11.3
Translocation
Testis or 
ovotestis
–
Male or ambiguous
SOX9
TF
608160
17q24
dup17q24
ND
–
Male or ambiguous
R-­spondin 1
TF
610644
1p34.3
AR
Ovotestis
+/–
Male or ambiguous
Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and certain malignancies
Androgen Excess
HSD3B2
Enzyme
201810
1p13
AR
Ovary
+
Clitoromegaly
CAH, primary adrenal failure, partial androgenization due to ↑ DHEA
CYP21A2
Enzyme
201910
6p21-­23
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
CAH, phenotypic spectrum from severe salt-­losing forms associated with 
adrenal failure to simple virilizing forms with compensated adrenal 
function, ↑ 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
CYP11B1
Enzyme
20210
8q21-­22
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
CAH, hypertension due to ↑ 11-­deoxycortisol and 11-­deoxycorticosterone
POR (P450 
oxidore­
ductase)
CYP enzyme electron 
donor
124015
7q11.2
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
Mixed features of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase 
deficiency, and aromatase deficiency; associated with Antley-­Bixler 
skeletal dysplasia
CYP19
Enzyme
107910
15q21
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
Maternal virilization during pregnancy, absent breast development at 
puberty, except in partial cases
Glucocor­
ticoid 
receptor
Nuclear receptor TF
138040
5q31
AR
Ovary
+
Ambiguous
↑ ACTH, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and cortisol; failure of dexamethasone 
suppression (patient heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in CYP21)
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AD, autosomal dominant (often de novo pathogenic variant); AR, autosomal recessive; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DHEA, dehydroepiandros­
terone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; DSD, disorders of sex development; ND, not determined; OMIM #, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man number; TF, transcription factor; WAGR, Wilms, 
aniridia, genital anomalies, and retardation; X, X-­chromosomal; Y, Y-­chromosomal. Chromosomal rearrangements likely to include key genes are included.
Data from Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. International Consensus Conference on Intersex organized by the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the European Society for 
Paediatric Endocrinology. Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500; Baxter RM, Arboleda VA, Lee H, et al. Exome sequencing for the 
diagnosis of 46,XY disorders of sex development. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100:e333–e344.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
438
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
characterization of possible steroidogenic enzymatic defects, imag­
ing studies to characterize internal genitalia, and determination of 
genetic sex as well as other genetic studies as determined by each 
individual patient with atypical genitalia. The parents need counsel­
ing about the potentially complex nature of the baby’s condition, and 
guidance as to how to deal with the curiosity of their well-­meaning 
friends and family members. The evaluation and management should 
be carried out by a multidisciplinary team of experts that include 
practitioners in pediatric endocrinology, pediatric surgery/urology, 
pediatric radiology, newborn medicine/neonatology, genetics, and 
psychology. On occasion, the sex of rearing will need to be uncom­
mitted until the diagnostic evaluation is completed. Once the sex of 
rearing has been agreed on by the family and team, treatment can be 
organized. Genetic counseling should be offered as part of routine 
work-up.
After a complete history and physical exam, the common diag­
nostic approach includes multiple steps that are usually performed 
at the same time rather than waiting for results of one test prior to 
performing another, in order to expedite the diagnosis. At many cen­
ters, the initial evaluation may include a broad genetic screening panel 
that simultaneously examines for multiple potential disease-­associated 
genetic variants. Careful attention to the presence of physical features 
other than the genitalia is crucial to determine if a diagnosis of a par­
ticular multisystem syndrome is possible (Table 26.6 and Fig. 26.7). A 
summary of many features of commonly encountered causes of DSD is 
provided in Table 26.7.
Diagnostic tests include the following:
	1.	 Blood karyotype, with rapid determination of sex chromosomes (in 
many centers this is available within 24–48 hours) (see Fig. 26.7).
	2.	 Other blood tests (see Table 26.6)
	
a.	 Screen for congenital adrenal hyperplasia: cortisol biosyn­
thetic precursors and adrenal androgens, particularly serum 
levels of 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and androstenedione for 
21-­hydroxylase deficiency, the most common form. In the United 
States, all 50 states have a newborn screen for 21-­hydroxylase 
deficiency.
	
b.	 Screen for androgen biosynthetic defects with serum levels of 
androgens and their precursors.
	
c.	 Assess for gonadal responsiveness to gonadotropin to screen for 
testicular gonadal tissue: measure serum levels of testosterone 
and dihydrotestosterone before and after intramuscular injec­
tions of hCG.
HSD3B2
CYP11A1  StAR
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17-OH pregnenolone
Adrenal & Sex Steroid Synthesis
Sex Steroid Synthesis
Standard Pathway
Adrenal Steroid Synthesis
DHEA
CYP21A2  POR
CYP11B1
CYP11B2
Aldosterone
Corticosterone
Cortisol
DHT
Testosterone
Estradiol
Estrone
Androstenedione
17-OH progesterone
Progesterone
DOC
11-Deoxycortisol
SRD5A2
AKR1C2/4
17-OH
allopreg-
nanolone
Androstanediol
DHT
5DHP
Sex Steroid Synthesis
Alternative Pathway
To DHT
AKR1C2/RoDH (ox)
CYP17A1  POR
HSD17B3
HSD17B3
HSD17B2
C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R
S
R
D
5
A
1
C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R
A
R
O

P
O
R
Fig. 26.5  Steroidogenic pathways. CYP11A1: cholesterol side chain cleavage. Enzyme activities include 
20-­hydroxylase, 22-­hydroxylase, and 20,22-­lyase; CYP17A1: activities include 17α-­hydroxylase and 17,20-­
lyase; HSD3B2: activities include 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II and D5D4-­isomerase; CYP21A2: 
activity is 21-­hydroxylase; CYP11B1: activity is 11β-­hydroxylase; CYP11B2: activities include 18-­hydroxylase 
(CMOI) and 18-­dehydrogenase (CMOII); SRD5A1: activity is 5α-­reductase type I; SRD5A2: activity is 5α-­
reductase type II; HSD17B2: activity is 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II; HSD17B3: activity is 17β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type III; AKR1C2/4 (blue): activities are 3α-­reductase types I and III; AKR1C2/
RoDH (ox): activities are 3α-­reductase and 3-­hydroxyepimerase. ARO, aromatase; DHEA, dehydroepiandros­
terone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; 5αDHP, 5α-­dihydroprogesterone; DOC, deoxycorticosterone; POR, P450 
oxidoreductase. (Data from Kim MS, Donohoue PA. Adrenal disorders. In: Kappy MS, Allen DB, Geffner ME, 
eds. Pediatric Practice Endocrinology. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2014; and Flück CE, et al. Why boys 
will be boys: two pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed for male sexual differentia­
tion. Am J Hum Genet. 2011;89:201–218.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
439
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
	
d.	 Molecular genetic analyses for SRY (sex-­determining region of 
the Y chromosome), other Y-­specific loci, and, when appropri­
ate, broad screening for other known single-­gene defects associ­
ated with DSD (see Table 26.4).
	
e.	 Gonadotropin levels (LH and FSH).
	
f.	 AMH and inhibin B levels.
	3.	 The internal anatomy of patients with ambiguous genitalia can be 
defined with one or more of the following studies:
	
a.	 Pelvic ultrasound; renal and adrenal ultrasound.
	
b.	 Pelvic MRI.
	
c.	 Genitourethrograms.
	
d.	 Endoscopic examination of the genitourinary tract.
	
e.	 Exploratory laparoscopy to locate and characterize/biopsy 
the gonads.
BASIC APPROACHES TO THE DIAGNOSIS 
AND MANAGEMENT OF DISORDERS OF SEX 
DEVELOPMENT
In the neonate, the presence of atypical genitalia requires immediate 
attention to determine the etiology and then, if necessary, decide on 
the sex of rearing. In some cases, DSD is associated with other abnor­
malities that adversely impact the child’s health, particularly the salt-­
losing forms of CAH, adrenal insufficiency related to SF1 defects, and 
renal abnormalities associated with WT-­1 defects.
The family of the infant needs to be informed of the child’s condition 
as early, completely, compassionately, and honestly as possible. Caution 
must be used to avoid feelings of guilt, shame, and confusion. Guid­
ance needs to be provided to alleviate both short-­term and long-­term 
concerns and to allow the child to grow up in a completely supportive 
environment. The initial care is best provided by a team of professionals 
who remain focused foremost on the needs of the child. Management 
of the potential emotional and psychologic effects that these disorders 
can generate in the child and the family is of paramount importance and 
requires the involvement of physicians, psychologists, and other health 
care professionals with sensitivity, training, and experience in this field.
While awaiting the results of blood tests, imaging with pelvic ultra­
sonography and/or MRI is used to determine the presence of a uterus 
and ovaries. Presence of a uterus and absence of external palpable 
gonads often suggest a virilized XX female. A search for the source of 
virilization includes studies of adrenal hormones to rule out varieties of 
CAH, and studies of androgens and estrogens may be necessary to rule 
out aromatase deficiency. Virilized XX females with CAH are generally 
(but not always) reared as females even when the genitalia are Prader 
stage 4 or 5 (see Fig. 26.3).
The absence of a uterus, with or without palpable external gonads, 
may indicate an undervirilized XY male. Measurements of blood lev­
els of gonadotropins, testosterone, AMH, and DHT are necessary to 
determine whether testicular production of androgen is present and is 
normal. Undervirilized males who are totally feminized may be reared 
as females. Certain significantly undervirilized infants, such as those 
with 5α-­reductase deficiency, may be reared as males because these 
children virilize normally at puberty. Sixty percent of individuals with 
5α-­reductase deficiency assigned as female in infancy will identify as 
males as adults. An infant with a comparable degree of underviriliza­
tion resulting from an androgen receptor defect, such as androgen 
insensitivity syndrome (AIS), may be successfully reared as a female, 
depending on androgen responsiveness.
In some mammals, the female exposed to androgens prenatally or 
in early postnatal life exhibits nontraditional sexual behavior in adult 
life. Most, but not all, females who have undergone fetal masculiniza­
tion from CAH have female sexual identity, although during childhood 
they may appear to prefer male typical play activities over female typ­
ical play activities.
In the past it was thought that surgical treatment of ambiguous 
genitalia to create a female appearance, particularly when a vagina was 
present, was more successful than construction of male genitalia. Con­
siderable controversy has developed regarding these decisions. Sexual 
functioning is to a large extent more dependent on neurohormonal and 
behavioral factors than the physical appearance and functional capac­
ity of the genitalia. Similarly, controversy exists regarding the timing of 
the performance of invasive and definitive procedures, such as surgery. 
Whenever possible, without endangering the physical or psychologic 
health of the child, an expert multidisciplinary team should consider 
deferring elective surgical procedures and gonadectomies until the 
child can participate in the informed consent for the procedure.
TABLE 26.5  Association of Genital 
Abnormalities
Abnormal 
Characteristics
Examples of Associated Disorders
Male-­Appearing Genitalia
Micropenis
Growth hormone or luteinizing hormone deficiency
Testosterone deficiency (in 2nd and 3rd trimesters)
Partial androgen insensitivity
Syndrome: idiopathic
Hypospadias (more severe)
Disorders of gonadal development 46,XX DSD
Ovotesticular DSD
46,XX or 46,XX DSD
Syndrome: idiopathic
Impalpable gonads
Anorchia
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome
46,XX DSD with 21-­ or 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency 
cryptorchidism
Small gonads
47,XXY, 46,XX DSD
Dysgenetic or rudimentary testes
Inguinal mass (uterus 
or tube)
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome, dysgenetic 
testes
Female-­Appearing Genitalia
Clitoromegaly
XX with 21-­ or 11β-­hydroxylase or 3β-­hydroxy 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Other 46,XX DSD
Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes, ovotes­
ticular DSD
46,XY DSD
Tumor infiltration of clitoris
Syndrome: idiopathic
Posterior labial fusion
As for clitoromegaly
Palpable gonad(s)
Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes, 
ovotesticular DSD
46,XY DSD
Inguinal hernia or mass
As for palpable gonad(s)
DSD, disorders of sex development.
From Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff’s & Mar­
tins’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:1674, Table 89.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
440
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
For all patients with DSD who have Y-­chromosome material and 
intraabdominal gonads, gonadectomy is generally recommended due 
to the risk of gonadal tumors developing with increasing age, many 
of which are malignant. The risk is highest in children with gonadal 
dysgenesis, partial androgen insensitivity, or Frasier or Denys-­Drash 
syndrome.
The pediatrician, pediatric endocrinologist, and psychologist, along 
with the appropriate additional specialists, should provide ongoing 
compassionate, supportive care to the patient and the patient’s fam­
ily throughout childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Active support 
groups are available for families and patients with many of the condi­
tions discussed.
SPECIFIC TYPES OF DISORDERS OF SEX 
DEVELOPMENT
46,XX Disorders of Sex Development
In 46,XX DSD, the sex chromosomes are XX, but the external genita­
lia are virilized. If the gonads are ovaries, there is no significant AMH 
production. Thus the uterus, fallopian tubes, cervix, and upper vagina 
will develop. The varieties and causes of this condition are relatively 
few. Most cases result from exposure of the female fetus to excessive 
exogenous or endogenous androgens during early intrauterine life (see 
Figs. 26.2 and 26.4 and Table 26.2). The changes consist principally of 
virilization of the external genitalia (clitoral hypertrophy and labio­
scrotal fusion).
Androgen Exposure/Fetoplacental Source
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. CAH is the most common cause of 
genital ambiguity and of 46,XX DSD. CAH is caused by an enzymatic 
defect in the biosynthesis of cortisol. This results in compensatory 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) excess, which stimulates 
hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex in an attempt to normalize cortisol 
secretion. There is overproduction of adrenal androgen precursors 
in the forms of CAH that cause genital ambiguity in 46,XX infants. 
Females with 21-­hydroxylase and 11-­hydroxylase deficiency are the 
most highly virilized (see Fig. 26.2). Minimal virilization also occurs 
with the type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2) defect 
(see Fig. 26.5 for enzymatic pathways). The androgen precursors 
are converted in extra-­adrenal tissues into testosterone and DHT, 
the potent androgens that bind to the androgen receptor (AR). 
The treatment for all forms of CAH is cortisol replacement therapy, 
which reduces ACTH secretion and reverses the androgen excess. 
Ambiguous genitalia
with XY karyotype
Palpable gonads or
testes detectable by
imaging
hCG stimulation and
AMH levels
Vanishing
testes
Follow algorithm for
palpable gonads or
testes detectable by
imaging
(See Fig. 26.7)
Suspicion for adrenal
biosynthesis defect?
Abnormal ACTH
stimulation test?
hCG
stimulation
T/DHT
ratio
5α-reductase
deficiency
Persistent
müllerian duct
syndrome
Response to
testosterone
therapy?
Note: AMH levels can be elevated in
androgen insensitivity and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Environmental
Unknown cause
Field defects
Androgen
insensitivity
STAR (↓T precursors,↓cortisol)
3β-HSD (↑17-OH preg, ↑DHEA)
17-α hydroxylase /17, 20 lyase
(↓cortisol, ↑prog, ↑preg,
↓17-OH-prog, ↑DOC,
↑corticosterone, ↓17-OH preg
17β-HSD (normal cortisol,
↑androstenedione, ↓testosterone)
P450 oxidoreductase deficiency
(normal or ↓cortisol, normal or 
↑preg, prog, 17-OH preg, and 
17-OH prog, and normal or 
↓DHEA/androstenedione)
- Gonadal dysgenesis – may
  require gonadal biopsy to
  confirm diagnosis, can be
  isolated or syndromic
- Ovotesticular DSD – will
  require gonadal biopsy to
  confirm presence of both
  ovarian and testicular tissue
- LH receptor defect
- Hypogonadotropic
  hypogonadism – GnRH
  stimulation test will show no
  rise in LH/FSH, evaluate for
  panhypopituitarism
Müllerian
structures?
Minimal/no
response to hCG
Testosterone
No
No response to hCG
Undetectable AMH
Some response,
detectable AMH
Yes
Yes
No
Normal
Ratio ↑
Normal ratio
Yes
Normal
None/minimal
No
Low
Fig. 26.6  Diagnostic algorithm for ambiguous genitalia with XY karyotype. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic 
hormone; AMH, antimüllerian hormone; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; 
DOC; deoxycorticosterone; DSD, disorder of sex development; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, 
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; 
LH, luteinizing hormone; preg, pregnenolone; prog, progesterone; STaR, steroidogenic acute regulatory pro­
tein; T, testosterone. (From McCann-­Crosby B, Sutton R. Disorders of sexual development. Clin Perinatol. 
2015;42[2]:395–412 [Fig. 3, p. 400].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
441
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
TABLE 26.6  Potential Investigations for Disorders of Sex Development
Approach
Test
Uses
Genetics
FISH* (X-­ and Y-­specific probes)
Rapid analysis of sex chromosome complement on cells
qfPCR*
Rapid analysis of sex chromosome signal in DNA
Karyotype*
Analysis of sex chromosomes and autosomes in cells with ability to look for mosaicism by screening multi­
ple cells, as well as detection of major deletions, duplications, and balanced translocations
Array CGH or SNP microarray*
Analysis of chromosome signal across the genome, with ability to detect smaller copy number variants but 
not balanced translocations, using DNA
Multiple ligation probe-­dependent 
amplification
Analysis of the loss or gain of specific exons or whole genes on a predefined panel of probes, such as for 
DSD genes, using DNA
Single-­gene analysis
Sanger sequencing and analysis of individual genes that are highly likely to be the cause of DSD based on 
incidence and clinical and biochemical features (e.g., CYP21A2)
Targeted panel sequencing
Analysis of large numbers of known DSD-­causing genes using high-­throughput sequencing of DNA
Whole exome sequencing
Analysis of all the coding exons in the DNA, which may show changes in known, putative, or novel DSD-­
associated genes, using high-­throughput sequencing
Endocrine
Routine serum biochemistry*; 
urinalysis*
May reveal a salt-­losing crisis or associated renal disorder (e.g., WT1)
17-­Hydroxyprogesterone,* 
11-­deoxycortisol, 
17-­hydroxypregnenolone
May help to diagnose CAH or reveal a specific block in an adrenal pathway relevant to DSD
Renin, ACTH
May show a salt-­losing state or primary adrenal insufficiency
Testosterone,* 
androstenedione, 
DHT
Indicates the degree of androgen production and ratios of androgens in the basal state or following hCG 
stimulation and may help to diagnose a block in androgen production consistent with a specific diagnosis 
(e.g., 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase or 5α-­reductase deficiencies); can also reveal androgen produc­
tion in ovotesticular DSD
Gonadotropins
May indicate an underlying block in steroidogenesis or androgen insensitivity (LH), or impaired Sertoli cell 
function (FSH)
AMH, inhibin B
Can be useful markers of testicular integrity: AMH is detectable throughout childhood and is reduced in 
testicular dysgenesis or absent if streak gonads or anorchia occur; AMH may be high in AIS or reduced 
androgen production due to steroidogenic defects; AMH may help to reveal the presence of testicular 
tissue in 46,XX ovotesticular DSD
Urinary steroids by GC–MS
Can be used to diagnose specific steroidogenic defects in the newborn period (e.g., 21-­hydroxylase defi­
ciency, 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, P450 oxidoreductase 
deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency); can reveal 5α-­reductase deficiency only after 3–6 mo of life
Dynamic tests: ACTH stimulation
Used to assess the adrenal gland stress response (quantitative) and can be coupled with measurement of 
steroid metabolites or poststimulation urine steroid analysis to study ratios of metabolites (diagnostic)
hCG stimulation
Used in short (3 days) or prolonged (3 wk) formats to assess androgen production (quantitative) and andro­
gen biosynthesis pathways (diagnostic); can also be used to assess for the presence of testicular tissue 
(e.g., anorchia, ovotestis), although AMH is now more often used initially
FSH stimulation test
Rarely used to investigate the presence of ovarian tissue by measuring inhibin A and estradiol response
Imaging
Abdominopelvic and renal 
ultrasound*
Can reveal the size, position, and structure of gonads (especially testes); the presence of müllerian struc­
tures; and associated changes (such as renal size or anomalies)
MRI
Sometimes used to assess internal structures, especially in adolescence
Cystourethroscopy, sinogram
Can reveal the structure of the bladder, vagina, and common channel
Surgical
Laparoscopy
Can reveal internal structures by direct visualization, such as gonads and müllerian structures
Gonadal biopsies
Can be used to determine the nature of gonads, especially if testicular dysgenesis or ovotestes are 
suspected
*Indicates first-­line investigations for which results are available within days. For images of G-­banded karyotypes and FISH analysis, see Fig. 26.6.
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AIS, androgen insensitivity syndrome; AMH, antimüllerian hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; 
CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; DSD, disorders of sex development; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization; 
FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GC–MS, gas chromatography–mass spectrometry; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; 
qfPCR, quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction; SNP, single-­nucleotide polymorphism.
From Achermann JC, Hughes IA. Pediatric disorders of sex development. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:949.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
442
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Mineralocorticoid replacement may be needed in 21-­hydroxylase and 
HSD3B2 deficiency. The surgical treatment of virilized genitalia in 
affected females is usually recommended during infancy. However, this 
remains a controversial topic.
CAH due to 21-­hydroxylase deficiency (variants in the CYP21A2 
gene) is one of the most common inherited diseases associated with 
DSD. It accounts for more than 95% of cases of adrenal steroidogenic 
defects and is estimated to occur in about 1 in 14,000 live births. In 
some genetically isolated populations such as Yupik Eskimos, the inci­
dence is much higher. CYP21A2 deficiency usually presents as one 
of two clinical syndromes in neonates or very young infants, both of 
which are associated with glucocorticoid deficiency. If not diagnosed 
Ambiguous genitalia
XX
karyotype
XY
karyotype
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
Salt losing?
21-OH deficiency
Simple virilizing
21-OH deficiency
Classic salt
wasting
3β-HSD
deficiency
11-Deoxycortisol
High
No
Yes
High
Normal
High
Müllerian structures present
Yes
No
Müllerian structures absent
Normal
Normal
Variable
11-Hydroxylase
deficiency
Pelvic/abdominal
ultrasound
History of maternal
hyperandrogenemia
Progestin ingestion
during pregnancy
Maternal CAH
Maternal ovarian or
adrenal tumor
Fetoplacental hyperandrogenism:
–Aromatase deficiency
Laparotomy/gonadal
biopsy
Presence of both ovarian
and testicular tissue?
XX testicular DSD
(SOX9 duplication,
overexpression of SOX10
RSPO1 pathogenic variant)
XX ovotesticular DSD
P450 oxidoreductase can present
with ambiguous genitalia, skeletal
malformations, variable deficiency of
21-hydroxylase and 17-hydroxylase.
(Normal or ↓ cortisol; normal or ↑
pregnenolone, progesterone, 17-OH
pregnenolone, and 17-OH
progesterone; and normal or ↓
DHEA/androstenedione)
DHEAS
See algorithm for evaluation of
ambiguous genitalia in patients with
an XY karyotype (Fig. 26.6)
Chromosome analysis
CMA
Electrolytes
Glucose
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
Fig. 26.7  Diagnostic algorithm for patients with ambiguous genitalia. CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; 
CMA, chromosomal microarray; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; 
DSD, disorders of sexual development; HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. (From McCann-­Crosby B, Sut­
ton R. Disorders of sexual development. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42[2]:395–412 [Fig. 2, p. 399].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
443
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
in the first few weeks, the salt-­wasting form is associated with dehy­
dration, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, acidosis, and hypotension with 
elevated plasma renin activity (PRA) due to mineralocorticoid defi­
ciency. Symptoms of this renal salt loss include lethargy, vomiting, and 
poor feeding. Adrenal androgen excess results in ambiguous genita­
lia in affected females. The simple virilizing form also causes prena­
tal virilization in females but without postnatal salt wasting. In some 
infants, the distinction between the two forms is not clear due to early 
detection by newborn screening. Female patients with salt-­losing CAH 
tend to have more virilization than do non–salt-­losing female patients. 
Masculinization may be so intense that the urethral meatus is at the tip 
of the enlarged clitoris, giving the appearance of a normal penis (see 
Fig. 26.2). The patient may therefore appear to be a male with bilat­
eral cryptorchidism. Affected males have normal genitalia. Late-­onset 
forms of CYP21A2 deficiency present with early pubarche in both 
sexes, or with hirsutism and menstrual irregularities in older females. 
These late-­onset forms are not causes of DSD.
CAH due to 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency (pathogenic variants in 
the CYP11B1 gene) is the second most common cause of CAH, and 
accounts for <5% of CAH cases. As with other causes of CAH, corti­
sol synthesis is reduced; however, there is excessive mineralocorticoid 
(deoxycorticosterone [DOC]) secretion accompanying adrenal andro­
gen overproduction. As a result, patients become hypertensive after 
infancy because of increased sodium retention.
CAH due to 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II deficiency 
(pathogenic variants in the HSD3B2 gene) is a rare form of CAH in 
which synthesis of all steroid hormones is impaired (see Fig. 26.5). 
Thus, there are deficiencies of glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and 
potent androgens. Most patients present as neonates or in early infancy. 
Clinical manifestations are because of both cortisol and aldosterone 
deficiency as seen in 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, including feeding 
difficulties, vomiting, volume depletion, and subsequent hyponatre­
mia, hyperkalemia, and high PRA. Affected females have mild viril­
ization (an indirect effect of oversecretion of dehydroepiandrosterone 
[DHEA]). This form of CAH may also cause 46,XY DSD.
P450 oxidoreductase (POR) deficiency is also known as apparent 
combined CYP21A2 and CYP17A1 deficiency. The underlying defect 
is a pathogenic variant in the POR gene that encodes cytochrome 
P450 oxidoreductase, a mitochondrial cofactor that transfers electrons 
to CYP21A2 and CYP17A1 during steroidogenesis. This results in a 
partial deficiency of the enzymes 21-­hydroxylase and 17-­hydroxylase. 
Affected females are born with ambiguous genitalia, suggesting intra­
uterine androgen excess; however, as opposed to classic CAH, after 
birth serum androgen concentrations are low, and virilization does not 
progress. Males may have undervirilization. Mothers may have viril­
ization during pregnancy with an affected fetus. Bone malformations 
affecting primarily the head and limbs (Antley-­Bixler syndrome) may 
be seen in both boys and girls with POR deficiency.
Aromatase deficiency. In 46,XX females, the rare condition of 
aromatase deficiency during fetal life leads to 46,XX DSD and results in 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism at puberty because of ovarian failure 
to synthesize estrogen from androgen. Examples of this condition 
include two 46,XX infants who had enlargement of the clitoris and 
posterior labial fusion at birth. In one instance, maternal serum and 
urinary levels of estrogen were very low and serum levels of androgens 
were high. Cord serum levels of estrogen were also extremely low, and 
TABLE 26.7  Atypical/Ambiguous Genitalia: Features Associated with the Most Common 
Diagnoses
21-­OH 
Deficiency
Testicular 
Dysgenesis with 
Y Chromosome
Ovo-­
Testicular DSD
Partial 
Androgen 
Insensitivity
Dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) Deficiency
Block in 
Testosterone 
(T) Synthesis
Clinical Feature
Palpable gonad(s)
−
+/−
+/−
+
+/–
+
Uterus present†
+
+
Usually
−
–
−
Increased skin 
pigmentation
+/−
−
−
−
–
−
Sick baby
+/−
−
−
−
–
+/−
Dysmorphic features −
+/−
−
−
–
−
Diagnostic Test Results
Serum 17-­OHP
Elevated
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Electrolytes
Possibly 
abnormal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Possibly abnormal
Karyotype
46,XX
45,X/46,XY or others
46,XX
46,XY
46,XY
46,XY
Testosterone 
response to hCG
NA
Positive
Normal or reduced Positive
Positive
Reduced or absent
Gonadal biopsy
NA
Dysgenic gonad
Ovotestis
Normal testis with +/− Ley­
dig cell hyperplasia
Normal testis
Normal testis
DNA screening for AR‡ or 
post-­receptor pathogenic 
variants positive in many 
cases
Elevated T:DHT ratio
Levels of testosterone 
precursors elevated
Testosterone level low
†As determined by ultrasound or rectal examination.
‡Androgen receptor.
17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; 21-­OH, 21-­hydroxylase; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; NA, not applicable.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
444
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
those of androgen were elevated. The second case also had virilization 
of unknown cause since birth, but the aromatase deficiency was not 
diagnosed until 14 years of age, when she had further virilization 
and failed to go into female puberty. At that time, she had elevated 
levels of gonadotropins and androgens but low estrogen levels, and 
ultrasonography revealed large ovarian cysts bilaterally. Two siblings 
with aromatase deficiency have also been described. The 28-­year-­old 
XX proband was 177.6 cm tall (+2.5 SD) after having received estrogen 
replacement therapy. Her 24-­year-­old brother was 204 cm tall (+3.7 
SD) and had a delayed bone age of only 14 years due to failure of 
epiphyseal fusion, which is estrogen mediated.
Cortisol resistance due to glucocorticoid receptor gene 
pathogenic variants. A 9-­year-­old female with 46,XX DSD and a 
history of ambiguous genitalia, thought to be due to 21-­hydroxylase 
deficiency CAH, had elevated cortisol levels both at baseline and 
after dexamethasone, along with hypertension and hypokalemia, 
suggestive of the diagnosis of generalized glucocorticoid resistance. A 
novel homozygous pathogenic variant in exon 5 of the glucocorticoid 
receptor was demonstrated. Subsequently, additional families with 
this condition have been identified. Virilization occurs due to excess 
ACTH stimulation of adrenal steroid production, as the glucocorticoid 
receptor defect is also present in the pituitary gland, which senses 
inadequate cortisol effect to provide negative feedback.
Androgen Exposure: Maternal Source
Virilizing maternal tumors. Rarely, a female fetus can be virilized 
by a maternal androgen-­producing tumor. In a minority of cases, 
the lesion is a benign adrenal adenoma, but the majority are ovarian 
tumors, particularly androblastomas, luteomas, and Krukenberg 
tumors. Maternal virilization may be manifested by enlargement of the 
clitoris, acne, deepening of the voice, decreased lactation, hirsutism, 
and elevated levels of androgens. In the infant, there is enlargement 
of the clitoris of varying degrees, often with labial fusion if the tumor 
produced excess androgen during the 1st trimester. Mothers of children 
with unexplained 46,XX DSD should undergo physical examination 
and measurements of their own levels of plasma testosterone, 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), and androstenedione.
Administration of androgenic drugs to women during pregnancy. 
Testosterone and 17-­methyltestosterone have been reported to cause 
46,XX DSD in some instances. The greatest number of cases has 
resulted from the use of certain progestational compounds for the 
treatment of threatened abortion. These progestins have been replaced 
by nonvirilizing ones.
Disorders of Ovarian Development
46,XX testicular DSD. In this condition, also called XX male, the 
gonads are testicular, and virilization is typically incomplete. Infertility 
and/or gonadal failure may develop after childhood. Many cases are 
due to translocation of SRY sequences onto one of the X chromosomes, 
often paired with duplication of SOX9. The appropriate sex of rearing 
may be difficult to determine.
46,XX gonadal dysgenesis. These females typically present at 
puberty with lack of breast development and hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism. Normal müllerian structures are present, but ovaries 
are absent or streaks. They do not have atypical genitalia.
Undetermined/unknown. Rarely, 46,XX DSD can be associated with 
other congenital anomalies, especially those of the genitourinary or 
gastroenteric tract, and are thus multifactorial in origin. These include 
cloacal exstrophy and MURCS association (müllerian hypoplasia, 
renal agenesis, and cervicothoracic somite abnormalities). Isolated 
deficiency of müllerian development is known as Mayer-­Rokitansky-­
Küster-­Hauser syndrome.
46,XY Disorders of Sex Development
In 46,XY DSD, the genotype is XY, and the external genitalia are either 
not completely virilized, ambiguous (atypical), or completely female. 
When gonads are found, they typically contain testicular elements; 
their development ranges from rudimentary to normal. Because the 
process of normal virilization in the fetus is so complex, it is not sur­
prising that there are many varieties and causes of 46,XY DSD. The 
etiology of 46,XY DSD is not identified in up to 50% of cases; however, 
with advances in rapid and robust genetic testing panels, the proportion 
of undiagnosed cases is declining.
Defects in Testicular Development
The first step in male differentiation is development of the bipoten­
tial gonad into a testis. In the XY fetus, if there is a deletion of the 
short arm of the Y chromosome or pathogenic variant of the SRY gene, 
male gonadal differentiation does not occur. The phenotype is female; 
müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts are well developed because of the 
absence of AMH, and gonads consist of undifferentiated streaks. By 
contrast, even extreme deletions of the long arm of the Y chromosome 
(Yq−) have been found in normally developed males, most of whom 
have short stature and azoospermia. This indicates that the long arm 
of the Y chromosome normally has genes that prevent these manifes­
tations. In many syndromes in which the testes fail to differentiate, Y 
chromosomes appear morphologically normal on karyotyping.
Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1) pathogenic variants: 
Denys-­Drash, Frasier, and WAGR syndromes. The constellation of 
nephropathy with atypical genitalia and bilateral Wilms tumor typifies 
Denys-­Drash syndrome. Müllerian ducts are often present, indicating 
deficiency of multiple fetal testicular functions. Affected patients with 
a 46,XX karyotype have normal external genitalia. There is onset of 
proteinuria in infancy that progresses to nephrotic syndrome and end-­
stage renal failure by 3 years of age, with focal or diffuse mesangial 
sclerosis being the most consistent histopathologic finding. Wilms 
tumor usually develops in children younger than 2 years of age and is 
frequently bilateral. Gonadoblastomas have also been reported.
A variety of variants of WT1 have been found in Denys-­Drash syn­
drome. WT1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene and a transcription 
factor, and is expressed in the genital ridge and fetal gonads. One report 
found a zinc finger domain variant in the WT1 alleles of a patient with 
no genitourinary abnormalities, suggesting that some cases of sporadic 
Wilms tumor may carry the WT1 variant. Different pathogenic vari­
ants of the WT1 gene, heterozygous variants at intron 9, have been 
described in Frasier syndrome, a condition of nonspecific focal and 
segmental glomerulosclerosis, 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, and frequent 
gonadoblastoma, but without Wilms tumor.
WAGR syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome causing 
Wilms tumor, Aniridia, Genitourinary malformations, and intellectual 
disability (Retardation). These children have a deletion of one copy of 
chromosome 11p13, which may be visible on karyotype analysis. The 
deleted region encompasses the aniridia gene (PAX6) and WT1. Only 
the 46,XY males have genital abnormalities, ranging from cryptorchi­
dism to severe undervirilization. Gonadoblastomas have developed in 
the dysgenic gonads. Wilms tumor usually occurs by 2 years of age. 
Some cases also had unexplained obesity, raising the question of an 
obesity-­associated gene in this region of chromosome 11 and naming 
the syndrome WAGRO.
Campomelic dysplasia. This form of short-­limbed skeletal 
dysplasia is characterized by anterior bowing of the femur and tibia; 
small, bladeless scapulae; small thoracic cavities and 11 pairs of ribs; 
along with malformations of other organs. It is usually lethal in early 
infancy. About 75% of reported 46,XY patients exhibit a completely 
female phenotype with the external and internal genitalia both being 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
445
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
female. Some 46,XY patients have atypical genitalia. The gonads appear 
to be ovaries but histologically may contain elements of both ovaries 
and testes.
The gene responsible for the condition is SOX9 (SRY-­related HMG-­
box gene). This gene is structurally related to SRY and also directly 
regulates type II collagen gene (COL2A1) development. There is phe­
notypic variability in that the same pathogenic variants may result 
in different gonadal phenotypes. Gonadoblastoma was reported in a 
patient with this condition. The inheritance is autosomal dominant.
Steroidogenic Factor 1 (SF1)
Adrenal insufficiency and 46,XY DSD have been described in patients 
with pathogenic variants of the SF1 gene. In some patients, SF1 vari­
ants occur without causing adrenal insufficiency. In a number of these 
families, if the mother shares the same SF1 variant, she experiences 
premature ovarian insufficiency.
Other Known Genetic Causes of 46,XY DSD
46,XY DSD has been described in patients with other single-­gene 
pathogenic variants, as well as deletions of parts of autosomal loci on 
chromosomes 2q, 9p, and 10q. A disorder with digenic inheritance 
involving coexistence of pathogenic variants in both DMRT3 and OAS3 
has been described in a Taiwanese kindred. Examples of a number of 
these genetic conditions are shown in Table 26.4. The use of exome 
sequencing of targeted genes has enhanced the detection of specific 
genetic defects in patients with 46,XY DSD.
XY pure gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome). The designation 
pure distinguishes this condition from forms of gonadal dysgenesis 
that are of chromosomal origin and associated with somatic anomalies 
such as 45,X Turner syndrome and 47,XXY Klinefelter syndrome. 
Affected patients have normal stature as adults and a completely 
female phenotype at birth, including vagina, uterus, and fallopian 
tubes. At pubertal age, breast development and menarche fail to 
occur, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism is present. None of the 
other phenotypic features associated with 45,X are present. Familial 
cases suggest an X-­linked or a sex-­limited dominant autosomal 
transmission. Most of the patients with a known genetic cause have 
had pathogenic variants of the SRY gene. The gonads consist of almost 
totally undifferentiated streaks despite the presence of a cytogenetically 
normal Y chromosome. The primitive gonad cannot accomplish any 
testicular function, including suppression of müllerian ducts. There 
may be hilar cells in the gonad capable of producing some androgens; 
accordingly, some virilization, such as clitoral enlargement, may occur 
at the age of puberty. The streak gonads may undergo neoplastic 
changes, such as gonadoblastomas and dysgerminomas, and should 
be removed as soon as the diagnosis is established, regardless of the age 
of the patient.
XY gonadal agenesis syndrome (embryonic testicular regression 
syndrome). In this rare syndrome, the external genitalia are slightly 
atypical but more nearly female. Hypoplasia of the labia; some degree 
of labioscrotal fusion; a small, clitoris-­like phallus; and a perineal 
urethral opening are present. No uterus, no gonadal tissue, and usually 
no vagina can be found. At the age of puberty, no sexual development 
occurs and gonadotropin levels are elevated. Most children have been 
reared as females. In several patients with XY gonadal agenesis in 
whom no gonads could be found on exploration, significant rises in 
testosterone followed stimulation with hCG, indicating Leydig cell 
function somewhere. Siblings with the disorder are known.
It is presumed that testicular tissue was active long enough during 
fetal life for AMH to inhibit development of müllerian ducts but not 
long enough for testosterone production to result in virilization. Tes­
ticular degeneration seems to occur between the 8th and the 12th fetal 
week. Regression of the testes before the 8th week of gestation results 
in Swyer syndrome; between the 14th and the 20th week of gestation, it 
results in the rudimentary testis syndrome; and after the 20th week, it 
results in anorchia with otherwise normal external genitalia.
In bilateral anorchia, sometimes referred to as vanishing testes 
syndrome, testes are absent, but the male phenotype is complete; it is 
presumed that fetal testicular function was active during the critical 
period of genital differentiation but that sometime later it was dam­
aged. Bilateral anorchia in identical twins and unilateral anorchia in 
identical twins and in siblings suggest a genetic predisposition. Coex­
istence of anorchia and the gonadal agenesis syndrome in a sibship is 
evidence for a relationship between the disorders.
Deficiency of Testicular Hormone Production
Genetic defects have been delineated in the enzymatic steps required 
for the synthesis of testosterone by the fetal testicular Leydig cells, 
and a defect in Leydig cell differentiation has also been described. 
These defects produce 46,XY males with incomplete masculinization. 
Because levels of testosterone are normally low before puberty except 
during the period of minipuberty at 1–2 months of age, an hCG stim­
ulation test may be needed in children to assess the ability of the testes 
to synthesize testosterone.
Leydig cell aplasia. Patients with aplasia or hypoplasia of the Leydig 
cells usually have a female phenotype, but there may be mild virilization. 
Testes, epididymis, and vas deferens are present; the uterus and fallopian 
tubes are absent due to normal production of müllerian-­inhibiting 
substance. There are no secondary sexual changes at puberty, but pubic 
hair may be normal. Plasma levels of testosterone are low and do increase 
with hCG stimulation; LH levels are elevated. The Leydig cells of the 
testes are absent or markedly deficient. The defect may involve a lack of 
receptors for LH. In children, hCG stimulation is necessary to differentiate 
the condition from the androgen insensitivity syndromes (AISs), as older 
children with AIS have low testosterone levels when prepubertal. There is 
male-­limited autosomal recessive inheritance. The human LH receptor is 
a member of the G protein–coupled superfamily of receptors that contains 
seven transmembrane domains. Several inactivating pathogenic variants 
of the LH receptor have been described in males with hypogonadism 
suspected of having Leydig cell hypoplasia or aplasia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. CAH due to lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia: This is the most severe form of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia, and it derives its name from the appearance of the 
enlarged adrenal glands resulting from accumulation of cholesterol 
and cholesterol esters. The rate-­limiting process in steroidogenesis 
is the transport of free cholesterol through the cytosol to the inner 
mitochondrial membrane, where the P450 side-­chain cleavage enzyme 
(CYP11A1) acts. Cholesterol transport into mitochondria is mediated 
by the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) (see Fig. 26.5). 
Most patients with lipoid CAH have genetic variants of StAR. A 
minority have variants in CYP11A1.
All serum steroid levels are low or undetectable, and ACTH and 
PRA levels are very elevated. The phenotype is female in both genetic 
females and males. Genetic males have no müllerian structures because 
the testes can produce normal AMH but no steroid hormones. These 
children present with acute adrenal crisis and salt wasting in infancy. 
Most patients are 46,XY. In 46,XX patients with StAR defects, ovar­
ian steroidogenesis can occur at puberty, as ovarian estrogen produc­
tion does not require StAR. These 46,XX patients do not have DSD. 
All patients have a lifelong requirement for glucocorticoid and min­
eralocorticoid replacement therapy. Some patients will need estrogen 
replacement therapy, such as all 46,XX individuals with CYP11A1 
pathogenic variants, as well as all 46,XY lipoid CAH patients. Intraab­
dominal testes should be removed due to the risk of future malignancy.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
446
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
CAH due to 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II (HSD3B2) 
deficiency. 46,XY infants with this form of CAH have various degrees 
of hypospadias, with or without bifid scrotum and cryptorchidism and, 
rarely, a complete female phenotype. Affected infants usually develop 
salt-­losing manifestations shortly after birth due to an inability to syn­
thesize biologically potent steroid hormones (see Fig. 26.5). Incom­
plete defects, occasionally seen in infants without salt loss and in boys 
with premature pubarche, as well as late-­onset nonclassic forms have 
been reported, but these forms do not cause DSD. As described ear­
lier, patients with HSD3B2 deficiency have pathogenic variants involv­
ing the gene encoding type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid enzyme, resulting in 
impairment of steroidogenesis in the adrenals and gonads. The impair­
ment may be unequal between adrenals and gonads. Normal pubertal 
changes in some boys could be explained by the normally present type 
I 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase present in many peripheral tissues. 
Infertility is frequent. There is no correlation between degree of salt 
wasting and degree of phenotypic abnormality. Replacement therapy 
with adrenal steroids is required from infancy on, and with sex steroids 
at puberty. In 46,XY patients with intraabdominal testes who are being 
raised as females, gonadectomy is recommended.
CAH due to deficiency of 17-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase. A single 
enzyme (CYP17A1) encoded by a single gene has both 17-­hydroxylase 
and 17,20-­lyase activities in adrenal and gonadal tissues (see Fig. 26.5). 
Genetic males with CYP17A1 deficiency usually have a complete 
female phenotype or, less often, various degrees of undervirilization, 
from labioscrotal fusion to perineal hypospadias and cryptorchidism. 
Pubertal development fails to occur in both genetic sexes.
In the classic disorder, there is decreased synthesis of cortisol by 
the adrenals and of sex steroids by the adrenals and gonads. Levels of 
the mineralocorticoid DOC and corticosterone are markedly increased 
and lead to the hypertension and hypokalemia characteristic of this 
form of 46,XY DSD. Although levels of cortisol are low, the elevated 
ACTH and corticosterone levels prevent symptomatic cortisol defi­
ciency. The renin-­aldosterone axis is suppressed because of the strong 
mineralocorticoid effect of elevated DOC. Virilization does not occur 
at puberty; levels of testosterone are low, and those of gonadotropins 
are increased. Because fetal production of AMH is normal, no mülle­
rian duct remnants are present. In 46,XY phenotypic females, removal 
of intraabdominal testes and replacement therapy with hydrocortisone 
and estrogenic sex steroids are indicated.
CYP17A1 deficiency has autosomal recessive inheritance. Affected 
46,XX females are usually not detected until young adult life, when 
they fail to experience normal pubertal changes and are found to have 
hypertension and hypokalemia. This condition should be suspected in 
patients presenting with primary amenorrhea and hypertension whose 
chromosomal complement is either 46,XX or 46,XY.
Deficiency of 17-­ketosteroid reductase. This enzyme, also called 
17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-­HSD), catalyzes the final step 
in testosterone biosynthesis. It is necessary to convert androstenedione 
to testosterone and also DHEA to androstenediol, and estrone to 
estradiol (see Fig. 26.5). Enzymatic defects in the fetal testis give rise 
to males with complete or near-­complete female phenotype in 46,XY 
patients. Müllerian ducts are absent, and a shallow vagina is present. 
The diagnosis is based on the ratio of androstenedione to testosterone; 
in prepubertal children a hCG stimulation test may be necessary to 
make the diagnosis.
The inheritance is autosomal recessive. At least four different types 
of 17β-­HSD are recognized, each encoded by different genes on dif­
ferent chromosomes. Type III (HSD17B3) is the enzyme defect that 
is especially common in a highly inbred Arab population in Gaza. 
The gene for the disorder is expressed only in the testes, where it con­
verts androstenedione to testosterone. Most patients are diagnosed at 
puberty because of virilization and the failure to menstruate. Testos­
terone levels at puberty may approach normal, presumably as a result 
of peripheral conversion of androstenedione to testosterone. Some 
patients spontaneously adopt a male gender role at puberty.
Type I 17β-­HSD converts estrone to estradiol and is found in the 
placenta, ovary, testis, liver, prostate, adipose tissue, and endometrium. 
Type II, whose gene is on chromosome 16q24, reverses the reactions of 
types I and III (convert testosterone to androstenedione and estrone to 
estradiol, respectively). Type IV is similar in action to type II. A late-­
onset form of 17β-­HSD deficiency presents as gynecomastia in young 
adult males.
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome. In this disorder, there is 
persistence of müllerian duct derivatives in otherwise completely 
virilized males. Cases have been reported in siblings and identical 
twins. Cryptorchidism is present in 80% of affected males; during 
surgery for this or inguinal hernia, the condition is uncovered when 
a fallopian tube and uterus are found. The degree of müllerian 
development is variable and may be asymmetric. Testicular function is 
normal in most, but testicular degeneration has been reported. Some 
affected males acquire testicular tumors after puberty. In a study of 38 
families, 16 families had defects in the AMH gene. They had low blood 
AMH levels. In 16 families with high AMH levels, the defect was in the 
AMH type II receptor gene, with 10 of 16 having identical deletions.
Treatment consists of removal of as many of the müllerian struc­
tures as possible without causing damage to the testis, epididymis, or 
vas deferens.
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome. Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome is 
an autosomal recessive disorder caused by variants in the sterol 
Δ7-­reductase gene. This prevents normal androgen synthesis. It 
is characterized by prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, 
microcephaly, ptosis, anteverted nares, broad alveolar ridges, 
syndactyly of the second to third toes, and severe intellectual disability. 
Its incidence is 1/20,000–1/60,000; 70% are male. 46,XY patients 
usually have genital ambiguity or completely female external genitalia. 
Müllerian duct derivatives are usually absent. Affected 46,XX patients 
have normal genitalia. Patients with Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome may 
also develop adrenal insufficiency due to inability to produce sufficient 
steroid hormones.
Defects in Androgen Action
In the following group of disorders, fetal synthesis of testosterone is 
normal and defective virilization results from inherited abnormalities 
in androgen action.
Dihydrotestosterone deficiency. Deficiency of steroid 5α-­
reductase type II (SRD5A2): SRD5A2 deficiency prevents the 
conversion of testosterone to DHT in androgen target tissues. Decreased 
production of DHT in utero results in marked ambiguity of external 
genitalia of affected 46,XY infants because of the absolute requirement 
for DHT in completion of prenatal virilization. Biosynthesis and 
peripheral actions of testosterone are normal.
The phenotype commonly associated with this condition in boys 
consists of a small phallus, bifid scrotum, urogenital sinus with per­
ineal hypospadias, and blind vaginal pouch (Fig. 26.8). Testes are in 
the inguinal canals or labioscrotal folds and are normal histologically. 
There are no müllerian structures. Wolffian (mesonephric) structures 
(i.e., the vas deferens, epididymis, and seminal vesicles) are present. 
Most affected patients have been assigned the female sex of rearing. At 
puberty, virilization occurs; the phallus enlarges, the testes descend and 
grow normally, and spermatogenesis occurs, as DHT is not required 
for normal virilization at puberty. There is no gynecomastia. Beard 
growth is scanty, acne is absent, the prostate is small, and recession 
of the temporal hairline fails to occur. The prenatal virilization of the 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
447
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
wolffian ducts is caused by the action of locally produced testosterone 
itself, although masculinization of the urogenital sinus and external 
genitals depends on the action of DHT during the critical period of 
fetal masculinization. Growth of facial hair and of the prostate postna­
tally also appears to be DHT dependent.
Several different gene defects of SRD5A2 have been identified 
in patients from throughout the world. Familial clusters have been 
reported from the Dominican Republic, Turkey, Papua New Guinea, 
Brazil, Mexico, and the Middle East. There is no reliable correlation 
between genotype and phenotype.
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait but 
expression is limited to males. Normal homozygous females with 
normal fertility indicate that in females DHT has no significant role 
in sex differentiation or in ovarian function later in life. The clinical 
diagnosis should be made as early as possible in infancy. It is import­
ant to distinguish this from partial androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(PAIS), as patients with PAIS are far less sensitive to androgen treat­
ment than are patients with SRD5A2 deficiency. The biochemical 
diagnosis of SRD5A2 deficiency is based on finding normal serum 
testosterone levels and normal or low DHT levels with markedly 
increased basal and especially hCG-­stimulated testosterone:DHT 
ratios (>17).
It is important to note that most but not all children with SRD5A2 
deficiency reared as females in childhood have changed to identify as 
male around the time of puberty. It appears that exposures to testos­
terone in utero, early postnatally, and at puberty have variable con­
tributions to the formation of their male gender identity. Much more 
needs to be learned about the influences of hormones such as andro­
gens as well as the influences of cultural, social, psychologic, genetic, 
and other biologic factors in gender identity and behavior. Infants with 
this condition should be reared as boys whenever practical. Treatment 
of male infants with DHT results in phallic enlargement. DHT is not 
commercially available in the United States but can be obtained from 
European suppliers.
Deficiency of 3α-­reductase (AKRC): Another cause of DHT defi­
ciency is a block in an alternative pathway of DHT synthesis (see Fig. 
26.5). Patients previously thought to have 46,XY DSD due to isolated 
deficiency of the 17,20-­lyase activity of CYP17A1 have subsequently 
been characterized as having variants in the AKR1C2 gene (3α-­
reductase type III) or both the AKR1C2 and AKR1C4 (3α-­reductase 
type IV) genes. These findings show that both the classical and alterna­
tive pathways to DHT production must be intact for normal prenatal 
virilization.
Androgen receptor defects: androgen insensitivity syndromes. 
The AISs are the most common forms of 46,XY DSD, occurring 
with an estimated frequency of 1/20,000 genetic males. This group of 
heterogeneous X-­linked recessive disorders can result from 1 of more 
than 150 different variants described in the androgen receptor gene, 
located on Xq11-­12: single point variants resulting in amino acid 
substitutions or premature stop codons, frameshift and premature 
terminations, gene deletions, and splice site variants. Post-­receptor 
defects have also been described.
The clinical spectrum seen in patients with AIS, all of whom have 
a 46,XY chromosomal complement, range from phenotypic females 
(complete AIS or CAIS) to males with various forms of atypical geni­
talia and undervirilization (partial AIS or PAIS, as well as clinical syn­
dromes such as Reifenstein syndrome) (Fig. 26.9) to phenotypically 
normal-­appearing males with infertility. In addition to normal 46,XY 
chromosomes, the presence of testes and normal or elevated testoster­
one and LH levels are common to all such patients.
In CAIS, an extreme form of failure of virilization, genetic males 
appear female at birth and are invariably reared accordingly as their 
condition often goes undetected until childhood or adolescence. The 
external genitalia are female. The vagina ends blindly in a pouch, and 
the uterus is absent due to the normal production and effect of AMH 
by the testes. In about one third of patients, unilateral or bilateral fal­
lopian tube remnants are found. The testes are usually intraabdominal 
but may descend into the inguinal canal; they consist largely of semi­
niferous tubules. At puberty, there is normal development of breasts, 
Fig. 26.8  5α-­Reductase deficiency. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol 
AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2003:165.)
A
B
Fig. 26.9  A, Partial androgen insensitivity with descended testes in 
bifid labioscrotal folds. B, Less severe partial androgen insensitivity with 
severe hypospadias and maldescent of testes. (From Wales JKH, Wit 
JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth. 2nd ed. Philadel­
phia: Elsevier; 2003:165.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
448
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
and the habitus is female, but menstruation does not occur and sex­
ual hair is absent. Adult heights of these women are commensurate 
with those of normal males despite profound congenital deficiency of 
androgenic effects.
The testes of affected adult patients produce normal to elevated 
male levels of testosterone that are converted to normal levels of DHT. 
Failure of normal male external genitalia differentiation during fetal 
life reflects a defective response to androgens including DHT starting 
very early in gestation.
Prepubertal females with this disorder are often detected when 
inguinal masses prove to be testes or when a testis is unexpectedly 
found during inguinal herniorrhaphy. About 1–2% of females with an 
inguinal hernia prove to have this disorder. In infants, elevated LH lev­
els should suggest the diagnosis. In older girls and adults, amenorrhea 
is the usual presenting symptom. In prepubertal children, the condi­
tion must be differentiated from other types of 46,XY undervirilized 
males in which there is complete feminization. These include 46,XY 
gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome), true agonadism, Leydig cell 
aplasia including LH receptor defects, and 17-­ketosteroid reductase 
deficiency; all these conditions, unlike complete AIS, are character­
ized by low levels of testosterone as neonates and during adult life and 
by failure to respond to hCG during the prepubertal years. Although 
patients with complete AIS have unambiguously female external gen­
itals at birth, those with partial AIS have a wide variety of phenotypic 
presentations ranging from perineoscrotal hypospadias, bifid scro­
tum, and cryptorchidism to extreme undervirilization appearing as 
clitoromegaly and labial fusion. Some forms of partial AIS have been 
known as specific syndromes. Patients with Reifenstein syndrome have 
incomplete virilization characterized by hypogonadism, severe hypo­
spadias, and gynecomastia (Fig. 26.10). Gilbert-­Dreyfus and Lubs are 
additional syndromes classified as partial AIS. In all cases, abnormal­
ities in the androgen receptor gene or post-­receptor defects have been 
identified.
The diagnosis of patients with partial AIS may be particularly 
difficult in infancy. The postnatal surge in testosterone and LH is 
diminished in those with CAIS but not in those with PAIS. In some, 
especially those sufficiently virilized in infancy, the diagnosis is not 
suspected until puberty when there is inadequate virilization with 
lack of facial hair or voice change and the appearance of unusually 
prominent gynecomastia. Azoospermia and infertility are common. 
Increasingly, androgen receptor defects are being recognized in adults 
who have a small phallus and testes and infertility. A single amino acid 
substitution in the androgen receptor was reported in a large Chinese 
family in whom some affected members were fertile while others had 
gynecomastia and/or hypospadias.
In children or young women with CAIS, the historical recommen­
dation has been that testes should be removed prior to adult life, or as 
soon as they are discovered. In one third of patients, malignant tumors, 
usually seminomas, develop by 50 years of age. Several teenage females 
have acquired seminomas. Replacement therapy with estrogens is indi­
cated at the age of puberty if the gonads were removed prior to this age. 
Some patients prefer to retain their gonads until after puberty has com­
pleted in order to mimic a more natural pubertal progression based on 
their own body’s timing of gonadotropins.
Normal breasts develop in affected girls who have not had their tes­
tes removed by the age of puberty. In these individuals, production of 
estradiol results from aromatase activity on testicular testosterone. The 
absence of androgenic activity also contributes to the feminization of 
these women.
The psychosexual and surgical management of patients with PAIS is 
extremely complex and depends in large part on the presenting pheno­
type. Osteopenia is recognized as a late feature of AIS.
Molecular analyses have suggested that phenotype may depend 
in part on somatic mosaicism of the androgen receptor gene. This 
was based on the case of a 46,XY patient who had a premature stop 
codon in exon 1 of the androgen receptor gene but who also had evi­
dence of virilization (pubic hair and clitoral enlargement) explained 
by the discovery of the wild-­type alleles on careful examination of the 
sequencing data. The presence of mosaicism shifts the phenotype to a 
higher degree of virilization than expected from the genotype of the 
mutant allele alone. Genetic counseling is thus challenging in families 
with androgen receptor gene variants. In addition to lack of genotype-­
phenotype correlations, there is a high rate (27%) of de novo patho­
genic variants in families.
The degree of sex hormone–binding globulin reduction after exoge­
nous androgen administration (stanozolol) has been shown to correlate 
with the severity of the receptor defect and may become a useful clinical 
tool. Successful therapy with supplemental androgens has been reported 
in patients with PAIS and various pathogenic variants of the androgen 
receptor in the DNA-­binding domain and the ligand-­binding domain.
Affected androgen receptors are also reported in patients with 
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy in whom clinical manifestations 
including testicular atrophy, infertility, gynecomastia, and elevated 
LH, FSH, and estradiol levels usually manifest between the 3rd and 5th 
decades of life. Androgen receptor pathogenic variants have also been 
described in patients with prostate cancer.
Undetermined Causes of 46,XY Disorders of Sex Development
Other 46,XY undervirilized males display great variability of the exter­
nal and internal genitalia and various degrees of phallic and müllerian 
Fig. 26.10  Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome at adolescence, 
male sex of rearing. Note gynecomastia from peripheral aromatase con­
version of testosterone to estradiol. Abundant pubic hair implies only 
partial resistance. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric Endo­
crinology and Growth. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2003:165.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
449
CHAPTER 26  Disorders of Sex Development
development. Testes may be histologically normal or rudimentary, or 
there may only be one testis. Other complex genetic syndromes, many 
resulting from single-­gene variants, are associated with varying degrees 
of ambiguity of the genitalia, particularly in the male. These entities 
must be identified on the basis of the associated extragenital malfor­
mations. Examples include bladder exstrophy and Eagle-­Barrett 
syndrome (formerly known as prune-­belly syndrome). Another such 
complex syndrome is termed ATRX or X-­linked α thalassemia with 
intellectual disability and genital abnormalities.
Ovotesticular Disorders of Sex Development
In ovotesticular DSD, both ovarian and testicular tissues are present, 
either in the same or in opposite gonads. Affected patients have ambig­
uous genitalia, varying from normal female with only slight enlarge­
ment of the clitoris to almost normal male external genitalia.
About 70% of all patients have a 46,XX karyotype. Ninety-­seven 
percent of affected patients of African descent are 46,XX. Fewer than 
10% of persons with ovotesticular DSD are 46,XY. About 20% have 
46,XX/46,XY mosaicism. Half of these are derived from more than 
one zygote and are chimeras (chi 46,XX/46,XY). The presence of both 
paternal and maternal alleles for some blood groups are demonstrated. 
An ovotesticular DSD chimera, 46,XX/46,XY, was reported as resulting 
from embryo amalgamation after in vitro fertilization. Each embryo 
was derived from an independent, separately fertilized ovum.
Examination of 46,XX ovotesticular DSD patients with Y-­specific 
probes has detected fewer than 10% with a portion of the Y chromo­
some including the SRY gene. Ovotesticular DSD is usually sporadic, 
but a number of siblings have been reported. The cause of most cases of 
ovotesticular DSD is unknown.
The most frequently encountered gonad in ovotesticular DSD is 
an ovotestis, which may be bilateral. If unilateral, the contralateral 
gonad is usually an ovary but may be a testis. The ovarian tissue is often 
normal, but the testicular tissue is usually dysgenic. The presence and 
function of testicular tissue can be determined by measuring basal and 
hCG-­stimulated testosterone levels as well as AMH levels. Patients who 
are highly virilized and have had adequate testicular function with no 
uterus are usually reared as males. If a uterus exists, virilization is often 
mild and testicular function minimal; assignment of female sex may be 
indicated. Selective removal of gonadal tissue inconsistent with sex of 
rearing may be possible; however, it should be noted that microscopic 
remnants of the undesired gonad may be present and become hormon­
ally active during puberty. In a few families, 46,XY ovotesticular DSD 
subjects and 46,XX males have been described in the same sibship.
Defects in the ovarian developmental protein R-­spondin 1, encoded 
by the RSPO1 gene, have also been described in 46,XX ovotesticular 
DSD.
Pregnancies with living offspring have been reported in 46,XX ovo­
testicular DSD individuals reared as females, but very few males with 
ovotesticular DSD have fathered children. About 5% of patients will 
develop gonadoblastomas, dysgerminomas, or seminomas.
Sex Chromosome Disorders of Sex Development
Some ambiguity of the genitalia is associated with a wide variety of 
chromosomal aberrations (see Table 26.2), which must always be 
considered in the differential diagnosis, the most common being the 
45,X/46,XY syndrome. It may be necessary to karyotype several tissues 
to establish mosaicism. The phenotype in 45,X/46,XY individuals may 
vary from completely female to completely male, and it is reported that 
there are probably a large number of patients who are never detected 
and are raised as normal males.
Other conditions included in the broad category of sex chromo­
some DSD include 45,X Turner syndrome and 47,XXY Klinefelter syn­
drome, due to their associated gonadal failure. However, patients with 
these conditions have normal external genitalia at birth.
   	 R E D  F L A G S
Danger signs include manifestations of adrenal insufficiency, in addi­
tion to a male phenotype without a palpable testis in the scrotum, 
hyperpigmentation (increased ACTH production), and hypertension. 
Although normal at birth, male patients with CAH may experience an 
adrenal crisis once circulating placental-­maternal steroid hormones 
are catabolized and excreted. This phenomenon often occurs between 
the 3rd and 10th days of life. The initial diagnosis in the male with salt-­
losing CAH may be sepsis, pyloric stenosis, meningitis, or other more 
common neonatal conditions.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
449.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allali S, Muller JB, Brauner R, et al. Mutation analysis of NR5A1 encoding ste­
roidogenic factor 1 in 77 patients with 46,XY disorders of sex development 
(DSD) including hypospadias. PLoS One. 2011;6:e24117.
Bashamboo A, Donohoue PA, Vilain E, et al. A recurrent p.Arg92Trp variant 
in steroidogenic factor-­1 (NR5A1) can act as a molecular switch in human 
sex development. Hum Mol Genet. 2016;25:3446–3453.
Baxter RM, Arboleda VA, Lee H, et al. Exome sequencing for the diag­
nosis of 46,XY disorders of sex development. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2015;100:E333–E344.
Bennecke E, Köhler B, Röhle R, et al. Disorders or differences of sex devel­
opment? Views of affected individuals on DSD terminology. J Sex Res. 
2020:1–10.
Berenbaum SA, Bryk KK, Duck SC, et al. Psychological adjustment in children 
and adults with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Pediatr. 2004;144:741–
746.
Biason-­Lauber A, Konrad D, Navratil F, et al. A WNT4 mutation associated 
with Müllerian-­duct regression and virilization in a 46,XX woman. N Engl 
J Med. 2005;351:792–798.
Bilezikjian LM, Justice NJ, Blackler AN, et al. Cell-­type specific modulation 
of pituitary cells by activin, inhibin and follistatin. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 
2012;359:43–52.
Bose HS, Pescovitz OH, Miller WL. Spontaneous feminization in a 46,XX 
female patient with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia due to a homo­
zygous frameshift mutation in the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997;82:1511–1515.
Bose HS, Sugawara T, Strauss JF, et al. The pathophysiology and genetics of 
congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. NEJM. 1996;335:1870–1878.
Bouvattier C, Carel JC, Lecointre C, et al. Postnatal changes of T, LH, and 
FSH in 46,XY infants with mutations in the AR gene. J Pediatr Endocrinol 
Metab. 2002;87:29–32.
Brinkmann AO. Molecular basis of androgen insensitivity. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 
2001;179:105–109.
Canto P, Vilchis F, Chavez B, et al. Mutations of the 5α-­reductase type II gene 
in eight Mexican patients from six different pedigrees with 5α-­reductase-­2 
deficiency. Clin Endocrinol. 1997;46:155–160.
Chu J, Zhang R, Zhao Z, et al. Male fertility is compatible with an Arg840 Cys 
substitution in the AR in a large Chinese family affected with divergent 
phenotypes of AR insensitivity syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2002;87:347–351.
Clarkson MJ, Harley VR. Sex with two SOX on: SRY and SOX9 in testis devel­
opment. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003;13:106.
Damiani D, Fellous M, McElreavey K, et al. True hermaphroditism: clinical 
aspects and molecular studies in 16 cases. Eur J Endocrinol. 1997;136:201–
204.
Eggers S, Sinclair A. Mammalian sex determination—insights from humans 
and mice. Chromosome Res. 2012;20:215–238.
El-­Khairi R, Achermann JC. Steroidogenic factor-­1 and human disease. Semin 
Reprod Med. 2012;30:374–381.
Fagerholm R, Santtila P, Miettinen PJ, et al. Sexual function and attitudes 
toward surgery after feminizing genitoplasty. J Urol. 2011;185:1900–1904.
Fluck CE, Meyer-­Boni M, Pandley AV, et al. Why boys will be boys: two path­
ways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed for male sexual 
differentiation. Am J Hum Genet. 2011;89:201–218.
Gul D. Third case of WAGR syndrome with severe obesity and consti­
tutional deletion of chromosome (11)(p12p14). Am J Med Genet. 
2002;107:70–71.
Habert R, Lejeune H, Saez J. Origin, differentiation and regulation of fetal and 
adult Leydig cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001;179:47–74.
Harrington J, Palmert MR. Distinguishing constitutional delay of growth and 
puberty from isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: critical apprais­
al of available diagnostic tests. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:3056–
3067.
Hochberg Z, Chayen R, Reiss N, et al. Clinical, biochemical and genetic find­
ings in a large pedigree of male and female patients with 5α-­reductase 2 
deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996;81:2821–2827.
Hughes IA, Davies JD, Bunch TI, et al. Androgen insensitivity syndrome. 
Lancet. 2012;380:1419–1428.
Imbeaud S, Belville C, Messika-­Zeitoun L, et al. A 27 base-­pair deletion of 
the anti-­mullerian type 1 receptor gene is the most common cause of 
the persistent mullerian duct syndrome. Hum Mol Genet. 1996;5:1269–
1277.
Kim MS, Donohoue PA. Adrenal disorders. In: Kappy MS, Allen DB, Geffner 
ME, eds. Pediatric Practice Endocrinology. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 
2020.
Kremer H, Karaaij R, Toledo SPA, et al. Male pseudohermaphroditism due to a 
homozygous missense mutation of the luteinizing hormone receptor gene. 
Nat Genet. 1995;9:160–164.
Krob G, Braun A, Kuhnle U. True hermaphroditism: Geographical distribu­
tion, clinical findings, chromosomes and gonadal histology. Eur J Pediatr. 
1994;153:2–10.
Lee PA, Nordenstrom A, Houk C, et al. Global disorders of sex development 
update since 2006: perceptions, approach and care. Horm Res Paediatr. 
2016;85:158–180.
Lee PA, Witchel SF. Genital surgery among females with congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia: changes over the past five decades. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 
2002;15:1473–1477.
Looijenga LHJ, Hersmus R, LeLeeuw BH, et al. Gonadal tumours and DSD. 
Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;24:291–310.
McPherson EW, Clemens MM, Gibbons RJ, et al. X-­linked α-­thalassemia/
mental retardation (ATR-­X) syndrome: a new kindred with severe 
genital anomalies and mild hematologic expression. Am J Med Genet. 
1995;55:302–306.
Mebarki F, Sanchez R, Rheaumes E, et al. Non-­salt-­losing male pseudoher­
maphroditism due to the novel homozygous N100S mutation in the 
type II 3 β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
1995;80:2127–2134.
Meier M, Moller G, Adamski J. Perspectives in understanding the role of 17β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases in health and disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2009;1155:15–24.
Mendonca BB, Inacio M, Costa EMF, et al. Male pseudohermaphrodit­
ism due to steroid 5α-­reductase 2 deficiency. Medicine (Baltimore). 
1996;75:64–76.
Mendonca BB, Leite MV, DeCastro M, et al. Female pseudohermaphroditism 
caused by a novel homozygous mutation of the GR gene. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2002;87:1805–1809.
Miller WL. P450 oxidoreductase deficiency: a new disorder of steroidogen­
esis with multiple clinical manifestations. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 
2004;15:311–315.
Moisan AM, Ricketts ML, Tardy V, et al. New insight into the molecular basis 
of 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency: identification of eight mu­
tations in the HSD3 gene in eleven patients from seven new families and 
comparison of the functional properties of twenty-­five mutant enzymes. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84:4410–4425.
Mullis PE, Yoshimura N, Kuhlmann B, et al. Aromatase deficiency in a female 
who is compound heterozygote for two new point mutations in the 
P450arom gene: impact of estrogens on hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 
multicystic ovaries, and bone densitometry in childhood. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 1997;82:1739–1745.
Ogilvy-­Stuart AL, Brain CE. Early assessment of ambiguous genitalia. Arch Dis 
Child. 2004;89:401–407.
Parisi MA, Ramsdell LA, Burns MW, et al. A gender assessment team: experi­
ence with 250 patients over a period of 25 years. Genet Med. 2007;9:348–
357.
Parma P, Radi O, Vidal V, et al. R-­spondin-­1 is essential in sex determi­
nation, skin differentiation and malignancy. Nat Genet. 2006;38:1304–
1309.
Piferrer F. Epigenetics of sex determination and gonadogenesis. Dev Dyn. 
2013;242:360–370.
Rajpert-­De Meyts E. Expression of anti-­müllerian hormone during normal 
and pathological gonadal development: association with differentiation 
of Sertoli and granulosa cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84:3836–
3844.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
449.e2
Royer-­Pekora B, Beier M, Henzler M, et al. Twenty-­four new cases of WT1 
germline mutations and review of the literature: genotype/phenotype cor­
relations for Wilms tumor development. Am J Med Genet. 2004;127A:249–
257.
Simard J, Sanchez R, Durocher F, et al. Structure-­function relationships and 
molecular genetics of the 3 beta-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase family. J 
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1995;55:489–505.
Sinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer MS, et al. A gene from the human sex-­
determining region encodes a protein with homology to a conserved DNA-­
binding motif. Nature. 1990;346:240–244.
Smith EP, Boyd J, Frank GR, et al. Estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in 
the estrogen-­receptor gene in a man. NEJM. 1994;331:1056–1061.
Stenvers KL, Findlay JK. Inhibins: from reproductive hormones to tumor 
suppressors. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2010;21:174–180.
Sun SS, Schubert CM, Chumlea WC, et al. National estimates of the timing of 
sexual maturation and racial differences among US children. Pediatrics. 
2002;110:911–919.
Tajima T, Fujieda K, Kouda N, et al. Heterozygous mutation in the cholesterol 
side chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc) gene in a patient with 46,XY sex rever­
sal and adrenal insufficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86:3820–3825.
Teixeira J, Maheswaran S, Donahue PK. Müllerian inhibiting substance: an 
instructive development hormone with diagnostic and possible therapeutic 
applications. Endocr Rev. 2001;22:657–674.
Tsai CL, Tsai CN, Lee YS, et al. Analysis of a Taiwanese family identifies 
a DMRT3-­OAS3 interaction that is involved in human sexual dif­
ferentiation through the regulation of ESR1 expression. Fertil Steril. 
2020;114:133–143.
Wallien MS, Cohen-­Kettenis PT. Psychosexual outcome of gender-­dysphoric 
children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47:1413–1423.
White PC, Speiser PW. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-­hydroxylase 
deficiency. Endocr Rev. 2000;21:245–291.
Winter JSD, Hughes IA, Reyes FL, et al. Pituitary-­gonadal relations in infancy: 
2. Patterns of serum gonadal steroid concentrations in man from birth to 2 
years of age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1976;42:679.
Wisniewski AB, Migeon CJ, Meyer-­Bahlburg HF, et al. Androgen insensitivity 
syndrome: long-­term medical, surgical and psychosexual outcome. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2000;85:2664–2669.
Yanase T, Simpson ER, Waterman MR. 17-­Alpha-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase 
deficiency: from clinical investigation to molecular definition. Endocr Rev. 
1991;12:91–108.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
