132
Chest pain in children is a common complaint; however, it is rarely 
due to underlying cardiac illness. This underscores the importance of 
avoiding a false sense of safety in low-­risk causes and maintaining vig­
ilance for potential life-­threatening etiologies. Chest pain can be the 
presenting complaint for a child describing chest tightness, burning, 
pressure, stabbing sensations, palpitations, and/or heartburn. It can be 
encountered in outpatient, emergency, and urgent care settings. This 
variability in complaint and care setting can make quickly discerning 
an etiology difficult, particularly in young children who are not able 
to verbalize precise symptoms. Chest pain as a symptom affects equal 
numbers of females and males and children under and over 12 years of 
age. Diagnostically, children younger than 12 years with chest pain are 
more likely to have cardiorespiratory etiologies for their pain, whereas 
adolescents are more likely to have musculoskeletal or psychogenic 
etiologies.
The general public has been adequately educated on the significant 
morbidity and mortality that chest pain can imply in adults in the form 
of cardiac ischemia. Therefore, when children complain of chest pain, 
it can provide significant anxiety for patients, families, and providers. 
Due to this anxiety, cardiology consultation is often sought. Only up 
to 6% of children without known congenital heart disease are found to 
have a cardiac etiology after evaluation. This number is likely higher 
than it actually is noted in some studies as only referrals to pediatric 
cardiology may be analyzed. The challenge for the medical care pro­
vider is to distinguish chest pain as a commonly benign pediatric com­
plaint from significant cardiac disease, limit unnecessary evaluation, 
and provide adequate reassurance for an anxious patient and family.
Due to the rarity of cardiac pathology as the cause for chest pain, it 
is difficult to develop evidence-­based guidelines for evaluation, and the 
implication of a misdiagnosis of a serious disorder is high. Chest pain 
caused by noncardiac causes may be the combination of multiple diag­
noses, leaving medical providers seeking to “rule out” life-­threatening 
cardiac causes of chest pain. The evaluation, if inconclusive, can leave 
patients and families without precise answers. Most final diagnoses of 
noncardiac chest pain represent clinical impressions rather than con­
firmed diagnoses. Between 20% and 45% of pediatric cases of chest 
pain are labeled idiopathic. The lack of a defined etiology or the pres­
ence of multiple causes for a particular patient can heighten worry, 
anxiety, and subsequent morbidity, which is reflected in missed days of 
school, reduced exercise, and psychologic distress. Furthermore, chest 
pain can become a chronic condition in the pediatric population; up 
to 45–69% of patients have been noted to have persistent symptoms, 
with 19% of patients reporting symptoms lasting for more than 3 years.
Overall, if medical providers systematically approach a child’s or 
an adolescent’s complaint of chest pain, they can provide thoughtful 
diagnostic evaluations that not only discover serious cardiac pathol­
ogy if present but also reassure families when a noncardiac etiology is 
suspected. Evaluation relies heavily on a thorough history and physical 
examination with subsequent electrocardiogram and further studies if 
cardiac etiologies remain on the list of possibilities.
CAUSES OF CHEST PAIN
The most common causes of chest pain in descending frequency 
include idiopathic, musculoskeletal, psychologic, gastrointestinal, 
pulmonary, and cardiac diagnoses. A differential diagnosis of pediat­
ric chest pain is listed in Table 8.1. The etiology of chest pain in the 
absence of cardiac pathology can be multifactorial and can include 
multiple items on this list.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH CHEST PAIN
A practical approach to chest pain first requires a detailed history and 
physical examination. An awareness of indicators (red flags) and pri­
oritization that may suggest serious disease and necessitate immediate 
treatment are essential (Table 8.2). A deliberate, orderly, and complete 
approach to the clinical evaluation often calms an anxious child and 
family.
History
The goal of a thorough history of a patient with chest pain is to deter­
mine if the etiology is life threatening, a manifestation of a chronic 
condition with possible serious complications, a specific acute cause, 
or multiple acute and/or chronic causes. Although chest pain affects 
children and adolescents of all ages equally, the age of a child can assist 
in diagnosis. Adolescents are more likely to have musculoskeletal or 
psychogenic causes of chest pain, while younger children have more 
respiratory disorders and vague complaints.
One possible approach includes a stepwise, directed history that 
includes:
 • Description of pain
 • Assessment for red-­flag symptoms (see Table 8.2), including tar­
geted family history
 • Medication review
 • Review of known illnesses
 • Review of systems including psychosocial evaluation
Eliciting the basics of the chest pain’s duration, quality, propensity 
to radiate, severity, and timing is essential. Details that have been noted 
to be particularly helpful include duration, aggravating and relieving 
factors, and associated symptoms. Severe pain that lasts only a few sec­
onds up to 1 or 2 minutes is often from the chest wall, but chest pain 
that persists longer is more likely to be organic in nature. Aggravating 
and alleviating factors can include position changes that accompany 
the pain from pericarditis or onset after eating spicy foods in gastro­
esophageal reflux. The character and location of the pain in pediatric 
patients are less helpful in the diagnostic evaluation due to often vague 
Chest Pain
Julie M. Kolinski
8
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
133
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
descriptions; nonetheless, medical providers should continue to obtain 
this information to understand the whole picture. Providers should 
remember that children often complain of chest pain when the pain 
is in a different place, such as the epigastrium or flank. Finally, it is 
important to determine whether the chest pain has had an impact on 
the child’s activity (Table 8.3).
Red-­flag symptoms (see Table 8.2) are high-­yield, must-­know char­
acteristics of a child’s or an adolescent’s chest pain. Oftentimes, after 
a patient’s complete description of the pain, a medical provider will 
already know the answers to multiple red-­flag symptoms, such as when 
the pain occurs, if it wakes the patient from sleep, and if it is associated 
with syncope. A targeted family history includes asking about inher­
ited conditions such as familial hypercholesterolemia, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and Marfan syndrome. It also can provide informa­
tion regarding relatives with adult-­onset cardiac illnesses associated 
with chest pain, such as heart failure or ischemia, which may be pro­
viding added anxiety for the family.
Medications that the child may already be taking are important to 
consider. Some medications have specific links to etiologies of chest 
pain, such as tetracyclines with erosive esophagitis or oral contra­
ceptives with pulmonary embolism. Other recreational drugs such 
TABLE 8.1  Differential Diagnosis of Pediatric Chest Pain
Musculoskeletal
Trauma (accidental, abuse)
Exercise, overuse injury (strain)
Costochondritis
Tietze syndrome
Precordial catch syndrome
Slipping rib syndrome
Fibromyalgia
Spinal cord or nerve root compression
Muscle strain (overuse injuries)
Pulmonary
Asthma
Pneumonia
Pleurisy
Cough
Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum
Pulmonary embolism
Tumor
Foreign body
Psychiatric
Hyperventilation
Anxiety
Panic disorder
Gastrointestinal
Achalasia
Gastroesophageal reflux
Esophageal foreign body including pill esophagitis
Esophageal spasm
Esophageal rupture
Cholecystitis
Subdiaphragmatic abscess
Perihepatitis (Fitz-­Hugh–Curtis syndrome)
Peptic ulcer disease
Pancreatitis
Cardiac
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Aortic stenosis
Pulmonary stenosis
Mitral valve prolapse
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Pericarditis
Myocarditis
Endocarditis
Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia
Exercise-­induced ventricular tachycardia
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome
Aortic dissection
Pulmonary hypertension
Eisenmenger syndrome
Ischemia (anomalous coronary artery, systemic lupus erythematosus, post–
heart transplant, Kawasaki disease, sympathomimetic drugs, hypercholes­
terolemia)
Other
Herpes zoster (cutaneous)
Sickle cell anemia vasoocclusive crisis (rib infarction)
Primary or metastatic cancer
Splenic rupture
Drug related: cigarette smoking, vaping, cocaine use, sympathomimetic use, 
tetracycline ingestion
Anorexia nervosa
Breast-­related disease
TABLE 8.2  Red Flags That Increase the 
Likelihood of a Cardiac Cause for Chest Pain
Sudden onset of severe pain
Pain radiating to right or left arm or shoulder
Pain occurs with exercise
Described as pressure
Exertional syncope
Pain that awakens the patient from sleep
Palpitations and/or dysrhythmias
Family history of sudden death, young-­onset ischemic heart disease, inherited 
arrhythmias such as long QT syndrome or Brugada syndrome, deep vein 
thrombosis or pulmonary embolism
Cyanosis
Diaphoresis
Personal past or current history of congenital heart disease
Personal history of connective tissue disease, hypercoagulable or hypercho­
lesterolemic state, systemic lupus erythematosus, Kawasaki disease, sickle 
cell anemia, Marfan syndrome, cystic fibrosis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Personal history of cocaine, huffing, vaping, and/or amphetamine use
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
134
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
as cocaine, other sympathomimetic agents (such as amphetamines, 
synthetic marijuana), and vaping have been associated with chest 
pain. A child’s known underlying illnesses and surrounding medical 
complaints discovered in a review of systems can complete the clinical 
picture for medical providers. The presence of joint pain or rash could 
suggest collagen vascular disease, or the presence of increased drooling 
could represent an esophageal foreign body.
A full psychosocial review should be performed on each patient 
to ensure that details of personal stressors and behaviors emerge. It is 
useful to learn about these aspects of the child’s chest pain from the 
child and the parent/family separately. Make sure to interview the 
patient alone if the child is older or an adolescent. It is difficult for chil­
dren to discuss areas of difficulty, such as family relationships, school 
difficulties, or concerns about physical development, with family pres­
ent. It is useful to ask, “What are you concerned that this pain is caused 
by?” of both the patient and the family. This question frequently gives 
information about overriding fears and concerns that can help medical 
providers know how to appropriately reassure the family in the likely 
event that the chest pain has a benign, noncardiac etiology.
Musculoskeletal
Musculoskeletal chest wall pain is perhaps the most identifiable cause 
of chest pain due to its association with localized tenderness elicited by 
specific manipulation of the thorax (Fig. 8.1). Pain can involve the ribs, 
costochondral junctions (such as in costochondritis), costal cartilages, 
intercostal muscles, sternum, clavicle, or spine. The pain is often worse 
with movement, coughing, and inspiration. In considering musculo­
skeletal etiologies, thoroughly consider any trauma to the chest wall. 
Both contusion and rib fracture can have exquisite tenderness on pal­
pation and pain on inspiration. Table 8.4 highlights common causes of 
musculoskeletal chest pain.
In general, chest wall pain can result from the strain of any mus­
cle group present in the chest; however, multiple syndromes have been 
described in relation to specific patterns of muscular pain (Fig. 8.2). 
Some of these syndromes include pectoral syndrome (pain in a band 
across the anterior parasternal chest wall on the right or the left), cora­
coid syndrome (pain at the site of the pectoralis minor muscle with 
tenderness at its insertion onto the coracoid process), and xiphoid pro­
cess syndrome (pain over the xiphoid process).
Psychogenic
Psychogenic causes of chest pain are more common in adolescents 
than in children under the age of 12. Patients with psychogenic eti­
ologies of chest pain may also have additional physiologic causes of 
pain; psychologic risk factors can amplify the clinical presentation 
TABLE 8.3  Historical Features of Chest Pain 
That Are Essential to Its Assessment
Duration of pain (how long present but also duration of each episode)
Acuteness of onset
Severity of pain (use scale of 1–10)
Associated symptoms
Precipitating and ameliorating factors
Quality of pain (pleuritic, sharp, dull)
Location of pain
Limitation of activities by pain
Radiation of pain
Time of day that pain occurs
Recent activity, injury, and stresses
Full psychosocial review, including behaviors
Medical history
Family medical history
Rectus abdominis
muscle
Xiphoidalgia
“Trigger”
points
Breast mass
or tenderness
Firm and/or tender
thoracoepigastric
vein
(Mondor’s syndrome)
Insertion of
pectoralis minor
Insertion of
pectoralis major
“Slipping rib”
Rib fracture
Tender costochondra
junctions
(costochondritis)
Intercostal
neuritis
Sternoclavicular
joint
Swollen costal cartilage
(Tietze syndrome)
Fig. 8.1  Palpable and/or visible abnormalities of the chest wall that may be found in different chest wall 
syndromes. In addition, various proximal abdominal causes of chest pain, such as disease of the gallbladder, 
liver, stomach, pancreas, or subdiaphragmatic space, must be considered. (From Reilly BM. Chest pain. In: 
Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
135
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
of chest pain. Psychologic forms of chest pain are typically recurrent 
with stressors. Children and adolescents may have a history of anxiety 
and/or stressful life events that are not easily apparent but can have 
a large impact on their perception of pain. Many psychologic factors, 
such as anxiety, depression, and psychosomatic features, often coexist. 
Patients with psychogenic causes of chest pain are the most likely to 
have other somatic symptoms, including breathlessness, fatigue, ner­
vousness, near-­syncope, and palpitations. These patients also often 
demonstrate more bodily worries, more limitation of general activity, 
and more school absences. The most common etiologies of psycho­
genic chest pain are hyperventilation and underlying psychiatric ill­
ness, such as anxiety, depression, or somatoform disorders (conversion 
or somatization).
Hyperventilation, most often in the setting of a panic attack, is 
characterized by rapid breathing accompanied with dyspnea and anx­
iety to the degree that systemic symptoms result, such as paresthesias, 
dizziness/lightheadedness, palpitations, and confusion. This can occur 
as an acute one-­time episode or can represent an underlying panic dis­
order if recurrent. These symptoms are manifestations of physiologic 
phenomena caused by hypocapnic respiratory alkalosis, chest muscle 
strain from use of accessory muscles, tachycardia and arrhythmias, 
spasm of the diaphragm, and gastric distention caused by aerophagia 
(Fig. 8.3). Typically, the patient’s chest pain complaint due to hyperven­
tilation will include sharp, nonradiating pain over the left precordium. 
It is the easiest to diagnose when these symptoms arise without 
exertion. However, it is often difficult to differentiate hyperventilation 
from asthma as both diagnoses can include dyspnea, chest tightness, 
cough during exercise, and symptoms characteristic of bronchospasm. 
Hyperventilation can also occur concurrently with costochondritis or 
asthma, further complicating diagnosis.
Anxiety, depression, and somatoform disorders can cause episodic 
chest pain with or without hyperventilation. Within anxiety disor­
ders, chest pain and other symptoms are typically temporally related 
to stressful situations. Anxiety-­related psychogenic chest pain is four 
times as likely to occur in a patient with a family history of chest pain 
(often an adult with a history of cardiac ischemia), and the pain is often 
fleeting and vague in its description.
Gastrointestinal
Esophagitis (reflux, infectious, eosinophilic) and esophageal motility 
disorders (diffuse esophageal spasm, achalasia) can cause chest pain in 
both adults and children. Esophagitis (commonly generalized within 
the term gastroesophageal reflux) is characterized by symptoms typical 
of “heartburn,” a substernal burning sensation that is exacerbated by 
eating or position changes, specifically lying supine. However, heart­
burn is less common in children than in adults. More commonly, chil­
dren will have the presence of epigastric tenderness on exam. In fact, 
epigastric tenderness is one of the best indicators of a gastrointestinal 
etiology of pain in a child. To manage this diagnosis, first assess if there 
are triggering factors, such as overeating or spicy foods. Avoidance of 
TABLE 8.4  Manifestations and Causes of Musculoskeletal Chest Pain
Signs and Symptoms
Diagnosis
Aching, localized pain after new or intense exercise or repetitive coughing
Can appear up to 2 days later
Can have localized swelling or erythema
Pain reproduced by range-­of-­motion testing or palpation
Muscular strain
Sharp, anterior pain over costochondral junctions, often along the sternal border
Exacerbated by deep breathing
First through fifth ribs are most common and often more than one costochondral junction affected
Can be related to growth spurts
Costochondritis (also called costosternal 
syndrome, parasternal chondrodynia, 
or anterior chest wall syndrome)
Can be considered a variant of costochondritis
Sharp, localized pain at only one costochondral junction
Area is swollen, ± warm, erythematous bulbous or fusiform 1–4 cm mass
Second or third costochondral junction is most common
Age predominance in adolescence and early 20s
Tietze syndrome
Pain and increased mobility due to subluxation of 8th, 9th, or 10th ribs (which are not attached to the sternum), 
resulting in impingement of superior intercostal nerve
Intermittent sharp pain in chest or upper abdomen
Brought on by exertion, especially sudden upward and anterior movement (“hooking maneuver”; see Fig. 8.2)
Can have popping sensation at onset of pain
Caused by trauma or dislocation of these ribs
Slipping rib syndrome (lower rib pain 
syndrome)
Brief (30 sec–3 min), nonradiating, well-­localized, sharp pain in the left parasternal area or cardiac apex (“Texidor twinge”)
Occurs at rest or with mild activity
Exacerbated with inspiration and alleviated by shallow breathing or straightened position
Related to poor posture
Precordial catch syndrome
Pain over both anterior chest and back
Spasm in muscles innervated by nerve root causes pain
No midline spine bony tenderness
History of vertigo, headache, pain after prolonged recumbence or straining
Spinal cord or nerve root compression, 
typically lower cervical or upper 
thoracic spine
Chronic aching and stiffness
Multiple points of tenderness on palpation of muscle with minimal pressure
Associated with fatigue and sleep disturbance
Fibromyalgia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
136
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
A
D
E
F
G
C
B
Fig. 8.2  Chest wall maneuvers. A, B, The “scissors” maneuver. The patient’s arm is adducted across the 
anterior chest, and the examiner pulls the patient’s hand beyond the contralateral shoulder (A). When both 
arms are tested together, traction is applied to both (B); the patient turns the head to either side, and the arms 
form a “scissors.” Pain originating in the scapula, thoracic spine, pectoral muscles, or ribs and intercostal 
structures is often precipitated by the scissors maneuver. C, The “hedge clipper” maneuver. The pectoralis 
major muscles are stressed by the patient’s pressing the palms forcefully together with the elbows flexed 
anterior to the chest. The pectoral muscles are thus more clearly defined, and pain is often appreciated within 
the muscles or at their insertion in the upper parasternal area (see Fig. 8.1). D, The “racing dive” maneuver. 
The pectoralis minor muscles are stressed by forcefully resisting the patient’s attempt to throw forward the 
shoulder and upper arm from an initial position behind (dorsal to) the chest wall. The attempted arm motion is 
that of flinging the arm and hand forward, as a swim racer would when beginning a racing dive. The examiner 
resists this forward arm and shoulder motion. E, The “crowing rooster” maneuver. The patient hyperextends 
the neck while the examiner lifts both of the patient’s arms backward and superiorly. Pain originating in the 
cervical spine or anterior chest wall or both is often thus reproduced. F, The “hooking” maneuver. With 
the patient supine, the examiner stands at the patient’s side, facing the patient’s feet. The examiner then 
“hooks” their fingers around the lower costal margin of the patient’s rib cage and pulls anteriorly (ventrally) 
and superiorly (cephalad). This maneuver may elicit pain when costochondritis or traumatic rib injuries involve 
the lower rib cage, when the upper rectus abdominis muscle is torn, or when a “slipping rib” is the problem. 
G, The “high 10” maneuver. The patient raises both hands overhead, elbows extended, and then presses 
forward with the hands against resistance offered by the examiner. Pain originating in the anterior rib cage, 
thoracic spine, or pectoral muscles may be elicited here. (A, B, and G from Reilly BM. Chest pain. In: Practical 
Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
137
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
these triggers can be adequate treatment to diagnose and treat. If pain 
persists, a trial of H2-­blocking agents or proton pump inhibitors helps 
diagnostically and therapeutically in the evaluation of esophagitis.
Motility disorders of the esophagus cause chest pain that lasts from 
only a few seconds to several hours. The pain is nonexertional but can be 
exacerbated by bending forward. Achalasia classically causes dysphagia, 
nocturnal regurgitation, and chest pain. It can occur at any age and the 
chest pain is variably associated with the diagnosis (19–95% of the time). 
Eosinophilic esophagitis can cause chest pain secondary to esophageal 
inflammation, dysmotility, and reflux. Other notable gastrointestinal dis­
orders that also cause chest pain include esophageal foreign body such as 
pill esophagitis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, 
hepatitis, and infections of the subdiaphragmatic space. Esophageal rup­
ture is a rare cause of chest pain; it has been described in patients with 
bulimia nervosa or after surgical repair of a tracheoesophageal fistula.
Pulmonary
Pulmonary causes of chest pain are often diagnosed through history 
and general appearance of the patient (Table 8.5). Some of these causes 
can require urgent evaluation and treatment. In a patient with sudden, 
significant chest pain, medical providers should consider acute pneu­
mothorax or acute pulmonary embolism (along with acute pericardi­
tis, myocarditis, or aortic dissection). Underlying history is essential 
to understand as in a recent trauma or underlying asthma or cystic 
fibrosis for pneumothorax (which can be spontaneous or secondary 
to the noted conditions; see Chapter 4). Known obesity, malignancy, 
prolonged immobilization, or adolescents taking birth control increase 
risk for pulmonary embolism. Asthma or reactive airway disease is 
more likely in a patient with audible wheezing and cough. Notably, 
patients with chest pain from undiagnosed causes after complete eval­
uation have a greater likelihood than normal control subjects to have 
abnormal results on methacholine challenges and exercise testing, indi­
cating that reactive airway disease (a typical sign of potential underly­
ing asthma) is a more common etiology of chest pain than providers 
realize. Finally, pneumonia and respiratory infections are the most 
common causes of chest pain when it presents with fever. Children typ­
ically cannot expectorate mucus until at least 8 years of age; therefore, 
clinical signs of pneumonia can include vomiting and abdominal pain 
in addition to the more typical symptoms of fever, cough, chest pain, 
and tachypnea. Vaping-associated lung injury may present with fever, 
dyspnea, and chest pain (see Chapter 4).
Anxiety
Hyperventilation
Use of accessory muscles
of respiration
PCO2 and
alkalosis
Ionized Ca++
L  shift of O2 Hgb and
CNS vasoconstriction
Peripheral nerve hypoxia
Lightheadedness,
confusion, syncope,
hallucinations, seizures
Sighing
Yawning
Tetany
Tachycardia and
arrhythmias
Chest pain
Palpitations
Paresthesias
Fig. 8.3  Pathophysiologic mechanisms of hyperventilation. CNS, central nervous system; Hgb, hemoglo­
bin; O2 Hgb, oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve; Pco2, carbon dioxide pressure. (From Herman SP, Stick­
ler GB, Lucas AR. Hyperventilation syndrome in children and adolescents: long-­term follow-­up. Pediatrics. 
1981;67:183–187.)
TABLE 8.5  Manifestations and Respiratory 
Causes of Chest Pain
Signs and Symptoms
Diagnosis
Unilateral pain associated with severe dyspnea
Can have radiation to ipsilateral shoulder
Degree of pain does not correlate to extent of 
pneumothorax
Risk factors include tall and thin body habitus, asthma, 
cystic fibrosis, inhalation of cocaine/marijuana
Pneumothorax, 
primary or 
secondary
Sudden pain, dyspnea, tachycardia ± hypoxia
Pain is pressure-­like or pleuritic
Can have hemoptysis (rare)
Risk factors include central venous catheter, trauma, 
malignancy, immobilization, oral contraceptive use, 
recent abortion or surgery, hypercoagulable state
ECG with sinus tachycardia, right heart strain
Pulmonary 
embolism
Wheeze, ± shortness of breath, ± cough
Often perceive “tightness” as pain
If exercise induced, can cause chest pain in absence 
of wheeze
Asthma, reactive 
airway disease
Fever, cough ± sputum production
Midsternal or parasternal pain that can be diffuse
Pain exacerbated by deep breathing, coughing, straining
Pneumonia with 
pleurisy
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
138
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
Cardiac
Although cardiac disease is a rare cause of chest pain, there is poten­
tial for dangerous morbidity and mortality if left undiagnosed. One of 
the foremost concerns of families with children who have chest pain 
is whether or not their child is having a heart attack, although this is 
extremely uncommon in the pediatric population. Etiologies of chest 
pain due to cardiac disease include arrhythmias, ischemia, structural 
abnormalities, and pericardial or myocardial disorders (Tables 8.6, 8.7, 
and 8.8). Arrhythmias are the most common, whereas patients with 
myocarditis or myocardial infarction are often the most acutely ill. 
Heart disease is more commonly found in adolescents than in younger 
children who complain of chest pain, and adolescents represent the 
largest group of patients between 1 and 21 years of age who die sud­
denly of cardiac causes. Perhaps the most important evaluation that 
should be done in each patient with concern for chest pain secondary 
to a cardiac etiology is to assess for pediatric sudden cardiac arrest. 
Four questions that should be asked during this assessment include:
	1.	 Have you ever fainted, passed out, or had a seizure suddenly and 
without warning, especially during exercise or in response to 
auditory triggers such as doorbells, alarm clocks, and ringing tele­
phones?
	2.	 Have you ever had exercise-­induced chest pain or shortness of 
breath?
	3.	 Are you related to anyone with sudden, unexplained, and unex­
pected death before age 50 years?
	4.	 Are you related to anyone who has been diagnosed as having a 
sudden death–predisposing heart condition such as hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome, or catecholaminergic poly­
morphic ventricular tachycardia?
Red-­flag symptoms as previously noted are essential to capture 
in the history (see Table 8.2). Lower-­risk findings for cardiac disease 
include pleuritic, positional, or sharp pain as well as tenderness pro­
duced by chest palpation. Children rarely come in complaining of 
“shortness of breath on exertion” or “palpitations.” Instead, children 
should be asked if they keep up with their same-­age peers when par­
ticipating in activities, if they finish last in races, or whether they must 
pause in the middle of a flight of stairs. If concerned for palpitations, 
a provider can ask if a child’s heart ever skips a beat or seems to do 
flip-­flops or somersaults in their chest. Even with these questions, a 
child with palpitations may only be able to describe their symptoms 
as pain. If red flags are not present but a potentially serious noncar­
diac etiology of chest pain is suspected, a continued investigation of the 
pain itself is necessary to make a diagnosis. Supraventricular and ven­
tricular tachyarrhythmias can put adolescents at risk for sudden death. 
TABLE 8.6  Causes of Pediatric Anginal 
Chest Pain
Critical aortic stenosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Coronary artery atherosclerosis (hypercholesterolemia)
Anomalous origin of left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery
Acute inflammatory coronary arteritis or aneurysm in context of Kawasaki 
syndrome, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children, or vasculitis 
disorder
Chronic coronary artery stenotic sequalae of acute inflammatory coronary 
artery diseases
Origin of left coronary artery from right sinus of Valsalva
Ectopic origin from aortic sinus
Coronary artery fistula
Associated with other congenital heart diseases
Cocaine use
Coronary vasospasm
TABLE 8.7  Structural Cardiac Abnormalities That Can Cause Chest Pain
Signs and Symptoms
ECG
Diagnosis
Chest pain with associated dyspnea is brought on by exercise
Patient history of syncope, presyncope
Seen in adolescence due to rapid growth of left ventricle in puberty
Crescendo-­decrescendo systolic ejection murmur from outflow tract gradient
Prominent septal Q wave, left 
ventricular hypertrophy, left 
axis deviation
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Chest pain is brought on intermittently
Patient history of tiring easily, exertional dyspnea ± syncope, cool extremities
Signs of right heart failure is a late finding
High-­pitched, early diastolic decrescendo murmur (pulmonary regurgitation)
Right ventricular hypertrophy
Pulmonary hypertension (primary 
or secondary to pulmonary ste­
nosis or Eisenmenger complex)
Chest pain is brought on with exercise
Patient history of syncope at late stages
Harsh crescendo-­decrescendo systolic murmur radiating to carotid arteries ± thrill
Left ventricular strain
Aortic stenosis
Chest pain that is vague and nonexertional, but most children are asymptomatic
Patient history of postural hypotension, palpitations, or syncope
Late to midsystolic click preceding a systolic murmur
Normal, T-­wave abnormalities or 
prominent U waves
Mitral valve prolapse
Chest pain that is acute, present on anterior or posterior chest that can migrate to arms, 
abdomen, and legs
Patient history may include Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, previously healthy 
weight-­lifting athletes
High-­pitched early diastolic decrescendo murmur (aortic regurgitation)
Normal, can have low QRS 
voltages
Aortic dissection
Chest pain may be present but unclear due to patient age (for example, symptoms occur at 
2–3 mo of age)
Patient history of poor feeding, diaphoresis, tachycardia, irritability
Signs of heart failure can be present
Anterolateral myocardial infarc­
tion pattern with Q waves and 
ST changes
Anomalous left coronary artery 
from pulmonary artery
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
139
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), a narrow complex tachycardia, is 
the most common arrhythmia in children. In children under 12 years, 
the most common cause of SVT is an accessory atrioventricular path­
way, whereas in teenagers, it tends to be atrioventricular node re-­entry 
tachycardia. Patients with pre-­excitation or accessory pathways that 
cause an arrhythmia such as Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome are at 
the highest risk for SVT. Alternatively, ventricular tachycardia is a wide 
complex tachycardia that is often associated with mitral valve pro­
lapse, viral myocarditis, or long QT syndrome. Chest pain caused by 
an arrhythmia is typically associated with palpitations and/or dyspnea 
but not necessarily with exercise. The pain is caused by an imbalance 
of myocardial oxygen supply and demand, subendocardial wall stress, 
and diminished diastolic coronary perfusion. The pain itself is typically 
intermittent as most arrhythmias are inherently sporadic in their onset 
and resolution.
Chest pain that increases during physical exertion or other stress, is 
relieved by rest, is poorly localized to the substernal area, and possibly 
radiates to the left arm and/or jaw is likely secondary to a cardiac eti­
ology. This pain is often referred to as anginal and can be secondary to 
ischemia, although ischemia is not common in children or adolescents. 
Other conditions that can cause anginal chest pain in children are listed 
in Table 8.6. Any sign of anginal chest pain should prompt investigation 
of obstructive, structural cardiac abnormalities and anomalies of the 
coronary arteries. Associated presyncope, syncope, and/or palpitations 
with these symptoms should significantly raise a provider’s suspicion 
for underlying cardiac disease, and a complete physical examination 
with an ECG is essential initial diagnostic evaluation.
Structural abnormalities lead to chest pain through altered cardiac 
output, which can lead to syncope or death. Tables 8.7 and 8.9 review 
the signs, symptoms, and ECG findings of the structural cardiac abnor­
malities that can cause chest pain.
Acute pericarditis causes substernal chest pain that is sharp, 
stabbing, and aggravated by deep inspiration, coughing, or straining. 
Typical pericarditis pain is improved by being in the sitting position, 
and patients will avoid lying supine. There are many causes of peri­
carditis and/or pericardial effusion (see Table 8.8). Idiopathic or viral 
pericarditis has a preceding or accompanying flulike illness with myal­
gias, arthralgias, and fever. Evaluation for acute pericarditis includes 
physical examination during which a three-­component pericardial rub 
(atrial systole, ventricular systole, diastolic filling) may be present on 
auscultation. Of note, this rub may disappear with the development of 
pericardial effusion. Electrocardiogram findings of acute pericarditis 
go through a four-­stage evolution. Stage 1, the most classic stage for 
diagnosis (Fig. 8.4), may reveal diffuse PR depressions with upright P 
waves followed by J-­point ST elevations. The ST elevations noted in 
pericarditis are referred to as J-­point elevations due to their upslop­
ing “J” shape. Subsequently, stage 2 shows descent of the J-­point ele­
vations followed by stage 3 with T-­wave inversions. Stage 4 then shows 
TABLE 8.8  Etiology of Pericarditis and Pericardial Effusion
Idiopathic (Presumed Viral or Autoinflammatory)
Infectious Agents
Bacterial: Group A streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, pneumococci, 
meningococci,* Haemophilus influenzae,* Salmonella species, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, rickettsiae, 
tularemia
Viral†: Coxsackievirus (group A, B), echovirus, mumps, influenza, Epstein-­Barr 
virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, hepatitis B virus, 
COVID-­19, parvovirus
Fungal: Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces 
dermatitidis, Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida species, Aspergillus 
species
Parasitic: Toxoplasma gondii, Entamoeba histolytica, schistosomes
Collagen Vascular–Inflammatory and Granulomatous 
Diseases
Rheumatic fever
Systemic lupus erythematosus (idiopathic and drug induced)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
Kawasaki disease
Scleroderma
Mixed connective tissue disease
Reactive arthritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Dermatomyositis
Behçet syndrome
Sarcoidosis
Vasculitis
Familial Mediterranean fever
Serum sickness
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Traumatic
Cardiac contusion (blunt trauma)
Penetrating trauma
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
Radiation
Contiguous Spread
Pleural disease
Pneumonia
Aortic aneurysm (dissecting)
Metabolic
Hypothyroidism
Uremia
Gaucher disease
Fabry disease
Chylopericardium
Neoplastic
Primary
Contiguous (lymphoma)
Metastatic
Infiltrative (leukemia)
Others
Drug reaction
Pancreatitis
Post–myocardial infarction
Thalassemia
Central venous catheter perforation
Heart failure
Hemorrhage (coagulopathy)
Chylous
Biliary-­pericardial fistula
*Infectious or immune complex.
†Common (viral pericarditis or myopericarditis is probably the most common cause of acute pericarditis in a previously normal host).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
140
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 8.9  Systolic Murmurs Important in the Diagnosis of Chest Pain
Innocent ejection 
murmur
Loudest left sternal border at base, 1–3 intensity, peaks early in systole; no click, gallop, heave, or 
diastolic murmur
Diminishes with standing and Val­
salva maneuver
Valvular aortic 
stenosis
Mild:
Similar to innocent murmur but ejection click is possible
Severe:
Loudest over right second intercostal space, peaks late in systole; delayed carotid upstroke, thrill pres­
ent; left ventricular heave; audible S4 gallop; aortic insufficiency murmur may also be present
Hypertrophic car­
diomyopathy
Loudest over left second intercostal space, peaks in midsystole; carotid upstroke brisk or bisferiens; no 
diastolic murmur
Increases with standing or Valsalva 
maneuver; decreases on squatting
Pulmonic 
stenosis
Mild:
Similar to innocent murmur but ejection click is possible
Severe:
Loudest over left second intercostal space; loud, widely split S2; thrill present; right ventricular heave; 
ejection click at left second intercostal space
Mitral valve 
prolapse
Loudest at left sternal border and apex; mid-­ to late-­systolic murmur; click precedes murmur
Increases with standing after squatting 
and during expiration
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
J-Point Depression
PR Depression
J-Point Elevation
J-Point Elevation
J-Point Elevation
J-Point Elevation
J-Point Elevation
J-Point Elevation
PR Elevation
I
II
III
II
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
A
Pericarditis 
Infarction
B
Fig. 8.4  A, Acute pericarditis. Note diffuse J-­point ST elevations and near-­ubiquitous PR segment depres­
sions. B, Acute ST elevation myocardial infarction: Note dome-­shaped, sometimes referred to as “tombstone-­
shaped,” ST elevations in leads II, III, and aVF with reciprocal ST depressions in leads I, aVL, and V1–V5 
consistent with an acute inferior wall myocardial infarction. (A from Spodick DH. Acute pericarditis: current 
concepts and practice. JAMA. 2003;289:1150–1153; B from Hwang C, Levis JT. ECG diagnosis: ST-­elevation 
myocardial infarction. Perm J. 2014;18:e133.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
141
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
restitution back to the child’s baseline ECG. These J-­point ST elevations 
are markedly different from ST elevations caused by cardiac ischemia, 
which are more dome shaped (see Fig. 8.4). A chest x-­ray may show 
an enlarged cardiac silhouette. In pericarditis, perform an echocardio­
gram to clarify the amount of pericardial fluid present and whether or 
not there is ventricular dysfunction.
Acute myocarditis often is caused by or follows viral infections. 
Symptoms of acute myocarditis include lethargy, pallor, low-­grade 
fever, anorexia, chest or abdominal pain, and signs of congestive heart 
failure. ECG abnormalities tend to be diffuse and nonspecific, and 
complications of myocarditis include arrhythmias and conduction 
blocks; chest x-­ray may show an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Often, 
patients can merely have persistent tachycardia. Patients with myocar­
ditis have the propensity to become severely ill and often require inpa­
tient or even intensive care hospitalization.
Other
Other causes of chest pain are diverse and variable. Patients with her­
pes zoster often experience chest pain prior to the typical vesicular 
rash over a unilateral dermatome. These patients can continue to have 
burning chest pain for weeks to months. Breast-­related causes of chest 
pain can occur in both males and females. Females may complain of 
throbbing or burning chest pain caused by fibrocystic disease, fibroad­
enoma, swelling with menstruation, mastitis, or pregnancy. Gyneco­
mastia in males can lead to unilateral or bilateral chest pain. Substance 
abuse of tobacco and/or cocaine in addition to other sympathomimetic 
substances can also cause chest pain. Other medications, such as tetra­
cyclines, iron, or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, can cause pill-­
induced esophagitis. Foreign bodies in the airways and/or esophagus 
can be unusual causes of chest discomfort; these diagnoses are typically 
evident due to other symptoms such as dysphagia, drooling, choking, 
stridor, or dyspnea. Neoplastic diseases such as mediastinal tumors or 
lymphomas can also manifest primarily as chest pain.
In addition, certain underlying disease processes have clinical 
courses that can manifest as chest pain. In patients with sickle cell 
anemia, chest pain can be secondary to acute chest syndrome and rib 
or pulmonary infarction. Long-­term complications of Kawasaki dis­
ease include coronary artery stenosis and coronary artery aneurysm, 
both of which can present as chest pain. Patients with these cardiac 
complications of Kawasaki disease often have associated symptoms of 
fatigue, shortness of breath, and diaphoresis. Patients with Marfan syn­
drome are at high risk for dissecting aortic aneurysm, as are patients 
with Turner syndrome, type IV Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, and homo­
cystinuria (Table 8.10). A dissecting aortic aneurysm will often have 
the history of a sharp, sudden onset of chest pain with radiation to 
the back. Rheumatic fever is an acquired condition that can present 
with the major manifestations of carditis, which may include tachycar­
dia out of proportion to degree of fever, mitral regurgitation or aortic 
regurgitation, and signs of pericarditis or heart failure. Chest pain also 
can be present before the onset of lower spinal symptoms in ankylos­
ing spondylitis, a disease of the sacroiliac joints with variable involve­
ment in the thoracic and cervical spine. A phenomenon that can occur 
with any cardiac procedure is postpericardiotomy syndrome, which 
includes fever, chest pain, and an audible friction rub approximately 
1–2 weeks postsurgery.
COVID-­19 and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome 
in Children
Chest pain is not a symptom commonly reported with acute COVID-­19 
syndrome. However, multisystem inflammatory syndrome, character­
ized by fever, multisystem organ involvement, and laboratory markers 
of inflammation, has been reported to cause critical illness in >50% of 
cases. Cardiac involvement is common in children with multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C). Specifically, children 
with MIS-­C should be monitored for shock, cardiac arrhythmias, peri­
cardial effusion, and coronary artery dilation. Evaluation of children 
with MIS-­C should include a cardiac troponin, an N-­terminal pro–B-
type natriuretic peptide, and inflammatory markers including CRP, 
ferritin, and D-­dimer (see Chapters 4 and 53). All patients with sus­
pected MIS-­C should receive an ECG, and if there are abnormalities in 
biochemical markers, pediatric cardiologists often recommend echo­
cardiogram evaluation to better understand the impact of this newly 
developing disease. Long-­lasting effects of this disease and of acute 
COVID-­19 in the pediatric population are yet to be fully understood.
Physical Examination
A physical examination can often confirm a medical provider’s suspi­
cion of a particular diagnosis or diagnoses, especially when it comes to 
the complaint of chest pain. The cardiovascular assessment of children 
requires patience, thoroughness, and flexibility to adapt to children 
who may not desire you to examine them. All physical examinations 
for the complaint of chest pain should start with observing the child 
for general states of distress, pain with breathing, and interaction with 
parents. Vital signs can indicate the presence of pain by revealing signs 
of tachycardia and tachypnea, and can provide information regarding 
potential serious medical illness, including fever, hypoxia, or hypoten­
sion. Blood pressures should be obtained in all four upper and lower 
extremities, monitoring closely for a gradient between extremities. All 
vital signs should be evaluated in the context of reference ranges for a 
child’s age and height.
A helpful physical exam finding is elicitation of chest wall tender­
ness upon palpation of the thorax, which is pathognomonic for chest 
wall pain (see Fig. 8.1). Therefore, medical providers are encouraged 
to palpate over the chest including the ribs, intercostal areas, sternum, 
xiphoid, manubrium, axilla, clavicles, epigastric area, spinous pro­
cesses, and paraspinal areas. Chest wall maneuvers can also be per­
formed to better understand what muscle group is causing the pain 
(see Fig. 8.2).
Palpation of the chest wall should be performed to identify the 
point of maximal intensity and to determine if there is a cardiac heave 
or thrill. Palpation of the abdomen should be done for tenderness and 
organomegaly. Both distal and proximal pulses should be felt for equal­
ity and caliber. After palpation, percussion over the thorax should be 
done. Dullness to percussion can suggest consolidation, effusion, or 
atelectasis, whereas hyperresonance to percussion can suggest pneu­
mothorax or asthma.
Every medical provider should allow ample time for auscultation of 
the lungs and heart. Medical providers should follow a constant, sys­
temic procedure for listening to heart sounds (see Table 8.9). Heart 
sounds include S1–S4. S1 is caused by mitral and tricuspid valve closure, 
and S2 is caused by aortic and pulmonary valve closure. The sounds 
caused by these valves opening are not heard in healthy individuals. 
Because the left-­sided valves close before the right-­sided valves, the S2 
heart sound can be physiologically split into the aortic valve and then 
the pulmonic valve closing during inspiration. S3 and S4 are harder to 
understand and hear. S3 is a result of the deceleration of blood at the 
end of early rapid filling of the ventricles. An S3 is normal in children 
with hyperdynamic circulations (such as athletes) and thin chest walls 
(of note, in adults an S3 is always abnormal). An S4 is a result of deceler­
ation of blood at the end of late rapid filling of the ventricles. Audible S4 
sounds are always abnormal, no matter what age the patient is. There­
fore, a gallop rhythm (third heart sounds) can be normal or abnormal.
Subsequently, medical providers must listen to what occurs between 
S1 and S2. A midsystolic click is often an indicator of the mitral valve 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
142
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
TABLE 8.10  TAA Syndromes and Diseases from a Heritable or Genetic Cause
Gene (Protein)
Syndrome or Disease
Clinical Features
Extracellular Matrix Protein Genes
FBN1 (fibrillin-­1)
Marfan syndrome
Aortic root aneurysm, AD, TAA, MVP, long bone overgrowth, scoliosis, 
pectus deformities, ectopia lentis, myopia, tall stature, PTX
FBN2 (fibrillin-­2)
Congenital contractural arachnodactyly, 
Beals syndrome
MVP, arachnodactyly, marfanoid habitus, digital contractures, mild aortic 
dilation
COL3A1 (type 3 procollagen)
Vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
TAA, AAA, arterial rupture, AD, MVP, bowel and uterine rupture, PTX, 
translucent skin, atrophic scars, small joint hypermobility, easy 
bruising
EFEMP2 (fibulin-­4)
Cutis laxa
TAA, arterial tortuosity, arterial stenosis, hypertelorism, arachnodactyly
MFAP5 (microfibrillar-­associated protein 5)
FTAAD, AAT9
TAA, AD
TGF-­β Signaling Pathway Genes
TGFBR1 (TGF-­β receptor 1)
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome type 1, Furlong 
syndrome, FTAAD, AAT5
TAA, branch vessel aneurysms, AD, arterial tortuosity, craniosynostosis, 
hypertelorism, bluish sclera, bifid/broad uvula, translucent skin, visible 
veins, MVP, clubfoot, easy bruising
TGFBR2 (TGF-­β receptor 2)
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome type 2, FTAAD, AAT3
TAA, branch vessel aneurysms, AD, arterial tortuosity, craniosynostosis, 
hypertelorism, bluish sclera, bifid/broad uvula, translucent skin, visible 
veins, MVP, clubfoot, easy bruising
SMAD3 (SMAD3)
Aneurysm-­osteoarthritis syndrome, LDS 3
TAA, branch vessel aneurysms, AD, arterial tortuosity, overlapping 
phenotype with LDS 1 and 2 and marfanoid features, bifid uvula, 
premature osteoarthritis, osteoarthritis dissecans
TGFB2 (TGF-­β 2 ligand)
FTAAD, LDS 4
TAA, arterial tortuosity, AD, MVP, PDA, overlapping features of MFS and 
LDS, bifid uvula, hypertelorism
TGFB3 (TGF-­β 3 ligand)
Rienhoff syndrome, LDS 5
TAA, AAA, AD, hypertelorism, bifid uvula, overlapping features of MFS 
and LDS, MVP
SKI (v-­SKI sarcoma oncogene homolog)
Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome (velocardio­
facial syndrome)
TAA, marfanoid habitus, craniosynostosis, intellectual disability, skeletal 
muscle hypotonia
SLC2A10 (glucose transporter 10)
Arterial tortuosity syndrome
Widespread aortic and branch vessel tortuosity, TAA, aortic and arterial 
dissection, keratoconus, marfanoid habitus, joint contractures
SMAD2 (SMAD2)
FTAAD
TAA, AD, cervicocranial arterial dissection
SMAD4 (SMAD4)
Juvenile polyposis syndrome, HHT, FTAAD
Telangiectasia, AVMs, TAA, AD
Vascular Smooth Muscle Contraction Components or Cytoskeleton Genes
ACTA2 (α-­smooth muscle actin)
FTAAD, AAT6
TAA, AD, BAV, moyamoya disease, premature CAD and CVD, livedo 
reticularis, iris flocculi
MYH11 (myosin heavy chain-­11)
FTAAD, AAT4
TAA, AD, PDA
MYLK (myosin light chain kinase)
FTAAD, AAT7
AD at relatively small aortic size
PRKG1 (protein kinase cGMP dependent)
FTAAD, AAT8
Aortic root aneurysm and AD
MAT2A (MAT IIα)
FTAAD
TAA, AD, BAV
FLNA (filamin A)
EDS with periventricular nodular heterotopia 
and cardiac valve dysplasia
X-­linked, TAA, BAV, MV disease, seizures, joint hypermobility
Bicuspid Aortic Valve–Associated Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
NOTCH1 (NOTCH1)
BAV with TAA
Aortic stenosis, TAA
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, TGFB3, ACTA2, 
MAT2A, GATA5, SMAD6, LOX
BAV with TAA
Syndromic and nonsyndromic FTAAD with increased frequency of BAV
XO, Xp
Turner syndrome
BAV, COA, TAA, AD, short stature, lymphedema, webbed neck, prema­
ture ovarian failure; affects 1 in 2,500 live-­born girls
AAA, abdominal aortic aneurysm; AAT, aortic aneurysm syndrome; AD, aortic dissection; AVM, arteriovenous malformation; BAV, bicuspid aortic 
valve; CAD, coronary artery disease; COA, coarctation of the aorta; CVD, cerebrovascular disease; EDS, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome; FTAAD, familial 
thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection syndrome; HHT, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; LDS, Loeys-­Dietz syndrome; MFS, Marfan syn­
drome; MV, mitral valve; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PTX, pneumothorax; TAA, thoracic aortic aneurysm; TGF, 
transforming growth factor.
From Zipes DP, et al. Braunwald’s Heart Disease – A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 11th ed. Vol. 2. Elsevier; 2019:1301, Table 63.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
143
CHAPTER 8  Chest Pain
prolapsing into the left atrium. It can be a single click or series of clicks. 
Then, the medical provider should listen for heart murmurs. Heart 
murmurs can provide additional clinical evidence for potential cardiac 
causes of chest pain. Listening for heart murmurs should be performed 
with the patient supine, sitting, standing, squatting, and standing after 
squatting. Many murmurs increase in intensity with decreased ven­
tricular filling or decreased afterload (standing, release of Valsalva, 
squatting); however, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy’s murmur does 
the opposite. It increases in intensity with the Valsalva maneuver and 
decreases with squatting. Of note, all diastolic murmurs or murmurs 
grade 3/6 or higher should be further evaluated with an echocardio­
gram. The presence of a gallop rhythm or a friction rub can make an 
immediate cardiac diagnosis. A pericardial friction rub is a scratchy, 
high-­pitched, to-­and-­fro sound caused by the inflamed pericardial 
surfaces rubbing together during cardiac motion and that is loudest 
when the patient is upright and leaning forward. Finally, the patient 
should be assessed for extremity edema. It is important to stress that 
if a patient’s examination is unrevealing, it is imperative that providers 
pay close attention to vital signs. Tachypnea, tachycardia, hypoxemia, 
or hypertension without an obvious cause always warrants further 
evaluation.
Electrocardiogram
An ECG may be helpful if there is a suggestive history and/or physical 
examination for potential cardiac disease. In the absence of a sugges­
tive history and physical, the yield of an ECG is considered low as it 
may be normal in patients with structural heart disease or arrhythmias. 
Regardless, because of its relatively low cost and noninvasive nature, 
electrocardiograms should be performed in the evaluation of chest 
pain if there are any concerns discovered in the history assessment or 
physical examination. After a medical provider obtains an ECG, there 
are a few important principles to keep in mind. ECG findings are age 
specific (e.g., infants have a right ventricular–dominant ECG and T 
waves are usually inverted), arrhythmias are often not found on rou­
tine ECGs, and providers should be careful in using the “machine” read 
in regard to myocardial infarction, pericarditis, or long QT syndrome 
(the computer is prone to overdiagnosis).
Further Diagnostic Testing
Cardiac consultation is reasonable for any child with red-­flag symp­
toms, specifically chest pain associated with exertion, syncope with 
exertion, chest pain with concurrent palpitations, abnormal findings 
on cardiac examination or ECG, a history of cardiac surgery/inter­
vention, or a high-­risk family history. If a patient has chest pain with 
concurrent fever or signs of hemodynamic instability, the child should 
be referred to the emergency department for further evaluation for 
myocarditis.
When the previous evaluation results in a positive screening result, 
echocardiogram is the diagnostic test of choice for further assessment. 
However, referral to a cardiologist is generally more cost-­effective than 
obtaining an echocardiogram without a cardiologist. The decision to 
do an echocardiogram should be judicious due to the low probabil­
ity of significant findings (Table 8.11). An echocardiogram should be 
obtained urgently if there are signs of cardiac tamponade (hypoten­
sion, tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus) or poor cardiac output. It is also 
useful if mitral valve prolapse, valvular heart disease, hypertrophic car­
diomyopathy, septal defects, endocarditis, or pericarditis is suspected.
Other diagnostic modalities can include chest radiographs, exercise 
stress tests, and Holter monitors. A chest radiograph is helpful if there 
is a clinical finding that needs further investigation, such as a history of 
trauma or fever. Other than pulmonary disease, a chest radiograph can 
note cardiomegaly or pneumothorax. Regardless, a chest radiograph 
in the absence of febrile illness, trauma, or lung findings on physical 
examination has not been shown to be largely beneficial as the likeli­
hood of finding bone or intrathoracic abnormalities in the absence of 
these features is low. Exercise stress tests should be reserved for anginal 
cardiac pain in the setting of other normal testing. Due to the difficulty 
of determining anginal chest pain in the pediatric population, there has 
been an increased frequency of exercise stress tests ordered. However, 
medical providers should remember that in the setting of chest pain 
with a normal echocardiogram evaluation, an exercise stress test has 
low yield. A 24-­hour Holter monitor or a 30-­day loop recorder only 
should be utilized if an arrhythmia is suspected but the resting ECG 
is normal. Testing for other underlying abnormalities as the cause of 
noncardiac chest pain can include pulmonary function testing and/
or methacholine challenge testing as well as esophageal manometry 
testing.
The standardized clinical assessment and management plan 
(SCAMP) is used to reduce practice variation, optimize resource use, 
and improve patient care through algorithms. One study showed that 
utilization of SCAMPs reduced cost by 27.5% in assessing and man­
aging pediatric chest pain. It suggests that the diagnostic approach to 
chest pain in pediatric patients should use only data gathered from the 
history and physical in conjunction with ECG to suggest when further 
testing is indicated. Laboratory testing for biochemical markers of car­
diac damage is used extensively in the adult population, primarily to 
diagnose and assist in management of acute myocardial infarction and 
in children with MIS-­C. The biochemical marker most utilized is the 
TABLE 8.11  Appropriate Use Criteria for Initial Transthoracic Echocardiography in Outpatient 
Pediatric Cardiology in Children Seen with Chest Pain
Appropriate use of echocardiography
Exertional chest pain
Nonexertional chest pain with abnormal ECG findings
Chest pain with a family history of sudden unexplained death or cardiomyopathy
Echocardiography may be appropriate
Chest pain with other symptoms or signs of cardiovascular disease, a benign family history, and normal ECG findings
Chest pain with a family history of premature coronary artery disease
Chest pain with recent onset of fever
Chest pain with recent illicit drug use
Echocardiography is rarely appropriate
Chest pain with no other symptoms or signs of cardiovascular disease, a benign family history, and normal ECG findings
Nonexertional chest pain with no recent ECG
Nonexertional chest pain with normal ECG findings
Reproducible chest pain with palpation or deep inspiration
Adapted from Barbut G, Needleman J. Pediatric chest pain. Pediatr Rev. 2020;41(9):469–480.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
144
SECTION 3  Cardiac Disorders
high-­sensitivity troponin T. The MB isoenzyme of creatinine kinase is 
rarely used and only utilized if the troponin T is found to be elevated. 
Troponin T is a protein present in high concentrations in the myocar­
dium but not in other tissues and is released rapidly after myocardial 
injury in direct proportion to the extent of injury. Troponin T has a 
high specificity and a low sensitivity for myocardial injury; therefore, 
false positives often occur, especially in pediatrics where the prevalence 
of myocardial ischemia and injury is extremely low. Troponin T levels 
are elevated in postoperative cardiac surgery patients and in diagnoses 
of myocarditis. Cutoff values have not been well defined; however, low-­
level troponin T elevations can signify serious disease in children, as 
opposed to adults, where these small elevations would be considered 
insignificant. Additional studies in pediatrics are continually ongoing 
regarding the potential usefulness of cardiac biochemical markers in 
diseases with muscle breakdown such as Duchenne muscular dys­
trophy or in determining subtle cardiac dysfunction after convulsive 
seizures.
Treatment
Medical providers should refer patients to cardiology specialists if car­
diac etiologies are still a concern after thorough history, physical, and 
necessary ancillary studies such as ECGs. Unfortunately, a precise diag­
nosis is not made in a high percentage of cases. It is up to the medical 
provider to carefully deal with uncertainty, not over-­test or over-­refer, 
and provide ongoing care that minimizes anxiety. Most importantly, 
if a noncardiac etiology is the highest consideration, medical provid­
ers should thoughtfully provide extensive reassurance that includes a 
symptomatic treatment approach and a plan for appropriate follow-­up. 
It is of the utmost importance that providers provide this reassurance 
and follow-­up to avoid a chronic course of chest pain with potential 
disability. Of note, families should be specifically asked about school 
absenteeism so that recommendations for returning to school can be 
given. Treatment plans should be tailored to both the most likely diag­
nosis and the patient’s individual concerns. Musculoskeletal chest pain 
can be treated with heat, antiinflammatory medications, or specific 
exercises. Psychogenic causes of chest pain are perhaps the hardest to 
treat, often requiring consultation with behavioral health specialists, 
counselors, and/or psychologists. Primary care providers can start 
this treatment by having their patients keep pain diaries to help facil­
itate follow-­up discussions. Gastrointestinal causes of chest pain can 
be diagnosed and treated with a trial of H2-­blocking agents or proton 
pump inhibitors in addition to reflux precautionary behaviors such as 
avoiding foods that worsen the symptoms, not eating close to bedtime, 
and elevating the head of the bed at night. Pulmonary causes of chest 
pain require therapies to treat the underlying cause, most frequently 
reactive airway disease.
Overall, because etiologies of chest pain are so often multifactorial 
and require ongoing evaluation and treatment, the primary care physi­
cian must stay actively involved in the patient’s care over time.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
144.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alehan F, Erol I, Cemil T, et al. Elevated CK-­MB mass and plasma brain-­type 
natriuretic peptide concentrations following convulsive seizures in children 
and adolescents: possible evidence of subtle cardiac dysfunction. Epilepsia. 
2009;50:755–760.
Angoff GH, Kane DA, Giddins N, et al. Regional implementation of a pediatric 
cardiology chest pain guideline using SCAMPs methodology. Pediatrics. 
2013;132:e1–e8.
Archer TP, Qualman SJ, Mazzaferri EL. Chest pain and dyspnea in a 
17-­year-­old smoker. Hosp Pract (Off Ed). 1998;33:97–98.
Barbut G, Needleman J. Pediatric chest pain. Pediatrics in Review. 
2020;41(9):469–480. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.2019-­0058.
Brown JL, Hirsh DA, Mahle WT. Use of troponin as a screen for chest pain in 
the pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:337–342.
Campbell RM, Douglas PS, Eidem BW, et al. ACC/AAP/AHA/ASE/HRS/
SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/SOPE 2014 appropriate use criteria for initial trans­
thoracic echocardiography in outpatient pediatric cardiology. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014;64(19):2039–2060.
Cartaya Blanco C, Bandler Parekh J. In brief: pericarditis. Pediatr Rev. 
2010;31:83–84.
Chun Jy, Kim TH, Han MY, et al. Analysis of clinical characteristics and causes of 
chest pain in children and adolescents. Korean J Pediatr. 2015;58(1):440–445.
Collins SA, Griksaitis MJ, Legg JP. 15-­minute consultation: a structured ap­
proach to the assessment of chest pain in a child. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract 
Ed. 2014;99:122–126.
Danduran MJ, Earing MG, Sheridan DC, et al. Chest pain: characteristics of 
children/adolescents. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008;29:775–781.
Driscoll DJ, Glicklich LB, Gallen WJ. Chest pain in children: a prospective 
study. Pediatrics. 1976;57:648–651.
Drossner DM, Hirsh DA, Sturm JJ, et al. Cardiac disease in pediatric patients pre­
senting to a pediatric ED with chest pain. Am J Emerg Med. 2011;29:632–638.
Farias M, Jenkins K, Lock J, et al. Standardized clinical assessment and 
management plans (SCAMPs) provide a better alternative to clinical 
practice guidelines. Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(5):911–920. https://doi.
org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.0667.
Friedman KG, Alexander ME. Chest pain and syncope in children: a practical 
approach to the diagnosis of cardiac disease. J Pediatr. 2013;163:896–901.
Geggel RL. Conditions leading to pediatric cardiology consultations in a tertia­
ry academic hospital. Pediatrics. 2004;114:409–417.
Hallagan LF, Dawson PA, Eljaiek LF. Pediatric chest pain: case report of a 
malignant cause. Am J Emerg Med. 1992;10:43–45.
Haworth SG. The management of pulmonary hypertension in children. Arch 
Dis Child. 2008;93:620–625.
Hwang C, Levis JT. ECG diagnosis: ST-­elevation myocardial infarction. Perm 
J. 2014;18:e133.
Iqbal SF, Otero HJ. Approach to the child with chest pain. J Urgent Care Med. 
2017. Available at: https://www.jucm.com/approach-­child-­chest-­pain/.
Kane DA, Fulton DR, Saleeb S, et al. Needles in hay: chest pain as the pre­
senting symptom in children with serious underlying cardiac pathology. 
Congenit Heart Dis. 2010;5:366–373.
Kocis KC. Chest pain in pediatrics. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:189–203.
Kronick-­Mest C. Postpericardiotomy syndrome: etiology, manifestations and 
interventions. Heart Lung. 1989;18:192–198.
Kyle WB, Macicek SL, Lindle KA, et al. Limited utility of exercise stress tests in the 
evaluation of children with chest pain. Congenit Heart Dis. 2012;7:455–459.
Lam JC, Tobias SC. Follow-­up survey of children and adolescents with chest 
pain. South Med J. 2001;94:921–924.
Leung A, Robson W, Cho H. Chest pain in children. Can Fam Physician. 
1996;4:23–33.
Lipshultz SE, Nader Rifai SE, Lipsitz SR, et al. Predictive value of cardiac 
troponin T in pediatric patients at risk for myocardial injury. Circulation. 
1997;96:2641–2648.
Loiselle KA, Lee JL, Gilleland J, et al. Factors associated with healthcare 
utilization among children with noncardiac chest pain and innocent heart 
murmurs. J Pediatr Psychol. 2012;37:817–825.
Owens TR. Chest pain in the adolescent. Adolesc Med. 2001;12:95–104.
Place R, Vezzetti R. Pediatric and adolescent chest pain. Pediatr Emerg Med 
Pract. 2007;4:1–26.
Pomeranz AJ, Busey SL, Sabnis S, et al. Chest Pain. Pediatric Decision-­Making 
Strategies. 16th ed. To Accompany Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 2002:52–57.
Rabinowicz S, Leshem E, Pessach IM. COVID-­19 in the pediatric population—
review and current evidence. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2020;22(11):29. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11908-­020-­00739-­6.
Reddy SR, Singh HR. Chest pain in children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 
2010;31:e1–e10.
Roodpeyma S, Sadeghian N. Acute pericarditis in childhood. A 10-­year experi­
ence. Pediatr Cardiol. 2000;21:363–367.
Rowe BH, Dulberg CS, Peterson RG, et al. Characteristics of children present­
ing with chest pain to a pediatric emergency department. Can Med Assoc J. 
1990;143:388–394.
Sabri MR, Ghavanini AA, Haghighat M, et al. Chest pain in children and ado­
lescents: epigastric tenderness as a guide to reduce unnecessary work-­up. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:3–5.
Saleeb SF, Li WYV, Warren SZ, et al. Effectiveness of screening for life-­
threatening chest pain in children. Pediatrics. 2011;124:e1062–e1068.
Selbst SM, Ruddy RM, Clark BJ, et al. Pediatric chest pain: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics. 1988;82:319–323.
Snyder CS, Fenier AL, Friedman RA, et al. The emergency department versus 
the computer: which is the better electrocardiographer? Pediatr Cardiol. 
2003;24:364–368.
Soongswang J, Durongpisitkul K, Nana A, et al. Cardiac troponin T: a 
marker in the diagnosis of acute myocarditis in children. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2005;26:45–49.
Spodick DH. Acute pericarditis: current concepts and practice. JAMA. 
2003;289:1150–1153.
Swenson JM, Fischer DR, Miller AS, et al. Are chest radiographs and electro­
cardiograms still valuable in evaluating new pediatric patients with heart 
murmurs or chest pain? Pediatrics. 1997;98:1–3.
Thull-­Freedman J. Evaluation of chest pain in the pediatric patient. Med Clin 
North Am. 2010;94:327–347.
Valverde I, Singh Y, Sanchez-­de-­Toledo J, et al., on behalf of the AEPC 
COVID-­19 Rapid Response Team. Acute cardiovascular manifestations in 
286 children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated With 
COVID-­19 infection in Europe. Circulation. 2021;143(1):21–32
Verghese GR, Friedman KG, Rathod RH, et al. Resource utilization reduc­
tion for evaluation of chest pain in pediatrics using a novel Standardized 
Clinical Assessment and Management Plan (SCAMP). J Am Heart Assoc. 
2012;1(2): jah3-­e000349. Published online 2012 Apr 24. https://doi.
org/10.1161/JAHA.111.000349.
Wiens L, Sabath R, Ewing L, et al. Chest pain in otherwise healthy children and 
adolescents is frequently caused by exercise-­induced asthma. Pediatrics. 
1992;90:350–353.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
