341
Constipation is defined symptomatically as the infrequent passage of 
hard stools, straining while passing a stool, or pain associated with 
the passage of a hard stool. The range of normal defecation patterns in 
children is widely variable, though in general, formula-fed infants may 
have four to five stools per day in the first weeks of life, while breast-fed 
infants usually pass softer and more frequent stools. Stool frequency in 
both gradually decreases to one to two per day by 1 year of age. Most 
children aged 1–4 years have one or two daily bowel movements, with 
a range of three daily bowel movements to one bowel movement every 
other day.
Constipation is classified broadly either as functional or as second­
ary to underlying conditions, such as anatomic abnormalities, meta­
bolic disorders, neurologic dysfunction, or medication effects (Table 
19.1). Most childhood constipation is functional. The Rome IV Criteria 
for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders defines functional constipa­
tion in two age groups as noted in Tables 19.2 and 19.3.
Changes in diet, such as formula changes or the addition of solid 
foods, may lead to transient constipation in infants, with up to 40% 
of constipation starting during this time period. Minor illnesses, 
including infectious diarrhea, can subsequently result in episodic con­
stipation as well. More long-standing constipation is often secondary 
to inadequate intake of dietary fiber, fluid, or both. The evaluation of 
constipation involves first determining whether the change in the fre­
quency or consistency of stools is secondary to functional constipation 
or is related to an underlying organic disorder. This determination is 
based on identifying historical features and examination findings that 
suggest an underlying disorder and prompt further investigation.
PHYSIOLOGY OF NORMAL DEFECATION AND 
CONSTIPATION
Fecal continence and physiologic defecation are dependent on the anal 
inhibitory reflex, which is in turn dependent on the proper structure 
and function of the internal and external anal sphincters and the pelvic 
floor. The internal anal sphincter is an involuntary muscle that is con­
tracted at rest. When a bolus of stool distends the rectum, the internal 
anal sphincter relaxes. This process generally results in the child sens­
ing the need to defecate. The external anal sphincter and the puborec­
talis muscle of the pelvic floor, under voluntary control, contract upon 
rectal distention, respectively closing the anus and decreasing the rec­
toanal angle, thus allowing the child to hold stool until it is socially 
convenient to defecate. Voluntary relaxation of the puborectalis mus­
cle and the external anal sphincter straightens the anorectal angle and 
allows the child to stool. In situations where there is encopresis sec­
ondary to overflow incontinence, the child typically consciously with­
holds stool by refusing to relax the external anal sphincter in the setting 
of a relaxed internal anal sphincter. Over time, the child is not able to 
keep the external anal sphincter fully contracted and stool leaks out of 
the anal canal. The presence of overflow incontinence is an important 
indicator that the anal inhibitory reflex is likely intact, as patients with 
anatomic or neurologic abnormalities of the distal colon and internal 
anal sphincter, including Hirschsprung disease, are unable to reflex­
ively relax the internal anal sphincter to allow for the passage of stool.
Patients with chronic constipation have abnormal anorectal 
manometry. The most consistent abnormality is blunted rectal sensa­
tion, rendering the patient unable to sense stool in the rectum. Other 
findings include incomplete relaxation of the internal anal sphincter 
and paradoxical contraction of the external sphincter during attempted 
defecation. Patients who have paradoxical anal contraction, also known 
as functional dyssynergia, are less likely to respond to routine medical 
therapy or may be more likely to have recurrent constipation if treat­
ment is withdrawn unless the paradoxical contraction is addressed.
DATA COLLECTION AND ASSESSMENT
History
Functional constipation may be distinguished from secondary causes 
of constipation by assessing the age of symptom onset, the stool consis­
tency, and the presence of associated signs or symptoms.
The age at symptom onset differentiates disease processes that are 
congenital versus those that are acquired. Failure to pass meconium 
in the first 48 hours of life suggests a diagnosis of Hirschsprung dis­
ease, though up to 50% of patients with Hirschsprung disease will pass 
meconium prior to this. Constipation in the first month of life or a 
history of constipation since infancy suggests organic causes, includ­
ing and in addition to Hirschsprung disease (Table 19.4). The onset of 
symptoms beyond infancy suggests acquired organic constipation or 
functional constipation.
Stool consistency in constipation can differ by etiology. Functional 
constipation tends to produce painful, large, bulky stools, whereas con­
stipation secondary to Hirschsprung disease or other organic etiologies 
tends to produce harder, pebble-like, or ribbon-like stools. Stool con­
sistency may be objectively rated via use of the Bristol stool scale (Fig. 
19.1) and can be used to follow response to therapy.
The assessment of associated signs and symptoms should include 
evaluating for a history of blood in the stool, as well as for the pres­
ence of urinary symptoms. Bright red blood on the surface of the stool 
suggests an anal fissure indicative of straining, which is seen in approx­
imately 25% of patients with constipation. Blood mixed in the stool 
suggests a more remote source, and thus less likely an anal fissure. Uri­
nary symptoms may take the form of either retention or incontinence. 
Retention may be secondary to congenital or acquired abnormalities 
in the neurologic regulation of bladder voiding and may be associated 
with similar abnormalities in the regulation of defecation. Megacystic 
megaureter intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome is often detected in 
utero or after birth with massive bladder distention and failure to pass 
Constipation
Joshua Noe
19
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
342
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
meconium. In some patients, it is an autosomal dominant disorder due 
to variants in the ACTG2 gene. Patients with primary chronic intestinal 
pseudoobstruction may also have bladder distention.
Alternately, retention may be secondary to urinary tract outflow 
obstruction caused by a large stool burden. Incontinence may be due 
to a large stool mass distending the rectum and placing pressure on the 
posterior bladder wall or may indicate overflow incontinence in the 
setting of a neurogenic bladder.
Abdominal pain is common in constipated patients; when present, 
it is often mild, nonspecific, and periumbilical. Older children may 
describe discomfort in the lower abdomen and a history of pain relief 
after passing stool. Appetite is often diminished. A diary recorded 
over a period of several days to weeks noting the passage of stools, the 
TABLE 19.1  Causes of Constipation in 
Infants and Children
Functional
Faulty diet (poor fiber intake, excessive 
cow’s milk, inadequate nutrition)
Inadequate fluid intake
Situational
Depression
Familial-constitutional
Anatomic
Anterior anal displacement
Ectopic anus
Anal stenosis
Malrotation
Colonic anomalies (rectocele, duplications)
Stricture (postsurgical, sequelae of inflam­
matory disorders including necrotizing 
enterocolitis)
Painful anorectal lesions (fissures, dermati­
tis, abscess)
Abnormal abdominal musculature (prune 
belly, gastroschisis)
Intestinal neoplasm, extraintestinal pelvic 
mass (teratoma)
Endocrine
Hypothyroidism
Panhypopituitarism
Hypoparathyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes insipidus (via dehydration)
Genetic/Metabolic
Hypercalcemia
Metal intoxication (lead, arsenic, mercury)
Dehydration
Cystic fibrosis: DIOS
Hypokalemia
Acute intermittent porphyria
Blue diaper syndrome
Hereditary coproporphyria
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Williams syndrome (hypercalcemia)
Infectious
Typhoid
Infant botulism
Chagas disease
Intrinsic Intestinal Neuronal or 
Myopathic Disorders
Hirschsprung disease
Intestinal neuronal dysplasia
Hypoganglionosis
Intestinal ganglioneuromatosis
Pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction 
(neuropathic or myopathic; primary or 
secondary)
Megacystis megaureter intestinal hypo­
peristalsis syndrome
Intestinal sphincter achalasia
Neurologic/Spinal Cord 
Lesions
Spina bifida and spina bifida 
occulta
Tethered cord
Spinal cord tumors
Traumatic lesions
Myotonic dystrophy
Cerebral palsy
Muscular dystrophy
Psychologic
Anorexia nervosa
Depression
Medications/Toxins
Anticonvulsants
Antacids (aluminum and 
calcium)
Iron
Lead
Barium
Opioids (codeine, diphenoxyl­
ate–atropine sulfate [Lomo­
til], loperamide [Imodium])
Antidepressants
Anticholinergics
Phenothiazines
Phenytoin
Methylphenidate
Pancreatic enzymes (fibrosing 
colonopathy)
Vitamin D intoxication
Vincristine
Calcium channel blockers
Bismuth
Clonidine
Antihistamines
Diuretics
Other
Milk protein–induced anal 
inflammation and fissure 
formation
Celiac disease
Collagen vascular disease 
(SLE, mixed connective tissue 
disease, scleroderma, derma­
tomyositis)
Amyloidosis
DIOS, distal intestinal obstruction syndrome; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus.
TABLE 19.2  Functional Constipation: 
Infant/Toddler
Diagnostic criteria Must include 1 mo of at least two of the following in 
infants up to 4 yr of age:
	1.	 Two or fewer defecations per week
	2.	 History of excessive stool retention
	3.	 History of painful or hard bowel movements
	4.	 Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
	5.	 History of large-diameter stools
In toilet-trained children, the following additional criteria may be used:
	6.	 At least one episode/wk of incontinence after the acquisition of toileting 
skills
	7.	 History of large-diameter stools that may obstruct the toilet
TABLE 19.3  Functional Constipation: 
Child/Adolescent
Diagnostic criteria Must include two or more of the following at least once 
a week for a minimum of 1 mo with insufficient criteria for diagnosis of IBS:
	1.	 Two or fewer defecations in the toilet per week in a child with a develop­
mental age of at least 4 yr
	2.	 At least one episode of fecal incontinence per week
	3.	 History of retentive posturing or excessive volitional stool retention
	4.	 History of painful or hard bowel movements
	5.	 Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
	6.	 History of large-diameter stools that can obstruct the toilet
After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully explained by 
another medical condition.
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome.
TABLE 19.4  Causes of Constipation During 
the Neonatal Period
Meconium plug (rule out cystic fibrosis)
Meconium ileus (rule out cystic fibrosis)
Hirschsprung disease
Pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction
Anteriorly displaced anus
Ectopic anus
Anal stenosis
Imperforate anus
Spina bifida
Hypothyroidism
Hypercalcemia
Neuronal intestinal dysplasia types A and B
Megacystis megaureter intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
Medications (opioids, paralytic agents, magnesium)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
343
CHAPTER 19  Constipation
timing of meals, and the onset of abdominal pain can aid in the diag­
nosis of constipation and in monitoring therapy. The personal medical 
history and the family history may reveal illnesses and conditions asso­
ciated with constipation (Table 19.5; see Table 19.1).
The child’s behavior during defecation should be noted. A history of 
straining, as an index of difficulty in defecation, can be misinterpreted 
by parents, who often view a child’s efforts to withhold stool as efforts 
to pass a bowel movement. Parents often describe a toddler who hides 
in a corner, with stiffened straight legs, or who may lean into the wall or 
hold onto a table while “straining.” More often, these actions represent 
attempts at withholding stool. The young child, having become consti­
pated, passes a painful stool, which, if large, may be associated with an 
anal fissure. If a fissure is present, a small amount of blood is usually 
passed with the stool and may create additional worry if noticed by 
the child. The child associates the passage of stools with pain and tries 
to prevent further painful episodes by withholding fecal matter. This 
behavior results in the formation of even larger, harder stools, which 
are painful to pass, thus establishing a link between pain and defeca­
tion that perpetuates the cycle. Children with stool retention may go 
3–5 days without defecating. Enuresis and encopresis may occur in this 
setting. Fecal incontinence is one of the most common presentations 
of functional constipation and can be misinterpreted by the parent as 
diarrhea by virtue of constant smearing of stool in the gluteal cleft.
Physical Examination
Abnormal growth patterns should alert the physician to the possibility 
of underlying organic disease, such as hypothyroidism or celiac disease 
(see Table 19.5). Abdominal examination is usually benign; there may 
be some mild tenderness in the left lower quadrant on palpation of a 
segment of bowel that is full of stool. Stool may be palpable through the 
abdominal wall in the sigmoid and descending colon. On occasion, a 
large, firm fecal mass extends from the symphysis pubis to the umbili­
cus, which may mimic findings of an abdominal malignancy.
The spine and sacral area should be examined closely. A tuft of hair, 
a dimple, or a palpable defect or mass in this area should prompt con­
sideration of spina bifida occulta or a tethered spinal cord. Sensory 
and motor function should be assessed. A normal anal wink, as elicited 
by gentle stroking of the perianal skin with a sharp object, such as a 
wooden tongue blade or the corner of a small package of lubricant, 
gives evidence of intact lumbosacral innervation. A normal cremas­
teric reflex in males also gives evidence of intact lumbosacral innerva­
tion. The cremaster muscle, innervated by the genitofemoral nerve of 
the lumbar plexus, typically contracts when the observer brushes a fin­
ger along the upper surface of the inner thigh, resulting in withdrawal 
superiorly of the ipsilateral testis.
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5
Type 6
Type 7
Separate hard lumps, like nuts,
hard to pass
Sausage-shaped but lumpy
Like a sausage but with cracks
on its surface
Like a sausage or snake, smooth
and soft
Soft blobs with clear-cut edges,
passed easily
Fluffy pieces with ragged edges, a
mushy stool
Watery, no solid pieces,
entirely liquid
Fig. 19.1  The Bristol stool chart allows for qualitative comparisons of 
stool consistency in the setting of both constipation and diarrhea.
TABLE 19.5  Historical and Physical Findings Suggestive of Organic Etiologies of Constipation
Symptoms or History
Physical Findings
Acute Signs
Delayed passage of meconium (after 48 hr of life)
Fever, vomiting, or diarrhea
Rectal bleeding (unless attributable to an anal fissure)
Severe abdominal distension
Bilious emesis
Chronic Signs
Constipation present from birth or early infancy
Ribbon stools (very narrow in diameter)
Urinary incontinence or bladder disease
Weight loss or poor weight gain
Delayed growth (e.g., decreasing height percentiles)
Extraintestinal symptoms (especially neurologic deficits)
Congenital anomalies or syndrome associated with Hirschsprung disease (e.g., 
Down syndrome, congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, neuroblastoma)
Family history of Hirschsprung disease
Severe abdominal distension
Pelvic mass (e.g., sacral teratoma)
Lumbosacral dimple, hair tuft or lipoma, or deviation of the gluteal cleft
Anal scars
Anteriorly displaced anus
Patulous anus (i.e., low resting sphincter tone)
Perianal fistula
High anal canal tone with empty rectum
Explosive expulsion of stool after digital examination of the rectum
Absent anal wink
Absent cremasteric reflex
Decreased lower extremity tone or strength
Abnormal lower extremity deep tendon reflex: absence of delay in relaxation 
phase
Abnormal thyroid gland
Extreme fear during the anal inspection
Modified from Tabbers MM, DiLorenzo C, Berger MY, et al. Evaluation and treatment of functional constipation in infants and children: evi­
dence-based recommendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58(2):258.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
344
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
The perianal area should be examined for evidence of fissures sug­
gestive of the passage of large, hard stools. The examination is facil­
itated if an assistant gently spreads the patient’s buttocks apart while 
the examiner illuminates the area. Soiling in the undergarments may 
indicate fecal impaction with overflow incontinence. The location of 
the anus in relation to the other perineal structures should be deter­
mined to assess for anatomic or structural anomalies, such as anterior 
displacement of the anus (Fig. 19.2). The anus is typically situated in 
the center of the slightly hyperpigmented skin surrounding the anal 
sphincter. An anteriorly displaced anus is indicated by an abnormal 
anal position index (API), which is defined as the ratio of the distance 
between the anus and the posterior aspect of the genitals (the four­
chette in females and scrotum in males) to the distance between the 
coccyx and the posterior genitals (Fig. 19.3). Measurements may be 
obtained using calipers or by placing clear plastic tape adjacent to the 
landmarks and marking with a pen, and then subsequently measuring 
the distance on the tape. The normal API for females is 0.45 ± 0.15, and 
for males it is 0.54 ± 0.14.
Digital examination is indicated in the evaluation of infantile con­
stipation, if the cause or degree of constipation is unclear, or if there 
are signs of organic disease. The examiner should note the patency 
and tone of the anus. High tone and an empty rectal vault may sug­
gest Hirschsprung disease. If the aganglionic segment is short enough, 
withdrawal of the finger might result in an explosive release of stool as 
the finger acts as a dilator to reach the dilated, ganglion-containing seg­
ment. Conversely, a dilated rectal vault with a large stool impaction is 
more suggestive of functional constipation with withholding behavior. 
In a cooperative patient, the examiner can ask the patient to bear down 
against their finger as if attempting to push out stool, which should 
result in relaxation of the anal canal. Patients who have paradoxical 
contraction of their anal canal upon this request may have functional 
dyssynergia, a condition in which the patient’s pelvic floor fails to relax 
upon attempted defecation.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Routine laboratory evaluation is usually not helpful in the evaluation of 
constipation, though is indicated if an organic etiology is suspected on 
the basis of the history or physical examination. Endocrinologic distur­
bances, such as hypothyroidism, can be associated with constipation. 
If celiac disease (see Chapter 14) is a consideration, serum anti–tis­
sue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibody levels should 
be assessed. A total IgA level should be performed concomitantly to 
exclude IgA deficiency confounding interpretation. If the patient does 
have IgA deficiency, anti–tissue transglutaminase IgG levels or esoph­
agogastroduodenoscopy with duodenal biopsies can be performed.
Plain films of the abdomen are rarely necessary, although if 
obtained may demonstrate stool in the large bowel. While this infor­
mation is occasionally useful in the case of a child with complaints of 
diarrhea whose symptoms are due to fecal impaction and overflow of 
liquid stools, a digital rectal exam similarly can supply the information 
needed. In addition, there is poor correlation between stool burden 
on abdominal radiography and symptoms of constipation. However, 
abdominal radiography may be a useful initial study in the evaluation 
of suspected obstruction or pseudoobstruction, identifying possible 
transition zones and/or air-fluid levels. Suspected Hirschsprung dis­
ease is evaluated radiographically via a liquid contrast enema in chil­
dren over 1 month of age in whom a transition zone is expected to have 
developed; in neonates, rectal suction biopsy is the test of choice (Fig. 
19.4). A contrast study in neonates may be useful to detect a meconium 
plug, microcolon, meconium ileus, or congenital anomalies (ileal atre­
sia, colonic duplication).
Neurologic symptoms, lower extremity or midline defects of the 
lower back or gluteal cleft, or examination findings suggestive of occult 
spinal dysraphism or tethered cord should be investigated with MRI 
of the spine and/or brain. MRI can be used if a disorder involving the 
lumbosacral spine is abnormal. Children with lower extremity and 
midline defects involving the lower back or gluteal cleft should have 
this imaging considered. Concerns for intestinal dysmotility may be 
evaluated with a colonic transit study, in which the patient swallows 
either a capsule of radiopaque circular markers once on day 1 or dif­
ferent-shaped markers on 3 consecutive days and undergoes serial 
abdominal radiographs to determine the distribution of the markers. 
After 3 days and by some protocols again after 7 days, any markers 
that have not yet been evacuated in the stool should be located in the 
rectum. The presence of markers more proximally in the gastrointesti­
nal tract suggests enteric nervous system or neuromuscular pathology 
(e.g., pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction).
A rectal motility evaluation may be helpful in the diagnosis and 
management of chronic constipation. Anorectal manometry can be 
used to evaluate the integrity of the muscles and the innervation of the 
defecatory mechanism. Determining the sensory threshold provides 
valuable diagnostic information: patients who cannot detect a balloon 
filled with 120 mL of air usually have encopresis. Hirschsprung disease 
is unlikely if reflexive relaxation of the internal anal sphincter occurs in 
the presence of rectal distention. Manometry and electromyography 
document the paradoxical contraction of the external anal sphincter 
on attempted defecation seen in functional dyssynergia. Anorectal 
manometry can also be used as a therapeutic modality in biofeedback 
therapy in patients with constipation and encopresis and in patients 
with paradoxical external anal sphincter contraction. Total colonic 
A
B
C
Internal
sphincter
Internal
sphincter
External
sphincter
External
sphincter
External
sphincter
Internal
sphincter
Fig. 19.2  A, Anterior ectopic anus. B, Normal anal anatomy. C, Anterior anal displacement.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
345
CHAPTER 19  Constipation
Fourchette-
coccygeal
distance
Fourchette-
anal distance
Scroto-
coccygeal
distance
Scroto-
anal distance
Fig. 19.3  Measuring the anal position index (API) in females and males. The API is defined as the ratio of 
the distance between the anus and the posterior aspect of the genitals (the fourchette in females and scro­
tum in males) to the distance between the coccyx and the posterior genitals. (From Alemrajabi M, Moradi 
M, Jahangiri F, et al. Anal position index; can it predict pelvic organ disorders in adults? J Coloproctol. 
2019;39[3]:237–241.)
Presence
of ganglion cells
and normal AChE activity,
but absence of recto-
sphincteric reflex
on anorectal
manometry
Presence
of ganglion cells
and normal AChE activity,
but therapy-resistant
constipation or
functional bowel
obstruction
Submucosal
hyperganglionosis
with giant ganglia,
ectopic ganglion cells,
and increased
AChE activity
Rectal suction biopsy
stained with AChE
Internal
anal sphincter
achalasia
Intestinal ganglio-
neuromatosis
Immature ganglia
AChE
staining
NADPH-d
staining
AChE and
NADPH-d
staining
Silver
staining
Transmission
electron
microscopy
Isolated
hypoganglionosis
Absence of the
argyrophil plexus
Megacystis
microcolon
intestinal
hypoperistalsis
syndrome
Full-thickness
rectal biopsy
Intestinal neuronal
dysplasia type B
Hirschsprung
disease
Absence
of ganglion cells
and increased
AChE activity
Fig. 19.4  Diagnostic algorithm for investigating chronic constipation and functional bowel obstruction in new­
born infants and young children. AChE, acetylcholinesterase; NADPH-d, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate diaphorase.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
346
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
motility is performed by placing a catheter in the colon to monitor 
pressures from the rectum to the cecum. Motility tracings reveal infor­
mation about the function of the colon that is useful in diagnosis and 
treatment, particularly if surgical options need to be explored.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The algorithmic approach to evaluating delayed passage of meconium 
in neonates is presented in Figure 19.4. An algorithmic approach to 
evaluating pediatric constipation is presented in Figure 19.5.
Hirschsprung Disease
Congenital aganglionic megacolon, or Hirschsprung disease, is a com­
mon cause of neonatal intestinal obstruction, occurring in approxi­
mately 1:5,000 to 1:15,000 live births, with a male-to-female ratio of 
about 4:1. The disease is rare in premature births, may be familial, and 
is associated with trisomy 21, Waardenburg syndrome, multiple endo­
crine neoplasia type 2A syndrome, congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome, and piebaldism. The absence of ganglion cells in both the 
Meissner (submucosal) plexus and the Auerbach (myenteric) plexus 
results in an inability of the involved segment of bowel to relax in 
response to distention from the presence of stool. In the newborn, pas­
sage of meconium is often delayed beyond 48 hours after birth. Most 
affected patients are diagnosed during infancy: 50% are diagnosed 
in the first months of life, 75% by 3 months, and 80% by the end of 
the first year. Diagnosis may be delayed into childhood and, in rare 
cases, into adolescence or even adulthood in some patients with ultra­
short-segment disease. These patients complain of constipation; mani­
festations usually start in infancy. Differentiating Hirschsprung disease 
from functional constipation may be challenging in older patients or 
in those with short-segment disease (Table 19.6). Conditions that may 
mimic Hirschsprung disease include other abnormalities of intestinal 
innervation such as chronic pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction and 
hyperganglionosis (see Table 19.1 and Fig. 19.4).
The lesion begins at the internal anal sphincter and extends contin­
uously into the rectum or the rectosigmoid colon in up to 80% of cases. 
In 10% of cases, there is total colonic aganglionosis; in another 10%, 
there is variable involvement of the small intestine in addition to total 
colonic disease. Delayed passage of meconium is the most common 
manifestation in the neonate, followed by lower intestinal obstruc­
tion (distention, bile-stained emesis), obstipation (no stools), failure 
to thrive, or, in rare cases, intestinal perforation. Meconium plug syn­
drome, in which a thick, inspissated cast of meconium obstructs the 
colonic lumen, may be an initial presentation. In addition, if stool 
is passed immediately after a rectal examination is performed in an 
obstipated or constipated patient, Hirschsprung disease should be 
suspected.
A plain abdominal film occasionally reveals distention of the nor­
mally innervated bowel proximal to the affected segment. The most 
useful radiographic test, though, is a liquid contrast enema, which 
may demonstrate a small-caliber rectum with a transition in the rec­
tosigmoid to the dilated, obstructed, normal proximal colon. Patients 
undergoing contrast enema should not undergo preparatory bowel 
evacuation procedures, which decrease test specificity, particularly 
in short-segment disease. A delayed lateral radiograph performed 24 
hours after the contrast enema aids in identifying a transition zone in 
the sigmoid colon.
Anorectal manometry is a valuable diagnostic procedure if radio­
graphic procedures are unrevealing. Normal internal anal sphincter 
relaxation with transient rectal distention rules out Hirschsprung dis­
ease. Paradoxical contraction of the internal anal sphincter suggests 
an absence of ganglion cells and is most common in Hirschsprung 
disease, though absence of relaxation has also been noted in prema­
ture infants, in neonates with infection or sepsis, and in thyroid aplasia; 
normal function is seen after appropriate therapy for these conditions. 
The sensitivity and specificity of anorectal manometry vary somewhat 
by age (children vs infants vs neonates), with a sensitivity that ranges 
from 0.79 to 0.90, a specificity ranging from 0.97 to 1.00, and a positive 
predictive value of 0.94–1.00.
A definitive diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease requires histologic 
confirmation of the absence of ganglion cells; such confirmation may 
be accomplished by a simple submucosal suction biopsy, which may 
be performed in the physician’s office. Suction biopsy excludes the 
diagnosis if ganglion cells are present. However, there may be a 10% 
false-negative rate. A full-thickness rectal biopsy procedure is reserved 
for infants with bowel obstruction and for older children with abnor­
mal rectal motilities and inconclusive suction biopsies.
Complications of undiagnosed Hirschsprung disease include acute 
toxic megacolon or infectious enterocolitis, most frequently caused by 
Staphylococcus aureus or Clostridioides difficile. Therapy for these com­
plications includes correcting electrolyte abnormalities (oftentimes 
hypokalemia), broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics, bowel rest, rec­
tal tube placement, and, if needed, emergency cecostomy or colectomy. 
Treatment for Hirschsprung disease is surgical resection of the affected 
segment of bowel and various strategies for an ileal or colonic rectal 
pull-through procedure.
Pediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction
Chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction is characterized by symptoms of 
intestinal obstruction without an identifiable lumen-occluding lesion. 
Pediatric-onset disease differs from adult-onset disease in etiology, 
symptom onset, phenotypic features, and natural history, and is consid­
ered a distinct entity termed pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction 
(PIPO) (Table 19.7). A variety of primary and secondary etiologies can 
produce the underlying pathophysiology of PIPO, which may consist 
of an intestinal neuropathy, an intestinal smooth muscle myopathy, 
an intestinal mesenchymopathy in which there is dysfunction of the 
interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), or a combination of these mechanisms 
(Table 19.8).
Symptoms vary according to the pathophysiology and the extent to 
which the gastrointestinal tract and other organ systems are involved, 
though most affected patients experience abdominal distention, vomit­
ing, and constipation. The majority present during the neonatal period; 
at onset these symptoms may be nonspecific and mimic colic, feeding 
intolerance, or other more routine causes of neonatal constipation; up 
to 80% of patients will present by 1 year of age. The abdominal dis­
tention, vomiting, and constipation may be episodic or exacerbated 
by intercurrent illnesses, surgical procedures, psychologic stressors, or 
enteral feeds. Over time, intestinal stasis may result in small intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth with resultant worsening abdominal distention 
and pain, and malabsorption; malnutrition may produce additional 
manifestations, including growth failure and the sequelae of micronu­
trient deficiencies. Certain etiologies are more likely to have associated 
features that may suggest PIPO as the underlying cause of abdomi­
nal symptoms; patients with an underlying intestinal smooth muscle 
myopathy are more likely to have bladder involvement. Earlier onset 
(<1 year)–associated intestinal malrotation, enteral feeding intoler­
ance, and parenteral nutrition dependence are additional predictors of 
poor outcome; mortality risk is approximately 20%.
Congenital PIPO may be sporadic or inherited; manifestations 
differ according to the underlying genetic abnormality (Table 19.9), 
though variable expressivity and penetrance have been noted within 
families with the same genetic abnormality as well. One congenital 
form, megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome, 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
347
CHAPTER 19  Constipation
can be suspected antenatally via the demonstration of an enlarged 
bladder and/or an abnormally narrow colon on fetal ultrasound, with 
gastrointestinal symptoms developing shortly after birth. The blad­
der remains enlarged and difficult to empty, contributing to abdom­
inal distension and often requiring catheterization. Mitochondrial 
neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE) is characterized 
by ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, peripheral neuropathy, and white mat­
ter abnormalities, in addition to pseudoobstruction. Other genetic 
forms have characteristic phenotypic features that suggest the specific 
diagnosis (see Table 19.9) and the potential need for either targeted 
Present since birth or infancy?
Normal exam?
No
No
CONSTIPATION
Normal exam?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Anal stenosis
Anal displacement
Ectopic anus
Spina bifida,
  etc.
Abnormal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
Manometry
Labs
Labs
Constipation
management
Appropriate therapy
for specific lesion,
then constipation
management as
needed
Hypothyroidism
Hypercalcemia
Lead intoxication
Diabetes
Infectious
Hypopituitarism,
  etc.
Constipation
management
Constipation
management
Paradoxical internal
anal sphincter
contraction
Rectal suction
biopsy
Ganglion cells
present
Ganglion cells
absent
Constipation
management
Liquid contrast enema
Transitional
zone identified
Full-thickness
rectal biopsy at
time of surgery
for Hirschsprung
disease
Normal
?Short-segment
Hirschsprung
disease
Full-thickness rectal biopsy
Ganglion cells
present
Surgery for
Hirschsprung
disease
Ganglion cells
absent
Appropriate therapy
for underlying condition,
then constipation
management as needed
Fig. 19.5  Algorithmic approach to the diagnosis of constipation.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
348
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
pseudoobstruction gene panel testing or genome or exome sequenc­
ing with copy number variant analysis. Secondary causes of PIPO are 
diverse, though can be categorized according to pathophysiology or 
associated disease (see Table 19.8).
The diagnosis should be suspected in patients presenting with symp­
toms of obstruction in whom anatomic luminal obstruction and malro­
tation have been excluded. Abdominal radiography may show dilated 
loops of bowel or multiple air-fluid levels. Luminal contrast studies can 
help exclude malrotation or obstruction; water-soluble contrast is pre­
ferred, as retained barium in the setting of delayed intestinal transit 
may form a bezoar. CT or MRI may be considered in patients unable to 
tolerate enteral contrast or in instances where extraluminal pathology 
is being considered as well. Laboratory evaluation should be directed 
at excluding secondary causes (see Table 19.8), particularly since ther­
apy for those diseases that are amenable to treatment may reverse the 
symptoms of PIPO; the evaluation should include a CBC, comprehen­
sive metabolic profile, inflammatory markers, and thyroid and cortisol 
studies. If history of phenotypic features is suggestive, then additional 
studies may include hemoglobin-A1c; anti–tissue transglutaminase 
IgA and total IgA; antinuclear antibody; anti-double-stranded DNA; 
anti-Scl-70 antibodies; aldolase and creatine phosphokinase; urine 
catecholamines; anti-Hu and type 1 anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies; 
urinary porphyrins; serology for Chagas disease, Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), JC virus, herpes simplex virus (HSV), 
and rotavirus; thymidine phosphorylase activity; serum lactic acid; and 
toxicology screens as indicated based on exposure history.
Manometry can identify the extent of gastrointestinal tract involve­
ment and help distinguish between myopathic and neuropathic etiol­
ogies; it may be challenging if disease is more restricted to the small 
intestine. Normal manometry and the absence of dilated bowel loops 
on plain radiography suggest alternate diagnoses. Histologic studies 
can provide more conclusive evidence of pathophysiology and guide 
prognostication and therapy. Full-thickness biopsies of the gastric 
antrum, small intestine, and colon should be obtained. Laparoscopic 
techniques decrease the risk of adhesions, disease exacerbation, or 
other complications. Neuropathic disease is characterized by loss or 
inflammatory infiltration of neurons, myopathic disease by smooth 
muscle atrophy and fibrosis, and mesenchymopathic disease by 
reduced, absent, or disrupted ICC networks, whereas mixed disease 
will demonstrate features of all three mechanisms.
Treatment is directed at correcting any underlying conditions 
resulting in secondary PIPO and at optimizing nutrition and qual­
ity of life while minimizing intraabdominal interventions that can 
exacerbate symptoms or result in adhesions, infection, or other com­
plications. Some patients may tolerate eating orally with the use of pro­
motility agents. Others with disease affecting primarily the proximal 
gastrointestinal tract may be able to tolerate gastric or jejunal feeds 
via enteral feeding tubes. Most patients will be unable to meet their 
nutritional requirements via enteral feeds alone and often require some 
degree of parenteral nutrition support. In these patients, central line 
complications or infections can be an additional source of morbidity 
or mortality.
Anterior Anal Displacement
There are two forms of displacement of the anus (see Fig. 19.2). In 
anterior ectopic anus, the anal canal and the internal anal sphincter 
are displaced anteriorly in the perineum as a unit and are separated 
from the external anal sphincter, which remains posterior in its usual 
position. On physical examination, it may be possible to elicit an exter­
nal sphincter anal wink in the usual location, posterior to the opening 
of the anal canal. Rectal examination often reveals a sharp posterior 
angulation in the anal canal. In anterior anal displacement, the entire 
normal anal unit is located in the anterior perineum. Both entities are 
found more commonly in females. Symptoms of constipation often 
begin in the neonatal period and are related to the difficulty in expel­
ling stool through a canal that is angled anteriorly. If the displacement 
is severe enough to cause symptoms, surgical correction may be neces­
sary to relocate the anus and relieve the obstruction.
Anal Stenosis
The diagnosis of anal stenosis may be delayed beyond the neonatal 
period, especially if the degree of stenosis is not severe. Any portion 
of the anal canal or the entire canal may be involved. The diagnosis 
can be made by digital examination or by endoscopy. Constipation is 
caused by fecal retention secondary to outlet obstruction. Treatment is 
by dilatation or anorectal myectomy.
Imperforate Anus
Imperforate anus is usually diagnosed in the neonatal nursery. Passage 
of meconium is delayed or is noted to take place through an abnormal 
TABLE 19.6  Distinguishing Hirschsprung 
Disease from Functional (Acquired) 
Constipation
Functional 
Constipation
Hirschsprung 
Disease*
History
Gender of patient
Male
Male
Onset of constipation
After 2 yr of age
At birth
Prevalence
1–3% of males
1:5,000–1:15,000
Encopresis
Common
Very rare
Forced bowel training
Usual
None
Stool size
Very large
Small, ribbon-like
Enterocolitis
None
Possible
Abdominal pain
Common
Rare except with obstruc­
tion, toxic megacolon, 
or enterocolitis
Failure to thrive
Uncommon
Common
Examination
Abdominal distention
Variable
Common
Poor growth
Rare
Common
Anal tone
Patulous
Tight
Rectal examination
Stool in ampulla
Ampulla empty
Malnutrition
Absent
Possible
Laboratory
Contrast enema
Massive amounts of 
stool, no transition 
zone
Transition zone, delayed 
evacuation (>24 hr)
Rectal biopsy
Normal
No ganglion cells; ↑ 
acetylcholinesterase 
staining
Anorectal manometry
Distention of the 
rectum causes 
relaxation of the 
internal sphincter
No sphincter relaxation
*Note that ultrashort-segment Hirschsprung disease may have clinical 
features of functional (acquired) megacolon (e.g., constipation).
Modified from Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 16th 
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:1140.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 19.7  Common and Distinctive Features of Pediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction
Etiology
Majority of cases appear to be congenital (up to 80%) and primary; secondary forms rare (<10%)
Disease subtype
Neuropathies more common (∼70%) with myopathic forms seen in ∼30%
Symptom onset
In utero, from birth, or early infancy (65–80% of patients by 12 mo of age)
Clinical features
 • Recurrent or continuous episodes of intestinal pseudoobstruction with symptoms present from birth/early life
 • Pain infrequently seen (approximately 30%)
 • Urologic involvement common (36–100%)
 • Intestinal malrotation in about 30% of cases
 • High risk of colonic and small bowel volvulus
Natural history
 • Poor outcome predicted by myopathic forms of PIPO; urinary involvement; concurrent intestinal malrotation; and inability to tolerate 
enteral feeds
 • Risk of mortality in approximately 20% of cases
Diagnostic approach
 • Diagnosis relies on clinical picture and radiology together with specialized tests (e.g., intestinal manometry, histopathology)
 • Dilated bowel loops with fluid levels commonly absent (∼40%) in patients presenting in the neonatal period
 • Histopathology yield high and used to inform management, for example, use of parenteral nutrition in intestinal myopathies and 
prokinetics in intestinal neuropathies
 • Apart from specific indications little yield from investigating for secondary PIPO
 • Need to differentiate from feeding problems and fabricated or induced illness
Nutritional therapy
Significant (∼80%) require parenteral nutrition to maintain normal growth and development; specialized feeds (e.g., hydrolyzed protein 
feeds) and feeding routes (e.g., jejunal) used to promote enteral feed tolerance
Pharmacologic therapy
Minimal evidence from well-designed trials; most medication use is based on anecdotal evidence, case reports, or adult literature
Surgical therapy
Venting ostomies very commonly used to decompress and reduce pseudoobstructive events; surgery as a “bridge” to transplantation may 
be indicated in highly elected cases
PIPO, pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction.
From Mousa H, Hyman PE, Cocjin J, et al. Long-term outcome of congenital intestinal pseudoobstruction. Dig Dis Sci. 2002;47:2298–2305; 
Faure C, Goulet O, Ategbo S, et al. Chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction syndrome: clinical analysis, outcome, and prognosis in 105 children. 
French-Speaking Group of Pediatric Gastroenterology. Dig Dis Sci. 1999;44:953–959; Hanks JB, Meyers WC, Andersen DK, et al. Chronic primary 
intestinal pseudo-obstruction. Surgery. 1981;89:175–182; Mann SD, Debinski HS, Kamm MA. Clinical characteristics of chronic idiopathic intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction in adults. Gut. 1997;41:675–681; Pitt HA, Mann LL, Berquist WE, et al. Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. Management 
with total parenteral nutrition and a venting enterostomy. Arch Surg. 1985;120:614–618; Stanghellini V, Camilleri M, Malagelada JR. Chronic idio­
pathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction: clinical and intestinal manometric findings. Gut. 1987;28:5–12; Stanghellini V, Cogliandro RF, De Giorgio R, 
et al. Natural history of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in adults: a single center study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;3:449–458; 
Vargas JH, Sachs P, Ament ME. Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction syndrome in pediatrics. Results of a national survey by members of the 
North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1988;7:323–332; Howard L, Ashley C. Manage­
ment of complications in patients receiving home parenteral nutrition. Gastroenterology. 2003;124:1651–1661.
TABLE 19.8  Classification of Pediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction (PIPO)
Primary PIPO
 • Sporadic or familial forms of myopathy and/or neuropathy and/or mesenchymopathy (abnormal ICC development) that relate to disordered development, degener­
ation, or inflammation. Inflammatory (including autoimmune) conditions include lymphocytic and eosinophilic ganglionitis and/or leiomyositis
 • Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) and other mitochondrial diseases
 • Neuropathy associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B
 • Hirschsprung disease (e.g., total intestinal aganglionosis)*
Secondary PIPO
 • Conditions affecting GI smooth muscle:
 • Rheumatologic conditions (dermatomyositis/polymyositis, scleroderma, systematic lupus erythematosus, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
 • Other (Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, amyloidosis, ceroidosis/brown bowel syndrome)
 • Pathologies affecting the enteric nervous system (familial dysautonomia; primary dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system; neurofibromatosis; diabetic 
neuropathy; fetal alcohol syndrome; postviral-related inflammatory neuropathy, e.g., cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella zoster virus, JC virus)
 • Endocrinologic disorders (hypothyroidism, diabetes, hypoparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma)
 • Metabolic conditions (uremia, porphyria, electrolyte imbalances, e.g., potassium, magnesium, calcium)
 • Gastroschisis
 • Neuropathy following neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
 • Other (celiac disease; eosinophilic gastroenteritis; Crohn disease; radiation injury; Chagas disease; Kawasaki disease; angioedema; drugs, e.g., opioids, anthraqui­
none laxatives, calcium channel blockers, antidepressants; antineoplastic agents, e.g., vinca alkaloids; paraneoplastic CIPO; major trauma/surgery; chromosome 
abnormalities)
Idiopathic (i.e., where forms of primary or secondary PIPO classified as above do not, as yet, have a defined etiopathogenesis)
CIPO, chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction; GI, gastrointestinal.
*Needs to be excluded in all cases of PIPO.
From Thapar N, Saliakellis E, Benninga MA, et al. Paediatric intestinal pseudo-obstruction: evidence and consensus-based recommendations from 
an ESPGHAN-led expert group. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66(6):991–1019 (Table 3, p. 999).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
350
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 19.9  Primary Disorders Associated with Chronic Intestinal Pseudoobstruction and 
Identified Genes
Gene
Syndrome
Function
Inheritance
Phenotype
Age of onset
SOX10
Type IV Waardenburg 
syndrome
Encodes a transcription 
factor essential for the 
development of enteric 
neurons
Autosomal 
dominant
Peripheral neuropathy with 
hypomyelination, sensorineural 
deafness, and pseudoobstruc­
tion
Neonatal period
POLG (DNA-polymerase 
gamma)
Congenital myopathy 
and gastrointestinal 
pseudoobstruction
Encodes for the catalytic 
subunit of the mitochon­
drial DNA
Autosomal 
recessive
Associated with mitochondrial 
depletion and deletions. Severe 
hypotonia and generalized 
muscle weakness, severe 
abdominal distension, and 
hypoactive bowel
Neonatal period
FLNA (filamin A)
Chronic idiopathic intes­
tinal pseudoobstruction 
(CIIPX)
Encodes large cytoskele­
tal proteins
X-linked recessive Abnormal filamin A leads to 
cytoskeletal abnormalities and 
potentially disrupts entericneu­
ron structure and function. 
Seizures and progressive 
abdominal distension and 
obstruction
Neonatal period
L1CAM (L1 cell adhe­
sion molecule)
Hydrocephalus with ste­
nosis of the aqueduct 
of Sylvius (HSAS) and 
congenital idiopathic 
intestinal pseudoob­
struction
Encodes a transmem­
brane glycoprotein 
involved in neurite 
outgrowth and neuronal 
migration
Autosomal 
recessive
Defect in the differentiation of the 
interstitial cells of Cajal leading 
to progressive distension 
and intermittent episodes of 
obstruction
Neonatal period
ACTG2 (enteric smooth 
muscle actin–gamma 
2)
Familial visceral 
myopathy; megacys­
tis–microcolon–intes­
tinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome
Encodes enteric smooth 
muscle actin
Autosomal domi­
nant, sporadic
Altered ACTG2 protein in the 
muscularis propria leads to 
impaired contractility
Neonatal to third decade 
in life
MYH11 (myosin heavy 
chain 11)
Megacystis–microcolon–
intestinal hypoperistal­
sis syndrome
Encodes myosin light 
chain
Autosomal 
recessive
Abnormal MYH11 in smooth mus­
cle myosin leads to impaired 
contractility
Neonatal to third decade 
in life
MYLK (myosin light 
chain kinase)
Megacystis–microcolon–
intestinal hypoperistal­
sis syndrome
Encodes a kinase required 
for myosin activation 
and subsequent 
interaction with actin 
filaments
Autosomal 
recessive
Abnormal MYLK leads to impaired 
smooth muscle cell contraction
Neonatal to third decade 
in life
LMOD1 (leiomodin 1)
Megacystis–microcolon–
intestinal hypoperistal­
sis syndrome
Encodes visceral smooth 
muscle cells
Sporadic
Abnormal LMOD1 leads to 
impaired intestinal smooth 
muscle contractility
Neonatal to third decade 
in life
MYL9 (myosin regula­
tory light chain 9)
Megacystis–microcolon–
intestinal hypoperistal­
sis syndrome
Encodes a regulatory 
myosin light chain
Autosomal 
recessive
Abnormal MYL9 leads to impaired 
intestinal smooth muscle 
contractility
Neonatal to third decade 
in life
RET proto-oncogene 
(receptor tyrosine 
kinase)
MEN2B
Expressed in the neural 
crest cells of the enteric 
ganglia and encodes a 
member of the receptor 
tyrosine kinase family 
of transmembrane 
receptors
Autosomal 
dominant
Gain-of-function variant associ­
ated with intestinal ganglioneu­
romas leading to increased cell 
number in the myenteric plexus 
and dysmotility
Infancy to third decade 
of life
TYMP (thymidine 
phosphorylase)
Mitochondrial neurogas­
trointestinal encephalo­
myopathy (MNGIE)
A nucleoside that main­
tains adequate thymi­
dine in mitochondria
Autosomal 
recessive
Accumulation of thymidine in 
mitochondrial DNA leads to 
impaired function. Multisystem 
mitochondrial disease with 
progressive gastrointestinal 
dysmotility
Infancy to third decade 
of life
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
351
CHAPTER 19  Constipation
location as a result of the presence of a fistula (e.g., rectovaginal, rec­
tovesicular, or rectoperineal). Treatment is surgical; the actual proce­
dure depends on the level and the extent of the defect.
Spina Bifida and Spina Bifida Occulta
Defecation disturbances, most frequently constipation, are common 
in patients with spina bifida and spina bifida occulta, especially if the 
defect involves the lumbosacral spine. The spinal and nerve root defects 
result in poor functioning of the terminal bowel. Voluntary external 
sphincter control and rectoanal sensation are most often diminished 
or absent, and the degree of difficulty with defecation is related to the 
degree and the extent of the injury.
Most patients can achieve an acceptable level of continence via an 
individualized bowel regimen. Dietary fiber, stool softeners, supposi­
tories, and enema continence catheters are treatment options. Biofeed­
back and pudendal nerve stimulation are successful in some patients. 
In most patients, a combination of treatment modalities allows social 
continence to be achieved and dramatically improves the patient’s 
quality of life. Treatment of patients with spinal or nerve injury, or dys­
function from other causes, is similar.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
The appropriate laboratory tests should be performed to rule out the 
various metabolic and endocrinologic conditions that may manifest 
with constipation (see Table 19.1). Frequent among these conditions is 
hypothyroidism, though hypothyroidism manifesting solely with neo­
natal constipation is rare. Rather, it should be suspected in any infant 
presenting with constipation, a history of prolonged neonatal jaundice, 
and other suggestive findings, such as poor feeding or an enlarged fon­
tanelle size.
Neurologic Disease
Children with neurologic disease may have constipation for many rea­
sons, including poor intestinal motility, lack of dietary fiber, and poor 
awareness of rectal vault distention with stool retention. Any illness 
affecting the spinal cord or sacral nerves, degenerative muscle diseases, 
cerebral palsy, and demyelinating diseases can result in constipation.
Medication-Related Constipation
A complete medication and environmental exposure history may 
reveal substances that can cause constipation (see Table 19.1).
ENCOPRESIS
Idiopathic or functional constipation is much more common than 
Hirschsprung disease. Long-standing constipation, including func­
tional constipation, leads to encopresis, the deposition of stools in the 
undergarments or other unorthodox locations that persists or occurs 
beyond the age that is considered culturally appropriate for achieving 
continence. In some cultures, delayed bowel training up to the age of 6 
years is normal. It is generally accepted in the United States that healthy 
children should be bowel trained by the age of 4 years.
Encopresis is related to the chronic withholding of stool. As the 
fecal mass accumulates, it causes rectal distention, increases rectal 
compliance, and eventually results in blunted or absent sensitivity of 
the rectum to the presence of liquid stool passing around a firm fecal 
mass. Children with encopresis usually pass small stools and do not 
completely empty the rectum. Periodically, they pass huge stools, 
which may block the toilet. It is important to specifically question the 
patient or parents regarding these massive stools because this informa­
tion is frequently not volunteered.
Encopresis has been incorrectly considered a symptom or mani­
festation of psychiatric illness. It was thought that the patient retained 
stools either consciously or subconsciously as a way to rebel against, 
please, or anger caretakers. Although encopresis may be seen in associ­
ation with emotional and behavioral problems, it is usually the result of 
painful defecation followed by a pattern of stool withholding, leading 
to chronic constipation, overflow encopresis, and possibly poor rela­
tions with peers as a result of fecal soiling. In the few patients in whom 
encopresis is truly a manifestation of psychiatric disease, there is often 
no stool retention, and the prognosis for fecal continence with therapy 
is poor.
Idiopathic constipation with or without encopresis may compress 
the bladder by a dilated rectum, thus causing stasis and urinary tract 
infections.
TABLE 19.9  Primary Disorders Associated with Chronic Intestinal Pseudoobstruction and 
Identified Genes—cont’d
Gene
Syndrome
Function
Inheritance
Phenotype
Age of onset
RAD21
Mungan syndrome
Part of a cohesion 
complex that controls 
pairing and unpairing 
in cell replication. 
Plays an important 
role in epithelial and 
neuronal survival and 
APOB regulation in the 
gastrointestinal tract
Autosomal 
recessive
Pseudoobstruction, megaduo­
denum, long-segment Barrett 
esophagus, and cardiac abnor­
malities
First to second decade 
of life
SGOL1
Chronic atrial and intesti­
nal dysrhythmia (CAID)
Component of the cohe­
sion pathway
Autosomal 
recessive
Accelerated cell cycle progression 
and enhanced activation of TGF-
β signaling leading to changes 
in both the enteric nervous 
system and smooth muscle
First to fourth decade 
of life
APOB, apolipoprotein B; MEN2B, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β.
From Gamboa HE, Sood M. Pediatric intestinal pseudo-obstruction in the era of genetic sequencing. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2019;21:70. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11894-019-0737-y
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
352
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Constipation is a common concern in infants and young children. A 
detailed history of bowel patterns identifies many children with nor­
mal bowel movements whose parents need reassurance. The majority 
of patients who do have constipation have functional constipation. 
The history should include a review of all medications and a search 
for an associated chronic disease, such as a metabolic or neurologic 
disease. This complete history, combined with a careful physical 
examination, including the spine and sacral area, the location of the 
anus, and a digital rectal examination, should alert the physician to 
the need for further evaluation. Red flags include onset in the neona­
tal period, growth failure, prolonged jaundice in the neonatal period, 
and symptoms of obstruction. Distinguishing features associated with 
Hirschsprung disease are listed in Table 19.6. Pediatric intestinal pseu­
doobstruction may initially present with nonspecific symptoms but has 
a significant risk of morbidity and mortality.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
352.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alemrajabi M, Moradi M, Jahangiri F, et al. Anal position index; can it 
predict pelvic organ disorders in adults? J Coloproctol. 2019;39(3):237–
241.
Alves MM, Sribudiani Y, Brouwer RWW, et al. Contribution of rare and 
common variants determine complex diseases—Hirschsprung disease as a 
model. Dev Biol. 2013;382:320–329.
Bennett Jr WE, Heuckeroth RO. Hypothyroidism is a rare cause of isolated 
constipation. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;54:285–287.
Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal 
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterol. 2016;150:1443–1455.
Croffie JM, Davis MM, Faught PR, et al. At what age is a suction rectal biopsy 
less likely to provide adequate tissue for identification of ganglion cells? J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2007;44:198–202.
Davari HA, Hosseinpour M. The anal position index: a simple method to 
define the normal position of the anus in the neonate. Acta Paediatr. 
2006;95:877.
Di Lorenzo C. Pediatric anorectal disorders. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 
2001;30:269.
Gamboa HE, Sood M. Pediatric intestinal pseudo-obstruction in the era of 
genetic sequencing. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2019;21(12):70.
Gidrewicz D, Potter K, Trevenen CL, et al. Evaluation of the ESPGHAN celiac 
guidelines in North American pediatric population. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2015;110:760–767.
Granada C, Loveless M, Justice T, et al. Tethered cord syndrome in the 
pediatric-adolescent gynecologic patient. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 
2015;28(5):309–312.
Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, Shulman RJ, Staiano A, van Tilburg M. 
Childhood functional gastrointestinal disorders: child/adolescent. Gastro­
enterol. 2016;150:1456–1468.
Khatib M, Baker RD, Ly EK, et al. The presenting pattern of pediatric celiac 
disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2016;62(1):60–63.
Lapointe SP, Rivet C, Goulet O, et al. Urological manifestations associated with 
chronic intestinal pseudo-obstructions in children. J Urol. 2002;168(4 Pt 
2):1768–1770.
Lembo AJ, Ullman SP. Constipation. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger 
MH, eds. Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. Phila­
delphia: WB Saunders; 2002:181–210.
Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, et al. Functional bowel disorders. 
Gastroenterology. 2006;130:1480–1491.
Lu PL, Mousa HM. Constipation: beyond the old paradigms. Gastroenterol 
Clin N Am. 2018;47(4):845–862.
Metaj M, Laroia N, Lawrence RA, et al. Comparison of breast- and formula-fed 
normal newborns in time to first stool and urine. J Perinatol. 2003;23:624–628.
Mohseni M, Kruse B. An unusual mimic of intermittent bowel obstruction. 
Am J Case Rep. 2019;20:1920–1922.
Proctor ML, Traubici J, Langer JC, et al. Correlations between radiographic 
transition zone and level of aganglionosis in Hirschsprung’s disease: impli­
cations for surgical approach. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:775–778.
Puri P, Gosemann JH, Nakamura H. Variants of Hirschsprung disease. Semin 
Pediatr Surg. 2012;21(4):310–318.
Tabbers MM, Boluyt N, Berger MY, et al. Clinical practice: diagnosis and 
treatment of functional constipation. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;170:955–963.
Tabbers MM, DiLorenzo C, Berger MY, et al. Evaluation and treatment of 
functional constipation in infants and children: evidence-based recom­
mendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 2014;58:258.
Tambucci R, Quitadamo P, Thapar N, et al. Diagnostic tests in pediatric 
constipation. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66:e89–e98.
van den Berg MM, Benninga MA, Di Lorenzo C. Epidemiology of childhood 
constipation: a systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101:2401–2409.
Wymer KM, Anderson BB, Wilkens AA, et al. Megacystis microcolon 
intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome: case series and updated review of 
the literature with an emphasis on urologic management. J Pediatr Surg. 
2016;51:1565–1573.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
