421
PREPUBERTAL VAGINAL BLEEDING
The source of abnormal vaginal bleeding during prepubertal child­
hood is much more likely to be the vulva or vagina rather than the 
uterus. There are unique characteristics making history and physical 
examination effective in narrowing the diagnostic possibilities as seen 
in Table 25.1. Collecting information regarding recent trauma, medica­
tion exposure, rashes or irritation of the external genitalia, abdominal 
pain, chronic cough, constipation, and malodorous discharge is essen­
tial in making a diagnosis efficiently. A sensitive assessment regarding 
the possibility of sexual assault should be made, and an age-­appropriate 
physical examination should be conducted noting the presence or 
absence of other pubertal signs, abnormalities of the vulva or urethra, 
vaginal discharge, and abdominal or vaginal masses.
Vaginal bleeding presenting within the first several days of life is 
most commonly due to estrogen withdrawal. Maternal estrogen enters 
fetal circulation stimulating proliferation of the endometrium. Exter­
nal genitalia examination typically reveals estrogenization, with thick­
ened vulvar mucosa and leukorrhea. Several days after delivery, serum 
estrogen levels fall significantly, leading to a reduction of blood sup­
ply to the endometrium, and the lining sheds as ischemia develops. If 
vaginal bleeding occurs within the first few days of life with a normal 
physical examination, a work-­up is not needed provided the bleeding 
spontaneously resolves.
The presence of a vaginal foreign body is another common cause of 
vaginal bleeding in early childhood. This bleeding is often described as 
persistent, light in quantity, brown colored, and malodorous. The phys­
ical examination is unremarkable other than the possible presence of a 
vaginal malodor. The most common foreign body found in the vagina 
is toilet paper, although many other solid objects have been reported. 
Depending on the age and cooperation of the patient, lateral and 
downward traction of the labia majora may allow direct visualization 
of the foreign body. Toilet paper can be retrieved in the office by gently 
irrigating the vagina with water using a small, flexible pediatric feeding 
tube. In cases where an optimal pelvic examination is not possible, a 
vaginoscopy under sedation should be performed. One technique is 
to place an 8 French Foley catheter in the vagina. A 5-­mm laparoscope 
is simultaneously placed in the vagina. Saline is then flushed into the 
vagina using the Foley catheter while the labia majora are manually 
held together. The vagina is then distended allowing for complete 
visualization of the vaginal cavity including the cervix and any foreign 
body present. Simply removing the foreign body will adequately treat 
the symptoms; no antibiotic therapy is needed. A vaginal foreign body 
should not automatically trigger a full sexual assault evaluation; this 
investigation should be conducted if there is indication by history, or if 
suspicious scarring of the posterior fourchette is noted.
Prepubertal vaginal infection may present with bleeding and dis­
charge. Unlike vaginal foreign body, the bleeding is typically red in 
color and not malodorous. Vaginal infection is also associated with 
complaints of external genital irritation. Mucosal erythema on phys­
ical examination is notable, particularly when the pathogen is group 
A β-­hemolytic streptococcus. The diagnosis is confirmed with culture 
of the vaginal canal. A specimen for culture can be collected using the 
gentle irrigation technique described previously if vaginal swab place­
ment is not possible. In addition to group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus, 
other pathogens that are commonly identified include Haemophilus 
influenzae, Escherichia coli, Shigella, and Salmonella species, with the 
latter two being particularly associated with vaginal bleeding. A recent 
history of an upper respiratory infection should raise suspicion of this 
diagnosis as the majority of vaginal infections arise from autoinocula­
tion. Notably, Candida infections of the vagina are uncommon in this 
population.
Vulvar dermatoses can also present with vaginal bleeding and 
significant irritation or pain of the external genitalia. In this case, the 
bleeding is minimal, often caused by trauma from scratching. While 
vulvar dermatosis in the prepubertal population is relatively uncom­
mon, atopic dermatitis, lichen sclerosus, and psoriasis are the most 
commonly described conditions (Figs. 25.1 and 25.2). Atopic dermatitis 
will only occur in regions in contact with the allergen. Suspicion for the 
latter two conditions should be raised if extragenital skin findings are 
noted, or if a positive family history is elicited. The typical appearance of 
lichen sclerosus is white parchment paper–like appearance in an hour­
glass distribution. Obliteration of the labia minora and clitoris can occur 
with long-­standing disease. Pinpoint bruising can also occur. While this 
is not the most common presentation, it is worth noting as it can be 
concerning for trauma. The treatment involves short courses of high-­
potency topical steroids and usually resolves as serum estrogen levels rise 
with maturation. Psoriasis typically appears as an erythematous plaque 
or papule marked by fissures, erosions, or scales. Treatment includes 
topical steroids, fluorinated ointments, emollients, and newer immuno­
modulators. In both cases, biopsy is needed to confirm the diagnosis; 
however, if clinical suspicion is high and symptoms are severe, empiric 
treatment prior to biopsy is reasonable. Other vulvar lesions that can 
produce bleeding include hemangiomas and genital warts.
Urethral prolapse is another cause of prepubertal vaginal bleeding 
associated with a classic physical examination finding (Fig. 25.3). It is 
seen more commonly in young females. The only complaint is bleed­
ing; there is no coexisting pain or irritation. The limited estrogen levels 
in childhood leave the urethra vulnerable to prolapse, especially in the 
setting of frequent Valsalva maneuvers from chronic cough or consti­
pation. On physical examination, the urethra appears prominent, ery­
thematous, and tubular “doughnut shaped,” protruding well beyond 
the urethral meatus. Topical estrogen therapy for 1–2 weeks is typically 
effective in resolving this condition. Rarely, urethral necrosis or uri­
nary retention can occur. In these cases, topical estradiol therapy may 
still be effective, but surgical resection may be needed for treatment.
Menstrual Problems and Vaginal Bleeding
Jessica Francis and Seema Menon
25
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
422
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
While the vast majority of lesions of the external genitalia causing 
prepubertal bleeding are benign, malignancy has been reported. Sar­
coma botryoides, a variant of rhabdomyosarcoma, is the most com­
mon vaginal tumor in childhood. The classic description of this tumor 
is a protruding vaginal mass with grapelike vesicles. Other malignant 
tumors of the lower genital tract that have been reported include mes­
enchymal tumors, neural ectodermal tumors in the Ewing family, 
and mixed müllerian tumors. Any abnormal-­appearing vaginal mass 
should raise concern for malignancy and should prompt a referral to 
an appropriate specialist for evaluation.
Bleeding secondary to a perineal injury presents acutely with pain 
and is associated with a clear provoking event unlike the other causes 
of childhood vaginal bleeding. Straddle injuries are the most common 
childhood injury to the genitalia and can lead to a bleeding laceration. 
This injury is caused by a nonpenetrating blunt force to the perineum 
when the legs are apart. Classic activities associated with straddle inju­
ries include bike riding, playing on a seesaw, and gymnastics. Water-­jet 
injuries related to falls during water sports can also be a mechanism for 
vaginal laceration and hemorrhage. An examination must be done to 
determine whether the laceration requires primary closure with suture. 
Conscious sedation or examination under anesthesia is appropriate for 
straddle injury evaluations as pain may prohibit a thorough evalua­
tion. If the history does not substantiate the injury, a sensitive interview 
should be conducted prior to the examination. Co-­examination with 
the sexual assault team is important should there be any suspicion.
Prepubertal vaginal bleeding presenting with breast development 
and growth acceleration should raise concern for precocious puberty 
(see Chapter 55). Conventional thinking defines pubertal changes 
before age 8 years as precocious. However, this is debated as hallmarks 
of puberty have been appearing earlier over the past century and differ 
by race in the United States. Important historical cues that are helpful 
in making a diagnosis include symptoms or known central nervous 
system (CNS) abnormalities, symptoms of hypothyroidism, family 
TABLE 25.1  Causes of Prepubertal Bleeding
Pain or Irritation
Associated Characteristics
Family History
Estrogen withdrawal
No
First week of life (neonates)
No
Foreign body
No
Malodorous
No
Vaginal infection
Yes
Recent upper respiratory infection
No
Vulvar dermatoses
Yes
Vulvar discoloration or lesion
Extragenital skin findings
Yes
Urethral prolapse
No
Chronic cough or constipation
Red, beefy, protuberant urethra
No
Straddle injury
Yes
Provoking injury
Visible laceration
No
Precocious puberty*
No
Cyclic pattern of bleeding
Secondary sexual characteristics present
Yes
Vaginal malignancy
Possible
Visible mass
No
Isolated functional ovarian cysts
No
None
No
*McCune-­Albright syndrome, central precocious puberty, juvenile granulosa cell tumor, severe hypothyroidism.
Fig. 25.1  Psoriasis: typical diaper involvement. (From Eichenfield LF, 
Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008, Fig. 15.12.)
Fig. 25.2  Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus. Whitening, atrophy, inflamma­
tion, and purpura of the labia. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz 
Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:535, 
Fig. 22.51.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
423
CHAPTER 25  Menstrual Problems and Vaginal Bleeding
history of early puberty, Peutz-­Jeghers or McCune-­Albright syndrome, 
or neurofibromatosis type 1. Height, Tanner staging of the breasts and 
pubic hair, and external genital changes consistent with estrogen expo­
sure, such as elongation of the labia minora and thickening of vulvar 
mucosa, should be specifically evaluated during physical examination. 
Café-­au-­lait spots, presence of an abdominal mass, and thyroid gland 
abnormalities should also be assessed. Radiographic imaging to deter­
mine the bone age of the left wrist can identify elevated serum estrogen 
levels and is a good initial screening test. Laboratory evaluation con­
firming precocious puberty includes elevated serum estradiol, andro­
gen panel, and gonadotropins. Imaging may also be needed in some 
clinical scenarios.
Early elevated serum estrogen most commonly occurs because of 
maturation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian (HPO) axis, termed 
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH)–dependent precocious 
puberty. In this condition, the pathology is simply the early timing of 
maturation. Administration of a GnRH analog is effective in temporar­
ily stopping anterior pituitary production of gonadotropins, ultimately 
preventing sex hormone production from the ovary. The purpose of 
halting early puberty is to avoid age-­inappropriate social contact, and 
to preserve height, which is particularly effective when treating patients 
6 years of age or younger. Rarely, GnRH pulsatile release is stimulated 
by CNS abnormalities such as infection, tumors, hydrocephaly, menin­
gomyelocele, neonatal encephalopathy, or cranial radiation. Type 1 
neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis are also associated with 
GnRH-­dependent precocious puberty. Imaging of the CNS should be 
aggressively pursued if there is suspicion of a CNS lesion, if pubertal 
progression is rapid, or if the child is under age 6.
GnRH-­independent precocious puberty is a much less common 
cause of precious puberty. In this condition, the hypothalamus is not 
driving ovarian sex steroid hormone production. Conditions such as 
malignant granulosa cell tumors of the ovary, benign functional ovar­
ian cysts, or tumors of the pituitary or adrenal gland are responsible 
for the elevated serum estrogens. McCune-­Albright syndrome, Peutz-­
Jeghers syndrome, and hypothyroidism are associated with GnRH-­
independent precocious puberty as well.
GnRH-­dependent and -­independent precocious puberty are asso­
ciated with different history and physical examination cues (Table 
25.2). A GnRH stimulation test is effective in differentiating these two 
processes. A rise in gonadotropins after exogenous administration 
of GnRH suggests that the HPO axis is active, confirming GnRH-­
dependent precocious puberty.
ABNORMAL BLEEDING IN ADOLESCENCE
Establishment of the menstrual cycle is a major hallmark of adoles­
cence. The menstrual cycle serves as a marker of health, so much so 
that it has been heralded as a “vital sign” during adolescence. Irregu­
lar menstrual bleeding may simply be related to the maturation of the 
complex physiologic process leading to puberty. In other cases, irreg­
ular menstrual bleeding may be a symptom of a significant medical 
condition (Table 25.3). A basic understanding of the menstrual cycle 
is helpful when trying to understand the many causes of abnormal 
bleeding.
REVIEW OF THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE
Complex interaction between the hypothalamus, pituitary, ovary, and 
uterus leads to ovulatory menstrual cycles (Fig. 25.4). The hypothal­
amus releases pulses of GnRH into a portal system to the pituitary 
gland. The anterior pituitary is stimulated to release the gonadotropins, 
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), 
when exposed to GnRH pulses. LH acts on the theca cells of the ovary 
leading to androgen production; these hormones are aromatized to 
estrogens in the granulosa cells of the ovary under the influence of 
FSH. This drives development of the dominant follicle.
Interaction between the anterior pituitary and ovary is complex in 
that it is bidirectional. Gonadotropin release is stimulated by GnRH 
and modulated by ovarian hormones, both the sex steroid hormones 
and the peptide hormones, activin and inhibin. In the first half of the 
cycle, the dominant follicle grows in size leading to increased estradiol 
production. A positive feedback relationship is seen between the ovary 
and the anterior pituitary, with higher levels of estradiol stimulating 
gonadotropin release. This ultimately leads to the LH surge, triggering 
ovulation.
Fig. 25.3  Urethral prolapse. This is a chronic case in which the initial 
hemorrhagic nature of the acute prolapse has resolved with observa­
tion, leaving a protuberant, edematous urethra. (From Zitelli BJ, McIn­
tire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical 
Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:558, Fig. 15.43.)
TABLE 25.2  Comparison of GnRH-­Dependent and GnRH-­Independent Precocious Puberty
GnRH-­Dependent Precocious Puberty
GnRH-­Independent Precocious Puberty
Prevalence
More common
Less common
Family history of early puberty
Positive
Negative
Unique characteristics
History or symptoms of CNS lesions, tumors, or 
infections
Symptoms of hypothyroidism, café-­au-­lait lesions, known Peutz-­Jeghers 
syndrome
GnRH stimulation test
Positive
Negative
CNS, central nervous system; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
424
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Postovulation, the dominant follicle transforms into a progesterone-­
secreting corpus luteum. During this phase of the cycle, estradiol 
inhibits gonadotropin release, preventing the development of another 
dominant follicle. The corpus luteum sustains progesterone secretion 
for 14 days; beyond this point, continued progesterone secretion is 
dependent on β-­human chorionic gonadotropin (β-­hCG) signaling 
from a pregnancy. If no pregnancy occurs, the corpus luteum regresses, 
and progesterone levels drop.
The endometrium is a mucosal surface lining the uterine cav­
ity. Its thickness and composition are under the influence of estra­
diol and progesterone. During the preovulatory estradiol-­dominant 
phase, termed the proliferative phase, the endometrium rapidly grows. 
The endometrial lining undergoes glandular differentiation to opti­
mize implantation during the postovulatory progesterone-­dominant 
phase, termed the secretory phase. If no pregnancy occurs, the spiral 
arterioles supplying the endometrium undergo spasm secondary to 
waning estradiol and progesterone levels. The endometrium becomes 
ischemic and sheds, producing menstrual bleeding. The amount of 
menstrual blood directly correlates with the thickness of the endome­
trium, the activity of the coagulation cascade directing the clotting of 
the vessels, and the re-­exposure to estrogen with the start of the new 
cycle. Any abnormality in these processes can lead to an abnormal 
bleeding pattern.
Normal parameters of the menstrual cycle should be understood 
to correctly identify abnormal patterns of bleeding. The cycle interval 
describes the number of days between the first day of one period and 
the first day of the next period. A normal cycle interval in adolescents 
is between 21 and 45 days. The cycle length describes the number of 
days menstrual bleeding lasts. A normal cycle length is conventionally 
described as less than 7 days. The amount of bleeding is much harder 
to quantify. Greater than 80 mL of menstrual blood loss during a cycle 
is considered pathologically heavy, with the average blood loss being 30 
mL. The clinical impracticality of obtaining this information is obvious. 
Menstrual blood flow requiring soaked pad changes every 1–2 hours is 
conventionally considered to be pathologically heavy.
Information regarding the start of menarche, cycle interval, cycle 
length, bleeding between menses, and questions detailing the quantity 
of blood flow is essential in the assessment of abnormal bleeding. The 
acronym PALM-­COEIN has been devised to categorize the multiple 
causes of abnormal uterine bleeding (Table 25.4). The conditions fall­
ing under the PALM group describe structural abnormalities and are 
much less common in the adolescent population than the nonstruc­
tural conditions falling under the COEIN group.
TABLE 25.3  Causes of Abnormal Bleeding in Adolescents
Cycle Length
Intermenstrual Bleeding
Heavy Menses
Unique Characteristics
Family History
Coagulopathy
Prolonged
No
Yes
Bruising
Epistaxis
Gingival bleeding
Yes
HPO axis immaturity
Variable
No
Variable
None
No
PCOS
Variable
No
Variable
Acne
Hirsutism
Central obesity
Yes
Endometrial causes
Prolonged
Yes
No
Unprotected sexual activity
Vaginal discharge
Fever
Cervical motion tenderness
Uterine tenderness
No
Contraceptive break­
through
Prolonged
Yes
No
Progesterone-­only contraceptive use
Improper use of hormonal contraception
No
Adenomyosis
Prolonged
No
Yes
Symmetrically enlarged uterus
Possible
Leiomyoma
Prolonged
No
Yes
Asymmetrically enlarged uterus
Yes
Polyp
Prolonged
Yes
No
None
No
HPO, hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovary; PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome.
ANTERIOR PITUITARY
Pulsatile GnRH
Follicle
Dominant
follicle
Spiral arterioles
Corpus
luteum
Ovulation
OVARY
Estrogen
Endometrium
0
Idealized
cycle day
Menses
5
14
28
Estrogen
Progesterone
FOLLICULAR PHASE
LUTEAL PHASE
FSH
FSH, LH LH SURGE
LH
Proliferative
phase
Secretory
phase
HYPOTHALAMUS
Fig. 25.4  Hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian endometrial axis: changes over 
time. FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
425
CHAPTER 25  Menstrual Problems and Vaginal Bleeding
PREGNANCY
Pregnancy evaluation is an important early step in the assessment 
of abnormal bleeding in the adolescent. Bleeding in pregnancy, par­
ticularly in the first trimester, is common and can occur with a nor­
mal or an abnormal intrauterine pregnancy or an ectopic pregnancy. 
Pregnancy-­associated bleeding can be light or heavy; similarly, it may 
be painless or associated with uterine cramping. A thorough history is 
helpful in understanding the heaviness of the current bleeding episode, 
determining the date of the last normal menstrual cycle, and assessing 
sexual and contraceptive activity. Physical examination can be helpful 
if the patient is beyond the first trimester as the uterus may be pal­
pable on abdominal examination. A pelvic examination to assess the 
size of the uterus is helpful in the first trimester but may not be appro­
priate for all adolescent patients. If a pregnancy is diagnosed by urine 
β-­hCG testing, the viability of the pregnancy may be determined with 
ultrasound or serial β-­hCG measurements 48 hours apart early in preg­
nancy. The threshold minimum rise expected depends on the starting 
β-­hCG level: at least 33% if the level is >3,000 mIU/mL to 49% if the 
level is <1,500 mIU/mL. Dropping or plateauing levels in early preg­
nancy are typically diagnostic of an abnormal intrauterine or ectopic 
pregnancy. Early assessment is essential due to the morbidity associ­
ated with a delayed diagnosis of an abnormal pregnancy.
COAGULOPATHY
The prevalence of bleeding dyscrasias in the general population is esti­
mated to be 1–2%. Among adolescents with heavy menstrual bleeding 
the prevalence is approximately 20%. Bleeding dyscrasias, particularly 
platelet dysfunction and thrombocytopenia, are associated with heavy 
and prolonged menstrual bleeding. In the adolescent population, 
menstrual cycles consistently lasting more than 7 days with a gush­
ing sensation or requiring soaked pad changes more frequently than 
every 2 hours, documented anemia, family history of bleeding disor­
der or tooth extraction, and delivery or miscarriage associated with 
excessive bleeding should raise concern for a bleeding dyscrasia. Cap­
turing information related to the cycle length, saturation of pads and 
frequency of change, frequency of menstrual blood leakage onto cloth­
ing, and number of school days or social activities missed is effective 
in assessing heavy bleeding in the adolescent. Additionally, patients 
who report easy bruising, gingival bleeding, or frequent epistaxis 
should raise suspicion for a platelet function defect. A reasonable basic 
approach to testing involves evaluating the platelet count, prothrombin 
time/international normalized ratio and partial thromboplastin time, 
and von Willebrand disease panel. Hematology referral is advisable 
in patients with severe, heavy, and prolonged bleeding and for those 
patients whose bleeding is not controlled with standard hormone ther­
apy. Although not as common as platelet function disorders, coagula­
tion factor deficiencies may also present with heavy uterine bleeding 
during adolescence.
OVULATORY DYSFUNCTION
The complex feedback relationship between estrogen and the anterior 
pituitary is the last part of the menstrual cycle to mature. Before positive 
feedback is established, FSH may actually decrease with rising estrogen 
levels. This stunts dominant follicle development and ovulation does 
not occur. Without ovulation, the corpus luteum does not develop; 
consequently, progesterone secretion from the ovary is limited. The 
endometrial lining is unstable without progesterone influence, leading 
to an abnormal bleeding pattern. This scenario is often termed imma­
turity of the HPO axis. The associated anovulatory bleeding pattern 
can present as frequent, absent, or heavy uterine bleeding. The abnor­
mal bleeding associated with HPO immaturity is typically seen within 
the first 3 years of menarche. While this is the most common cause of 
irregular bleeding in early adolescence, other causes should be consid­
ered because immaturity of the HPO axis is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrinopathy 
that is likely the result of a heterogeneous combination of influences 
including genetics, the intra-­ and extrauterine environment, insulin 
resistance, steroid hormone metabolism, and other metabolic abnor­
malities. The presenting clinical pattern can include hyperandro­
genemia causing hirsutism and acne; infrequent or absent ovulation 
leading to amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea, and subfertility; polycystic 
ovaries on ultrasound; and eventual development of metabolic syn­
drome (obesity, type 2 diabetes, hypertension). The bleeding pattern 
most commonly associated with PCOS is infrequent or absent men­
ses, although prolonged and heavy bleeding may occur. Diagnosis 
of PCOS typically relies on a variable presentation of three key fea­
tures: hyperandrogenism, oligomenorrhea, and polycystic-­appearing 
ovaries (Table 25.5). However, the hormonal changes and physical 
symptoms associated with PCOS overlap greatly with early adoles­
cence, making the evaluation particularly difficult in this age group. 
PCOS diagnosis during adolescence is less focused on ovarian ultra­
sonography as polycystic-­appearing ovaries are present in up to 40% 
of adolescents. Laboratory evaluation of androgen levels can also be 
problematic as assays vary in sensitivity and normative levels are not 
perfectly established. Anti–müllerian hormone elevation has also been 
associated with PCOS, but again, a normative level is not clear. The 
diagnostic work-­up of PCOS also involves the exclusion of mimicking 
causes such as late-­onset (nonclassic) congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
androgen-­secreting tumors, and Cushing disease. Normal early ado­
lescence should also be considered as a mimicking condition. There­
fore, considering this diagnosis within the 2 years of menarche should 
be done with caution, and only in the case of obvious pathology. Given 
the association of PCOS with future morbidity, close monitoring and 
re-­evaluation should be considered for adolescents with persistent 
PCOS symptomatology.
Thyroid dysfunction can lead to an abnormal uterine bleeding 
pattern by disrupting ovulation. Similar to PCOS, the bleeding pattern 
most commonly associated with thyroid dysfunction is absent or infre­
quent menses, but heavy, prolonged bleeding can develop. In this case, 
severe hypothyroidism leads to significantly elevated levels of thyroid-­
stimulating hormone. This hormone, also from the anterior pituitary, 
has FSH-­like activity and stimulates the stromal cells of the ovary to 
produce high levels of estrogen. The disregulated production of estro­
gen leads to a thickened endometrial lining that eventually outgrows 
its blood supply, leading to ischemia and shedding. Bleeding is heavy 
and prolonged because this shedding is asynchronous, and the volume 
of endometrium is high.
Ovulatory dysfunction often presents as absent menses or amen­
orrhea. The amenorrhea presentation has an extremely wide range of 
diagnostic possibilities, some of which are associated with significant 
TABLE 25.4  Classification System for 
Abnormal Bleeding
PALM
COIEN
Polyp
Adenomyosis
Leiomyoma
Malignancy
Coagulopathy
Ovulation dysfunction
Iatrogenic causes
Endometrial causes
Not otherwise specified
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
426
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
morbidity and even mortality if not recognized. Significant anatomic 
abnormalities, male karyotype, tumor of the anterior pituitary gland, 
significant malnutrition, and premature ovarian insufficiency illustrate 
the complexity of diagnostic possibilities (Table 25.6).
The first step in accurate diagnosis is determining when amenor­
rhea is actually pathologic. A work-­up for absent menses should be 
done for adolescents who show no signs of secondary sexual matura­
tion by age 13 or no menses with other sexual characteristics by age 
15, or if more than 3 months pass between menstrual cycles. Amenor­
rhea evaluation can begin at age 14 if hirsutism is noted or low caloric 
intake is suspected. Starting with a thorough history to identify any risk 
factors such as known renal anomalies, childhood exposure to chemo­
therapy or radiation, exercise and nutrition imbalance, galactorrhea, 
or family history of early menopause is important. A physical exam­
ination, including assessment of height, body mass index, acne and 
hirsutism, Tanner staging of breast and pubic hair development, and 
confirmation of a patent vagina if appropriate can help to further nar­
row the diagnostic possibilities. Ultrasound evaluation is a reasonable 
early test if the patient is not amenable to an examination, particularly 
if there is high risk of an anatomic abnormality. Laboratory assessment 
should include a pregnancy test and serum thyroid-­stimulating hor­
mone, FSH, and prolactin.
If the thyroid or pregnancy testing is abnormal, the diagnosis is 
clear. If the prolactin level is elevated and there is no evidence of hypo­
thyroidism, MRI of the anterior pituitary is warranted. Over 50% of the 
time, an elevated prolactin level is secondary to an anterior pituitary 
tumor. Other CNS lesions that irritate the pituitary stalk are also asso­
ciated with elevated prolactin levels. A thorough medication review 
should also be conducted in the case of hyperprolactinemia as this is 
a common side effect of antipsychotic medications that competitively 
bind to dopamine receptors, effectively lowering dopamine activity, 
leading to an elevation of prolactin secondary to the inhibitory rela­
tionship between dopamine and prolactin.
An elevated FSH is associated with complex diagnoses such as 
premature ovarian insufficiency and gonadal dysgenesis. Immediate 
karyotype evaluation should be performed with the intent of making 
an early diagnosis of Turner syndrome or gonadal dysgenesis involv­
ing an XY karyotype. Both of these conditions may be associated with 
morbidity if early treatment is not initiated. XY karyotype is associated 
TABLE 25.5  Diagnostic Criteria for PCOS
1990 NIH Guidelines
Patient satisfies both criteria:
	 (1)	 Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism
	 (2)	 Oligomenorrhea or oligo-­ovulation
Other causes of hyperandrogenism and anovulatory subfertility should be 
excluded.
2003 ESHRE/ASRM or Rotterdam Guidelines
Patient satisfies two of three criteria:
	 (1)	 Oligomenorrhea or oligo-­ovulation
	 (2)	 Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism
	 (3)	 Polycystic ovaries on ultrasound
Other causes of hyperandrogenism and anovulatory subfertility should be 
excluded.
2006 AES Guidelines
Patient satisfies both criteria:
	 (1)	 Hyperandrogenism: hirsutism or biochemical hyperandrogenism
	 (2)	 Ovarian dysfunction: oligo-­anovulation or polycystic ovaries
Other causes of hyperandrogenism and anovulatory subfertility should be 
excluded.
AES, Androgen Excess Society; ASRM, American Society for Repro­
ductive Medicine; ESHRE, European Society for Human Reproduction 
and Embryology; NIH, National Institutes of Health; PCOS, polycystic 
ovary syndrome.
From Rao P, Bhide P. Controversies in the diagnosis of polycystic ovary 
syndrome. Ther Adv Reprod Health. 2020;14:1–11 (Table 1, p. 2).
TABLE 25.6  Characteristics of the Causes of Amenorrhea
FSH
Karyotype
Family History
Classic Unique Findings
Turner syndrome
Elevated
45,X
Fragile X syndrome 
for mosaic Turner 
syndrome
Short stature
Webbed neck
Lymphedema of hands and feet
Low neck hairline
XY gonadal dysgenesis
Elevated
46,XY
No
No secondary sexual development
Hypothalamic amenorrhea
Low or normal
46,XX
No
Low body mass index
Poor dentition
Imperforate hymen
Normal
46,XX
No
Pain
Bulging hymen
PCOS
Normal
46,XX
Yes
Acne
Hirsutism
Central obesity
Müllerian anomalies
Normal
46,XX
Possible
Normal breast development
Blind vaginal pouch
AIS
Normal
46,XY
No
Normal breast development
Scant or no body hair
Blind vaginal pouch
Premature ovarian insufficiency
Elevated
46,XX
Yes
Variable presence of secondary sexual characteristics
Kallmann syndrome
Low or normal
46,XX
Yes
Inability to smell
Absent secondary sexual characteristics
AIS, androgen insensitivity syndrome; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
427
CHAPTER 25  Menstrual Problems and Vaginal Bleeding
with malignancy requiring gonadectomy; Turner syndrome is associ­
ated with left-­sided cardiac abnormalities (bicuspid aortic valve, coarc­
tation of aorta) in 50% of patients. Certainly, emotional support with 
both individual and family therapy, and referral to a support group, 
should be considered in patients with elevated FSH as natural fertil­
ity is compromised and to support any gender identity concerns that 
might be raised.
In many cases of amenorrhea, the hormone evaluation and physical 
examination will be largely normal. Functional hypothalamic amenor­
rhea, most likely caused by immaturity of the HPO axis, is a diagnosis 
of exclusion and presents with either normal or low FSH levels. Iden­
tification of excessive stress related to either the social environment or 
a medical condition, sports or exercise activity not supported with suf­
ficient calories, physical examination findings confirming poor nutri­
tion based on low body mass index percentile, or poor dentition from 
frequent vomiting is important to identify. Amenorrhea with anosmia 
is suspicious for Kallmann syndrome, which is associated with GnRH 
deficiency. In the case of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea, MRI 
of the CNS should be considered when the history interview does not 
produce any suspicion for stress or nutrition abnormalities, and partic­
ularly when symptoms such as nausea, headaches, and vision changes 
are present.
ENDOMETRIAL CAUSES
Infection and inflammation of the endometrium can lead to an abnor­
mal uterine bleeding pattern. The bleeding pattern can range from 
light, intermenstrual bleeding to prolonged menstrual bleeding. Infec­
tion of the upper genital tract, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), is 
a common diagnosis in adolescents and is directly linked to the high 
prevalence of gonorrhea and chlamydia infections in this popula­
tion. Treating gonorrhea and chlamydia infections of the lower gen­
ital tract has been shown to reduce the risk of PID, which has clinical 
implications much more severe than abnormal bleeding. Testing for 
gonorrhea and chlamydia infections is recommended at least annu­
ally in sexually active women 25 years of age or younger, regardless 
of symptoms. Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) is the most sen­
sitive and clinically useful as testing can be done on urine specimens 
and vaginal swabs as well as endocervical specimens. An infectious 
source of bleeding should be considered when evaluating a sexually 
active teenager.
IATROGENIC CAUSES
The most common group of medications that lead to abnormal uterine 
bleeding prescribed to adolescents is hormonal contraceptives. Iatro­
genic bleeding is typically described as prolonged or intermenstrual 
and is rarely heavy, and it is often referred to as breakthrough bleeding. 
Combination contraceptives (pills, transvaginal ring, and transdermal 
patch) are designed to provide 21 days of hormones for the purpose of 
blocking ovulation and 7 days of placebo triggering the endometrium 
to shed, leading to a menstrual cycle. If pills are missed, or if the trans­
dermal patch or ring is left in place longer than prescribed or removed 
too early, endometrial bleeding will be triggered. In some cases, 
breakthrough bleeding may occur even if the contraceptive method is 
being used correctly. Some follicular development has been described 
particularly with the very low-­dosage ethinyl estradiol contraceptive 
pills. While this is not associated with lower contraceptive efficacy, it 
may be associated with more ovarian cyst development and irregular 
bleeding. All progestin-­only contraceptive methods are associated with 
breakthrough bleeding. The majority of women using progesterone-­
only contraception report abnormal bleeding patterns after 1 year of 
use; however, the longer these methods are used, the more acceptable 
the bleeding pattern becomes. The actual mechanism causing break­
through bleeding when using progesterone-­only contraception is not 
clear; endometrial evaluation shows abnormal, enlarged, thin-­walled 
fragile blood vessels. Both the progestin-­releasing and the nonhor­
monal intrauterine device (IUD) can be associated with an abnormal 
bleeding pattern after initial insertion. This abnormal bleeding pattern 
typically improves over time. The majority of hormonal IUD users ulti­
mately experience a decrease in monthly menstrual bleeding, while the 
majority of nonhormonal IUD users report no change from their pre-­
insertion menstrual pattern after 1 year of use.
Abnormal bleeding in adolescents can be associated with non­
hormonal medications as well. Anticoagulation medications can lead 
to a heavy and prolonged bleeding pattern, especially when supra-­
therapeutic anticoagulation occurs. In some cases, the bleeding associ­
ated with anticoagulation is quite heavy and requires acute, aggressive 
therapy to prevent significant anemia. A strategy to avoid heavy men­
strual bleeding from anticoagulation is to start a safe hormonal contra­
ceptive method associated with reducing menstrual blood loss.
NOT YET CLASSIFIED
Persistent abnormal bleeding sometimes requires multiple evalua­
tions over time to identify the cause. In many cases, the initial evalu­
ation, even when complete, may not identify the abnormality. PCOS 
is a good example of a condition that evolves over time and some­
times requires multiple evaluations to confirm. If the bleeding pattern 
is causing anemia or significant quality-­of-­life disruption, treatment 
should not be withheld simply because a clear diagnosis has not been 
established.
STRUCTURAL CAUSES: PALM
The structural causes of abnormal bleeding are much less common 
in the adolescent population. Gynecologic malignancy and hyperpla­
sia in adolescence are rare conditions. In the case of the rare vaginal 
or cervical malignancy, the abnormal bleeding is typically prolonged 
or intermenstrual; endometrial malignancies and uterine sarcomas, 
also exceedingly rare, typically present with heavier bleeding. Ovar­
ian germ cell tumors are the most common gynecologic malignancy 
during adolescence, most commonly presenting in the 15-­ to 19-­year 
age group. Abnormal uterine bleeding is not a common presenting 
symptom of germ cell tumors. However, malignant stromal cell tumors 
of the ovary, specifically juvenile granulosa cell tumors, classically 
present with heavy and prolonged uterine bleeding. Ultrasound evalu­
ation should be immediately performed if an adolescent presents with 
abnormal uterine bleeding and an abdominal mass.
In addition to malignancy, ultrasound evaluation is effective in 
diagnosing leiomyomas (fibroids) and polyps. Both represent a benign 
overgrowth of uterine tissue and, again, are extremely uncommon in 
the adolescent population. A leiomyoma is a smooth muscle tumor of 
the myometrium that loses growth regulation and often presents with 
heavy and prolonged uterine bleeding. A polyp is typically an over­
growth of the endometrium or the endocervix and classically presents 
as intermenstrual bleeding. This structural abnormality is not well 
reported in the adolescent population. Adenomyosis is another abnor­
mality where islands of endometrial tissue are embedded in the myo­
metrium of the uterus. While this condition is rare in the adolescent 
population, it typically presents with heavy and prolonged bleeding, 
similar to a leiomyoma. Adenomyosis is also a benign condition, but 
unlike leiomyoma, the sensitivity of ultrasound diagnosis is low; MRI 
is more sensitive and reliable for diagnosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
428
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
Müllerian anomalies are another important structural cause of 
abnormal bleeding. The müllerian ducts, embryonically called 
the paramesonephric ducts, appear 37 days postfertilization and 
undergo a process of differentiation, migration, fusion, and canal­
ization to become the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and upper 
vagina. Müllerian anomalies result from abnormalities in differen­
tiation (agenesis), fusion (uterine didelphys, vaginal septum), and 
canalization (uterine septum). Absent menstrual bleeding is the 
most common abnormal bleeding pattern associated with müllerian 
anomalies, although most anomalies, such as bicornuate, didelphys, 
and septate uterus, do not result in abnormal bleeding. Anomalies 
presenting with amenorrhea are associated with an absence of the 
vagina, uterus, and/or cervix or a complete obstruction such as a 
transverse vaginal septum.
Anomalies involving a transverse vaginal septum are actually quite 
rare and may present with prolonged irregular bleeding as well as with 
amenorrhea. If spontaneous perforation of the vaginal septum occurs, 
a prolonged, irregular bleeding pattern is produced. Similarly, an 
obstructed hemivagina that spontaneously ruptures may lead to a sim­
ilar bleeding pattern. This müllerian anomaly describes uterine didel­
phys and bicollis with a partial vaginal septum obstructing the outflow 
of one of the müllerian tracts. A pelvic ultrasound is a good first step 
when evaluating for a suspected upper genital tract abnormality. MRI 
is the best imaging modality for confirmation.
A simple external genital examination should always be done 
during the evaluation of amenorrhea as imperforate hymen, a struc­
tural anomaly much more common than müllerian anomalies, is eas­
ily diagnosed by inspection. An imperforate hymen is the complete 
obstruction by the hymenal membrane at the level of the vaginal 
introitus preventing the passage of menstrual bleeding. Pain is a key 
complaint. Diagnosis by examination is reliable as the hymenal tissue 
is often bulging from the pressure resulting from the hematocolpos. In 
this case, a simple surgical procedure to remove the redundant hymen 
can be done to achieve normal anatomy. If a patient presents with a 
bulge at the introitus, pain, and regular menses, you should be sus­
picious of obstructed hemivagina and can confirm this diagnosis by 
attempting to pass a lubricated Q-­tip into the vaginal canal. Diagnosis 
of müllerian anomaly warrants imaging of kidneys, as renal anomaly or 
agenesis is common in these patients.
Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser (MRKH) syndrome and 
androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) are two other diagnostic 
possibilities that present with absent vagina and amenorrhea. In 
both of these conditions, the müllerian structures are absent and 
both external genitalia and breast development are consistent with a 
female phenotype. Karyotype and testosterone level differentiate the 
two disorders, as MRKH individuals are 46,XX with serum testos­
terone in the female range, whereas AIS individuals are 46,XY with 
testosterone levels in the male range. In AIS, the absent androgen 
activity leads to female external genitalia development and limited 
body hair, as well as no wolffian structure development. Peripheral 
conversion of androgens to estrogens leads to estrogenization, spe­
cifically breast development, during puberty. The gonads are at risk 
for malignancy and removal after achievement of adult height is 
recommended. After gonadectomy, estrogen replacement is needed 
until natural age of menopause is reached for optimal health. AIS 
is significantly less common than MRKH (2–5/100,000 vs 4/1,500) 
and is associated with an X-­linked recessive inheritance pattern, 
whereas MRKH appears to be more sporadic. Of note, individuals 
with gonadal dysgenesis and a Y chromosome present with amenor­
rhea and female external genitalia, but unlike AIS breast development 
is minimal and testosterone levels are low. As previously mentioned, 
gonadectomy should not be delayed in these individuals as the risk of 
malignancy is higher than in AIS.
TREATMENT
Progestins alone, or in combination with estradiol, are the most effec­
tive medical therapy to treat abnormal bleeding in adolescents. Hor­
mones should be considered first-­line therapy even when managing 
adolescents with bleeding dyscrasias or structural abnormalities such 
as adenomyosis or leiomyomas. When given cyclically, especially in the 
combination contraceptive formulation, bleeding becomes regular and 
light. If progestin-­only therapy is given continuously, menstrual bleed­
ing may be suppressed, although breakthrough bleeding, as described 
previously, can occur.
Selecting the best method for abnormal bleeding management 
should first focus on safety considerations, particularly if an estrogen-­
containing treatment is selected. Contraindications to estrogen ther­
apy are listed in Table 25.7. Teenagers that smoke should be counseled 
to quit smoking. After a determination of safety is made, a detailed 
discussion should be held to determine any potential compliance con­
cerns as improper use of hormone therapy can lead to irregular bleed­
ing and ultimately treatment failure.
Antifibrinolytics, specifically tranexamic acid, are effective non­
hormonal medications that can be considered for those adolescents 
who are not comfortable taking hormonal medications or who have 
significant contraindications or side effects to hormone therapy. These 
medications can also be used adjunctively with hormone therapy if 
bleeding control is suboptimal, but the risk for venous thromboembo­
lism should be discussed with the patient. A platelet transfusion, factor 
replacement, desmopressin, intravenous immune globulin, or oral cor­
ticosteroids may be appropriate adjunctive therapy depending on the 
etiology. Hormone therapy is effective in controlling bleeding second­
ary to all of these conditions and should be concurrently administered. 
In the rare case of a malignancy, polyp, or resectable partial anatomic 
blockage, surgical management is required.
If abnormal uterine bleeding is profound, producing significant 
anemia, hormonal therapy remains the mainstay of medical treatment, 
but with different dosing regimens (Table 25.8). Both estrogens and 
progestins alone or in combination are effective. High-­dose progestin 
therapy leads to endometrial atrophy. High-­dose estradiol therapy is 
effective by inducing endometrial vascular vasospasm, regenerating 
denuded epithelium, and increasing clotting factors. Both intrave­
nous and oral high-­dose estradiol preparations are available and the 
TABLE 25.7  Contraindications to 
Estrogen Therapy
Poorly controlled hypertension, or coexisting vascular disease
Current/history of ischemic heart disease
Liver dysfunction: severe cirrhosis, adenoma, hepatocellular carcinoma
History of venous thromboembolism/known thrombophilia
Complicated valvular heart disease
Migraine with aura
Active cancer or within 6 mo of treatment
<6 mo since diagnosis of peripartum cardiomyopathy
Diabetes with vascular complication
Major surgery with prolonged immobilization
Moderate to severe impairment of cardiac function
Solid organ transplant complicated by graft failure, rejection, cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
429
CHAPTER 25  Menstrual Problems and Vaginal Bleeding
intravenous route may be preferable in patients who are unable to tol­
erate oral medication secondary to nausea. Regardless of which high-­
dose hormone regimen is used, once cessation of bleeding has been 
achieved, transitioning to a progestin-­dominant therapy is imperative. 
If this is not done, sudden stoppage of the high dosage of hormone 
therapy will lead to withdrawal bleeding. Specific factor replacement, 
particularly factor VII replacement, may also be effective in controlling 
profound heavy bleeding, regardless of the cause.
GnRH agonist therapy is another option to acutely control heavy 
uterine bleeding. The mechanism of action involves decreased expres­
sion of GnRH receptors of the anterior pituitary secondary to receptor 
saturation, which leads to decreasing sex hormone production from 
the ovaries. This medication should be used with caution as a flare 
in bleeding may initially occur. Traditional dosing involves an intra­
muscular injection of either 11.25 mg given at 3-­month intervals or 
monthly dosing of 3.75 mg. GnRH agonist therapy is limited to 12 
months of use secondary to the significant lowering of bone mineral 
density as a result of decreased circulating ovarian estrogens. Vasomo­
tor symptoms are also a common side effect of decreased estrogens; 
treatment with low-­dose progestins or estradiol is typically effective in 
relieving symptoms.
Management of acute bleeding may require surgical therapy in 
addition to medical therapy. Placement of a Foley balloon into the 
endometrium filled with 30 mL of saline can effectively tamponade 
the bleeding endometrium and reduce the blood supply to the uterus 
by partially compressing the uterine arteries. The balloon is deflated 
gradually over 12–24 hours while hormone therapy is ongoing. A dila­
tion and curettage is often performed with Foley balloon placement. 
This procedure leads to endometrial thinning and can be effective in 
controlling heavy bleeding on its own, particularly if imaging suggests 
the presence of a clot in the endometrial cavity. Importantly, in cases 
of bleeding related to a dyscrasia, the sharp dilation and curettage pro­
cedure can increase blood loss. The final two surgical options, uterine 
artery embolization and hysterectomy, impair fertility and should be 
reserved as a last resort in life-­threatening situations.
MENSTRUAL PAIN IN ADOLESCENTS
Dysmenorrhea, defined as pain during the menstrual cycle, is the most 
common reason adolescent patients seek gynecologic care. Pain is most 
commonly in the pelvis secondary to uterine cramping but can also 
be reported in the back and upper thighs. Sixty to 70% of adolescents 
report pain during menses, and 15% report significant quality-­of-­life 
dysfunction leading to a disruption of normal activities. Dysmenorrhea 
is associated with ovulatory cycles; therefore, this symptom typically 
presents in the later adolescent years. Dysmenorrhea, unlike chronic 
pelvic pain, presents with cyclic pain beginning within 48 hours of the 
first day of the menstrual cycle and resolves by menstrual cycle day 2 
or 3. Primary dysmenorrhea is significantly more common in adoles­
cents. In this condition, high levels of prostaglandin E2 and F2α, pro­
duced by the endometrium, cause painful uterine cramping. Secondary 
dysmenorrhea is the result of an anatomic abnormality causing uterine 
cramping. About 10% of adolescents with menstrual pain have second­
ary dysmenorrhea.
If the physical examination is normal and there are no factors in 
the medical history raising suspicion for an anatomic abnormality, 
empirical treatment without laboratory or radiologic evaluation is a 
reasonable approach. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
are effective therapy as prostaglandin production is directly reduced. 
This therapy is most effective when started 24–48 hours prior to the 
onset of pain. Contraceptive agents that block ovulation and limit the 
growth of the endometrial lining lead to a decrease in prostaglandin 
production and therefore are also effective in treating dysmenorrhea. 
Although NSAIDs are traditionally considered first-­line therapy for 
primary dysmenorrhea, starting a contraceptive agent without an 
NSAID trial is acceptable given the inherent administration difficulty 
associated with proper NSAID use. Warm baths, heating pads, and 
exercise may be helpful adjunctive therapies. Nontraditional therapies 
such as vitamin E, magnesium supplementation, acupuncture, trans­
cutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and dietary supplements are 
not well studied.
If menses are reported to be painful, and if there is some persistence 
of pain between cycles, or if empirical therapy for primary dysmen­
orrhea is unsuccessful after 3–6 months of treatment, a diagnosis of 
secondary dysmenorrhea should be considered. Uterine leiomyomas, 
adenomyosis, and outflow tract abnormalities that block the egress of 
menstrual blood can cause significant pain during menses and discom­
fort between menstrual cycles. The most common cause of secondary 
dysmenorrhea during adolescence is endometriosis. The prevalence 
of endometriosis in the adolescent population has not been established, 
but 60% of adult women with endometriosis report symptoms prior to 
age 20, and approximately 66% of adolescents undergoing laparoscopy 
for pain are found to have endometriosis. Confirmation of endome­
triosis is challenging as no blood test or imaging study is diagnostic. 
Laparoscopic surgical evaluation of the pelvis can be helpful, but the 
lesions are often subtle and heterogeneous in appearance and conse­
quently can be missed. The hormonal therapies effective in treating 
primary dysmenorrhea are also effective in the treatment of secondary 
dysmenorrhea, with the exception of outflow tract obstruction abnor­
malities, which always require surgical management. The levonorges­
trel IUD has been particularly effective in controlling symptoms of 
endometriosis and leiomyomas.
While dysmenorrhea is a common premenstrual symptom, it is a 
different entity than premenstrual syndrome (PMS). The basic diag­
nostic strategy for PMS involves confirming the presence of at least one 
somatic complaint (breast tenderness, abdominal bloating, headache, 
or swelling of extremities) and one affective complaint (depression, 
angry outbursts, irritability, anxiety, confusion, or social withdrawal) 
during the 5 days preceding menses for three consecutive menstrual 
cycles. The symptoms must be resolved by the fourth day of the menses 
and should not recur until at least 13 days have passed from cycle day 
1 of the last menses. For diagnostic purposes, these symptoms should 
also negatively impact social or school participation.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is often grouped 
with PMS, but the diagnostic criteria differ. The American Psychiatric 
Association requires at least five of the following symptoms: marked 
depressed mood, marked anxiety, marked emotional lability, persistent 
and marked anger, decreased interest in usual activities, difficulty con­
centrating, lethargy, marked change in appetite, sleep disturbance, 
TABLE 25.8  Hormone Treatment Regimens 
for Acute Heavy Bleeding
IV Estrogen
Combination Oral 
Contraceptives
Oral Progesterone
Conjugated 
estrogen 25 mg 
every 4–6 hr
30–50 μg of ethinyl estra­
diol–containing tablets 
every 4–8 hr
Taper dosage over several 
days when bleeding 
subsides
Medroxyprogesterone 
10–20 mg orally b.i.d. to t.i.d.
or 
Norethindrone 5–10 mg 
orally b.i.d.
b.i.d., two times a day; IV, intravenous; t.i.d., three times a day.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
430
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
loss of control sensation, and physical symptoms of breast tenderness, 
swelling, headaches, joint pain, muscle pain, bloating, or weight gain. 
For diagnosis, the symptoms must interfere with activities and rela­
tionships, and the symptoms cannot be an exacerbation of a mood or 
personality disorder. These criteria must be confirmed by daily pro­
spective ratings over two consecutive cycles. The pathophysiology of 
PMS and PMDD has been linked to the fluctuation of ovarian sex ste­
roid hormones after ovulation. While no difference in hormonal levels 
have been confirmed in women with PMS/PMDD compared to those 
that do not have these conditions, there may be a different serotonin 
activity or γ-­aminobutyric receptor activity response to the hormone 
fluctuations during the luteal phase.
Treatment options include hormonal suppression of ovulation to 
prevent the luteal phase fluctuation of hormones. Hormonal agents 
containing the fourth-­generation progestin drospirenone have been 
effective in controlling affective and somatic symptoms. The possible 
small increased risk of venous thromboembolic events associated with 
this particular progestin preparation warrants a careful risk-­benefit 
analysis. NSAIDs and spironolactone have been shown to be helpful in 
the alleviation of the physical symptoms. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) are a first-­line treatment option in adult women with 
severe PMS and PMDD as improvement in both somatic and affective 
symptoms has been documented. However, the efficacy of these medi­
cations in adolescents with PMS/PMDD is unclear, and the association 
of these medications with increased suicidality has blunted widespread 
use. Nonpharmacologic therapies that have been utilized include exer­
cise; stress management; heat therapy; cognitive-­behavioral therapy; 
education about the syndrome; supplementation with calcium, magne­
sium, vitamin B6, and vitamin E; and chasteberry, ginkgo biloba, and 
St. John’s wort herbal remedies. Data supporting these therapies are 
promising but limited for conclusions of efficacy. Red flags include a 
mass, extragenital bleeding, anemia, a positive family history, and the 
possibility of an abnormal pregnancy.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Menstrual concerns and abnormal bleeding are common complaints in 
childhood and adolescence with a wide range of diagnostic possibilities. 
A thorough history and physical examination help to quickly identify 
the more likely underlying causes, narrowing the laboratory and imag­
ing evaluation that may be needed to efficiently make an accurate diag­
nosis. Red flags in the evaluation of vaginal bleeding include prolonged 
bleeding, nongynecologic bleeding, headache, visual disturbances, 
galactorrhea, abnormal or pelvic mass, anemia, or fevers. For the vast 
majority of adolescents presenting with menstrual concerns, treatment 
can be initiated with limited evaluation secondary to the likelihood 
of the underlying cause being a benign, transient process. Abnormal 
bleeding in childhood typically warrants more of a diagnostic work-­up, 
although most often the underlying cause is also benign.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
430.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 580. Von Willebrand disease in women. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122:1368–1373.
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 651. Menstruation in girls and adolescents: 
using the menstrual cycle as a vital sign. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;126(6):e143–
e146.
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 760. Dysmenorrhea and endometriosis in the 
adolescent. Obstet and Gynecology. 2018;132(6):e249–e258.
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 785. Screening and management of bleeding 
disorders in adolescents with heavy menstrual bleeding. Obstet Gynecol. 
2019;134(3):e71–e83.
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 789. Screening and management of the hyper­
androgenic adolescent. Obstet and Gynecology. 2019;134(4):e106–e114.
ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 193. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;131(3):e91–e103.
Adachi T, Sato H, Nakayama S, et al. Primary amenorrhea due to juvenile 
granulosa-­cell tumor of the ovary: a case report. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 
2012;38:597–600.
Amr SS, Tavassoli FA, Hassan AA, et al. Mixed mesodermal tumor of the 
uterus in a 4-­year-­old girl. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1986;5:371–378.
Andres MP, Podgaec S, Carreiro KB, et al. Endometriosis is an important 
cause of pelvic pain in adolescence. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2014;60(6):560–
564.
Baker VL. Primary ovarian insufficiency in the adolescent. Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol. 2013;25:375–381.
Baker WD, Soisson AP, Dodson MK. Endometrial cancer in a 14-­year-­old 
girl with Cowden syndrome: a case report. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 
2013;39(4):876–878.
Bradley SH, Lawrence N, Steele C, et al. Precocious puberty. BMJ. 
2020;368:I6597.
Braverman PK. Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. 
J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2007;20:3–12.
Brosens I, Gordts S, Habiba M, et al. Uterine cystic adenomyosis: a disease of 
younger women. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2015;28:420–426.
Brown J, Friedlander M, Backes FJ, et al. Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup 
(GCIG) consensus review for ovarian germ cell tumors. Int J Gynecol 
Cancer. 2014;24:S48–S54.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted dis­
eases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep). 
2015;64(3):1–135.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. U.S. medical eligibility criteria 
for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep). 2016;
65(3):1–96.
Cools M, Nordenstrom A, Robeva R, et al. Caring for individuals with a differ­
ence of sex development (DSD): a consensus statement. Nat Rev Endocri­
nol. 2018;14(7):415–429.
Davis E, Sparzak PB. Abnormal uterine bleeding. 2020 Nov 27. In: StatPearls 
[Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan–. PMID: 
30422508.
Deligeoroglou E, Karountzos V, Creatsas G. Abnormal uterine bleeding and 
dysfunctional uterine bleeding in pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 
Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013;29(1):74–78.
Dietrich JE. An update on adenomyosis in the adolescent. Curr Opin Obstet 
Gyn. 2010;22(5):388–392.
Dietrich JE, Millar DM, Quint EH. Non-­obstructive mullerian anomalies. J 
Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2014;27:386–395.
Dietrich JE, Miller DM, Quint EH. Obstructive reproductive tract anomalies. J 
Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2014;27:396–402.
Dwiggins M, Gomez-­Lobo V. Current review of prepubertal vaginal bleeding. 
Curr Opin Obstet Gyn. 2017;29(5):322–327.
Emans SJ, Laufer MR, DiVasta AD. Pediatric &Adolescent Gynecology. 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019.
The ESHRE Capri Workshop Group. Endometrial bleeding. Hum Reprod 
Update. 2007;13(5):421–431.
Fitzgerald S, DiVasta A, Gooding H. An update on PCOS in adolescents. 
2018;30(4):459–465.
Fuqua JS. Treatment and outcome of precocious puberty: an update. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(6):2198–2207.
Gauthier I, Clancy A, Lipson J, et al. Water-­related vaginal injury: a case report 
and review of the literature. J Obstetr Gynaecol Canada. 2018;40(7):926–
930.
Gordon CM. Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:365–371.
Gray SH. Menstrual disorders. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34:6–18.
Gruessner SE, Omwandho COA, Dreyer T, et al. Management of stage I 
cervical sarcoma botryoides in childhood and adolescence. Eur J Pediatr. 
2004;163:452–456.
Gupta J, Kai J, Middleton L, et al. Levonorgestrel intrauterine system versus 
medical therapy for menorrhagia. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:128–137.
Hickey M, Higham JM, Fraser I. Progestogens versus estrogens and proestro­
gens for irregular uterine bleeding associated with anovulation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2007;4:CD001895.
Howell JO, Flowers D. Prepubertal vaginal bleeding: etiology, diagnostic ap­
proach, and management. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2016;71(4):231–242.
Ibanez L, Oberfield SE, Witchel SF, et al. An international consortium update: 
pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of polycystic ovarian syndrome 
in adolescence. Horm Res Paediatr. 2017;88:371–395.
James AH, Kouides PA, Abdul-­Kadir R, et al. Evaluation and management of 
acute menorrhagia in women with and without underlying bleeding dis­
orders: consensus from an international expert panel. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol. 2011;158(2):124–134.
Kirsch CH, Goodman M, Esiashvili N. Outcome of female pediatric patients 
diagnosed with genital tract rhabdomyosarcoma based on analysis of cases 
registered in SEER database between 1973 and 2006. Am J Clin Oncol. 
2014;37(1):47–50.
Kondamudi NP, Gupta A, Watkins A, et al. Prepubertal girl with vaginal bleed­
ing. J Emerg Med. 2014;46(6):769–771.
Mariani G, Konkle BA, Ingerslev J. Congenital factor VII deficiency: therapy 
with recombinant activated factor VII – a critical appraisal. Haemophilia. 
2006;12:19–27.
Matteson K, Rahn DD, Wheeler 2nd TL, et al. Nonsurgical management 
of heavy menstrual bleeding: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 
2013;121:632–643.
McCluggage WG, Sumathi VP, Nucci MR, et al. Ewing family of tumors in­
volving the vulva and vagina: report of a series of four cases. J Clin Pathol. 
2007;60:674–680.
Meirow D, Rabinovici J, Katz D, et al. Prevention of severe menorrhagia in 
oncology patients with treatment-­induced thrombocytopenia by luteiniz­
ing hormone-­releasing hormone agonist and depo-­medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. Cancer. 2006;107:1634–1641.
Mills HL, Abdel-­Baki MS, Teruya J, et al. Platelet function defects in adoles­
cent with heavy menstrual bleeding. Haemophilia. 2013;20:249–254.
Moroni RM, Vieira CS, Ferriani RA, et al. Presentation and treatment of 
uterine leiomyoma in adolescence: a systematic review. BMC Wom Health. 
2015;15:4.
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Broder MS, et al. FIGO classification system 
(PALM-­COEIN) for causes of abnormal uterine bleeding in nongravid 
women of reproductive age. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2011;113:3–13.
Munro MG, Critchley HOD, Fraser IS. The FIGO classification of causes 
of abnormal uterine bleeding in the reproductive years. Fertil Steril. 
2011;95(7):2204–2208.
Neely KE, Crossen SS. Precocious puberty. Curr Opinion Obstet Gyncol. 
2014;26(5):332–338.
Ong LY, Hwang WS, Wong A, et al. Perivascular epithelioid cell tumor of the 
vagina in an 8 year old girl. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42:564–566.
Ott MA, Sucato GS. Committee on Adolescence. Contraception for adoles­
cents. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e1257.
Özcan J, Dülger O, Küpelioğlu L, et al. Uterine sarcoma in a 14-­year-­old girl 
presenting with uterine rupture. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2014;10:44–46.
Panico A, Lupoli GA, Fonderico F, et al. Multiple ovarian cysts in a young girl 
with severe hypothyroidism. Thyroid. 2007;17(12):1289–1293.
Peacock A, Alvi NS, Mushtaq T. Period problems: disorders of menstruation in 
adolescents. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97:554–560.
Peña AS, Witchel SF, Hoeger KM, et al. Adolescent polycystic ovary syndrome 
according to the international evidence-­based guideline. BMC Med. 
2020;18:72.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Bibliography
430.e2
Powell J. The approach to chronic pelvic pain in the adolescent. Obstet Gynecol 
Clin N Am. 2014;41:343–355.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Cur­
rent evaluation of amenorrhea. Fertil Steril. 2008;90(3):s219–s225.
Rao P, Bhide P. Controversies in the diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome. 
Ther Adv Reprod Health. 2020;14:1–11.
Rapkin AJ, Mikacich JA. Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dys­
phoric disorder in adolescence. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2008;20:455–
463.
Rosenfield RL. Adolescent anovulation: maturational mechanisms and impli­
cations. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:3572–3583.
Rothenberg SS, Beverly R, Barnard E, et al. Polycystic ovary syndrome in ado­
lescents. Best Prac and Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2018;48:103–114.
Sanfilippo J, Erb TE. Evaluation and management of dysmenorrhea on adoles­
cents. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2008;41(2):257–267.
Schober J, Woodhouse C. Clinical Ped and Adol Gynecol. 3rd ed. New York: 
Informa Healthcare; 2009.
Seravalli V, Linari S, Peruzzi E, et al. Prevalence of hemostatic disorders in 
adolescents with abnormal uterine bleeding. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 
2013;26:285–289.
Smith YR, Berman DR, Quint EH. Premenarchal vaginal discharge: find­
ings of procedures to rule out foreign bodies. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 
2002;15(4):227–230.
Spritzer PM, Motta AB. Adolescent and polycystic ovary syndrome: 
current concepts on diagnosis and treatment. Int J Clin Pract. 
2015;69:1236–1246.
Stricker T, Navratil F, Sennhauser FH. Vagina foreign bodies. J Paeditr Child 
Health. 2004;40(4):205–207.
Sugar N, Graham E. Common gynecologic problems in prepubertal girls. 
Pediatr Rev. 2006;27:213–223.
Taylor HS, Pal L, Seli E. Speroff’s Clinical Gynecologic Endocrinology and Infer­
tility. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019.
Tong LX, Sun GS, Teng JMC. Pediatric lichen sclerosus: a review of the epide­
miology and treatment options. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015;32(5):593–599.
Van Eyk N, Allen L, Giesbrecht E, et al. Pediatric vulvovaginal disorders: a 
diagnostic approach and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 
2009;31(9):850–862.
Werner R, Grötsch H, Hiort O. 46,XY disorders of sex development—the 
undermasculinised male with disorders of androgen action. Best Pract Res 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;24:263–277.
Williams CE, Creighton SM. Menstrual disorders in adolescents: review of 
current practice. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78:135–143.
Witchel SF, Burghard AC, Tao RH, et al. The diagnosis and treatment of PCOS 
in adolescents: an update. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2019;31(4):562–569.
Witchel SF, Oberfield S, Rosenfield RL, et al. The diagnosis of polycystic ovary 
syndrome during adolescence. Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;83:376–389.
Yaşa C, Uğurlucan FG. Approach to abnormal uterine bleeding in adolescents. 
J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2020;12(Suppl 1):1–6.
Young RH. Ovarian tumors and tumor-­like lesions in the first three decades. 
Semin Diagn Pathol. 2014;31:382–426.
Zapata LB, Whiteman MK, Tepper NK, et al. Intrauterine device use among 
women with fibroids: a systematic review. Contraception. 2010;82(1):41–55.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
