1
Most causes of sore throat are nonbacterial and neither require nor are 
alleviated by antibiotic therapy (Tables 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3). Accurate 
diagnosis is essential: Acute streptococcal pharyngitis warrants diag­
nosis and therapy to ensure prevention of serious suppurative and 
nonsuppurative complications. Life-threatening infectious complica­
tions of oropharyngeal infections, whether streptococcal or nonstrep­
tococcal, may manifest with mouth pain, pharyngitis, parapharyngeal 
space infectious extension, and/or airway obstruction (Tables 1.4 and 
1.5). In many cases, the history and/or physical exam can help direct 
diagnosis and treatment, but the enormous number of potential causes 
is too large to address all of them.
VIRAL PHARYNGITIS
Most episodes of pharyngitis are caused by viruses (see Tables 1.2 and 
1.3). It is difficult to clinically distinguish between viral and bacterial 
pharyngitis with a very high degree of precision, but certain clues may 
help the physician. Accompanying symptoms of conjunctivitis, rhini­
tis, cough, discrete ulcerations, croup, or laryngitis are common with 
viral infection but rare in bacterial pharyngitis.
Many viral agents can produce pharyngitis (see Tables 1.2 and 1.3). 
Some cause distinct clinical syndromes that are readily diagnosed 
without laboratory testing (Table 1.6; see also Tables 1.1 and 1.4). In 
pharyngitis caused by parainfluenza and influenza viruses, rhinovi­
ruses, coronaviruses, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), the symp­
toms of coryza and cough often overshadow sore throat, which is 
generally mild. Influenza virus may cause high fever, cough, headache, 
malaise, myalgia, and cervical adenopathy in addition to pharyngitis. 
In young children, croup or bronchiolitis may develop. When influenza 
is suspected on clinical and epidemiologic grounds or confirmed by 
testing (polymerase chain reaction [PCR] is most accurate), specific 
antiviral therapy is available for treatment of patients and prophylaxis 
of family members. RSV is associated with bronchiolitis, pneumonia, 
and croup in young children. RSV infection in older children is usually 
indistinguishable from a simple upper respiratory tract infection. 
Pharyngitis is not a prominent finding of RSV infection in any age 
group. Parainfluenza viruses are associated with croup and bronchiol­
itis; minor sore throat and signs of pharyngitis are common at the 
outset but rapidly resolve. Infections caused by parainfluenza, influ­
enza, and RSV are often seen in seasonal (winter) epidemics. Many 
agents can be identified using multiplex or targeted PCR testing, but there 
is rarely reason to test outpatients and infrequent benefit to testing inpa­
tients except to confirm and treat influenza.
Adenoviruses can cause upper and lower respiratory tract disease, 
ranging from ordinary colds to severe pneumonia and multisystem 
disease, including hepatitis, myocarditis, and myositis. The incubation 
period of adenovirus infection is 2-4 days. Upper respiratory tract 
infection typically produces fever, erythema of the pharynx, and fol­
licular hyperplasia of the tonsils, together with exudate. Enlargement 
of the cervical lymph nodes occurs frequently. When conjunctivitis 
occurs in association with adenoviral pharyngitis, the resulting syn­
drome is called pharyngoconjunctival fever. Pharyngitis may last as 
long as 7 days and does not respond to antibiotics. There are many 
adenovirus serotypes; adenovirus infections may therefore develop in 
children more than once. Laboratory studies may reveal a leukocytosis 
and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Adenovirus outbreaks 
have been associated with swimming pools and contamination in 
health care workers.
The enteroviruses (coxsackievirus and echovirus) can cause sore 
throat, especially in the summer. High fever is common, and the throat 
is erythematous but usually not bright red; tonsillar exudate and cervi­
cal adenopathy are unusual. Symptoms resolve within a few days. 
Enteroviruses can also cause meningitis, myocarditis, rash, and two 
specific syndromes that involve the oropharynx.
Herpangina is characterized by distinctive discrete, painful, gray-
white papulovesicular lesions distributed over the posterior orophar­
ynx (see Table 1.6). The vesicles are 1-2 mm in diameter and are 
initially surrounded by a halo of erythema before they ulcerate. Fever 
may reach 39.5°C. The illness is due to enteroviruses and generally lasts 
less than 7 days, but severe pain may impair fluid intake and occasion­
ally necessitates medical support.
Hand-foot-mouth disease is caused by coxsackievirus A16. Painful 
vesicles that ulcerate can occur throughout the oropharynx. Vesicles 
also develop on the palms, soles, and, less often, on the trunk or 
extremities. Fever is present in most cases, but many children do not 
appear seriously ill. This disease lasts less than 7 days.
Primary infection caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV) usually 
produces high fever with acute gingivostomatitis, involving vesicles 
(which become ulcers) throughout the anterior portion of the mouth, 
including the lips. There is sparing of the posterior pharynx in herpes 
gingivostomatitis; the infection usually occurs in young children. 
High fever is common, pain is intense, and intake of oral fluids is 
often impaired, which may lead to dehydration. In addition, HSV may 
Sore Throat
Robert R. Tanz
1 
SECTION 1  Respiratory Disorders
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
1.e1
(See Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, p. 2019)
2
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
Infection
Bacterial (see Tables 1.2, 1.3)
Viral (see Tables 1.2, 1.3)
Fungal (see Table 1.3)
Neutropenic mucositis (invasive anaerobic mouth flora)
Tonsillitis
Epiglottitis
Uvulitis
Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
Retropharyngeal abscess (prevertebral space)
Ludwig angina (submandibular space)
Lateral pharyngeal space cellulitis-abscess
Buccal space cellulitis
Suppurative thyroiditis
Lemierre syndrome (septic jugular thrombophlebitis)
Vincent angina (mixed anaerobic bacteria–gingivitis–pharyngitis)
Irritation
Cigarette smoking
Inhaled irritants
Reflux esophagitis
Chemical toxins (caustic agents)
Paraquat ingestion
Smog
Dry hot air
Hot foods, liquids
Other
Tumor, including Kaposi sarcoma, leukemia
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis)
Sarcoidosis
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
Foreign body
Stylohyoid syndrome
Behçet disease
Kawasaki syndrome
Posterior pharyngeal trauma—pseudodiverticulum
Pneumomediastinum with air dissection
Hematoma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Bullous pemphigoid
Syndrome of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical 
adenitis (PFAPA)
TABLE 1.1  Etiology of Sore Throat
Definite Causes
Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A streptococci)
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Epstein-Barr virus
Parainfluenza viruses (types 1–4)
Influenza viruses
Rhinoviruses
Coronavirus
Adenovirus (types 3, 4, 7, 14, 21, others)
Respiratory syncytial virus
Herpes simplex virus (types 1, 2)
Probable or Occasional Causes
Group C streptococci
Group G streptococci
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia trachomatis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
TABLE 1.2  Infectious Etiology 
of Pharyngitis
Bacteria
Fusobacterium necrophorum (Lemierre syndrome)
Neisseria meningitidis
Yersinia enterocolitica
Tularemia (oropharyngeal)
Yersinia pestis
Bacillus anthracis
Chlamydia psittaci
Secondary syphilis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Lyme disease
Corynebacterium ulcerans
Leptospira species
Mycoplasma hominis
Virus
Coxsackievirus A, B
Cytomegalovirus
Viral hemorrhagic fevers
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (primary infection)
Human herpesvirus 6
Measles
Varicella
Rubella
Fungus
Candida species
Histoplasmosis
Cryptococcosis
TABLE 1.3  Additional Potential Pathogens 
Associated with Sore Throat
manifest as pharyngitis in adolescents. Approximately 35% of new-
onset HSV-positive adolescent patients have herpetic lesions; most 
teenage patients with HSV pharyngitis cannot be distinguished from 
patients with other causes of pharyngitis. The classic syndrome of 
herpetic gingivostomatitis in infants and toddlers lasts up to 2 weeks; 
data on the course of more benign HSV pharyngitis are lacking. The 
differential diagnosis of vesicular-ulcerating oral lesions is noted in 
Table 1.6.
A common cause of a local and large lesion of unknown etiology 
is aphthous stomatitis (Fig. 1.1). PFAPA (periodic fever, aphthous 
stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis) is an idiopathic periodic 
fever syndrome that occurs predictably every 2-8 weeks. The onset of 
PFAPA is usually before the age of 5 years. In addition to aphthous 
stomatitis and pharyngitis, PFAPA is characterized by high fever lasting 
4-6 days. Individual episodes resolve spontaneously but may respond 
Peritonsillar 
Abscess
Retropharyngeal 
Abscess (Cellulitis)
Submandibular 
Space (Ludwig 
Angina)*
Lateral 
Pharyngeal 
Space
Masticator 
Space*
Epiglottitis
Laryngotracheo-
bronchitis 
(Croup)
Bacterial 
Tracheitis
Postanginal 
Sepsis 
(Lemierre 
Syndrome)
Etiology
Group A 
streptococci, 
oral anaerobes†
Staphylococcis aureus, 
oral anaerobes,† group 
A streptococci, 
“suppurative adenitis”
Oral anaerobes†
Oral 
anaerobes†
Oral 
anaerobes†
Haemophilus 
influenzae type 
b (rarely), group 
A streptococci, 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, 
Staphyloccocus 
aureus, and 
non-type b 
H. influenzae
Parainfluenza virus; 
influenza, adenovirus, 
and respiratory 
syncytial virus less 
common
Moraxella 
catarrhalis, 
S. aureus, 
H. influenzae 
type b or 
nontypable
Fusobacterium 
necrophorum
Age
Teens
Infancy, preteens, 
occasionally teens
Teens
Teens
Teens
2-5 yr
3 mo-3 yr
3-10 yr
Teens
Manifestations
Initial episode of 
pharyngitis, 
followed by 
sudden 
worsening of 
unilateral 
odynophagia, 
trismus, hot 
potato (muffled) 
voice, drooling, 
displacement of 
uvula
Fever, dyspnea, stridor, 
dysphagia, drooling, 
stiff neck, pain, 
cervical adenopathy, 
swelling of posterior 
pharyngeal space
Descending mediastinitis 
(rare)
Lateral neck radiograph 
reveals swollen 
retropharyngeal 
prevertebral space: 
infants, >1 × width of 
adjacent vertebral 
body (>2-7 mm); teens, 
> 13 × width of 
vertebral body 
(>1-7 mm)
CT distinguishes 
cellulitis from abscess
Fever, dysphagia, 
odynophagia, stiff 
neck, dyspnea; 
airway obstruction, 
swollen tongue and 
floor of mouth 
(tender)
Muffled voice
Severe pain, 
fever, 
trismus, 
dysphagia, 
edematous 
appearing, 
painful 
lateral facial 
(jaw) or neck 
swelling 
(induration)
May lead to 
Lemierre 
syndrome
Pain, 
prominent 
trismus, 
fever
Swelling not 
always 
evident
Sudden-onset high 
fever, “toxic” 
appearance, 
muffled voice, 
anxiety, pain, 
retractions, 
dysphagia, 
drooling, stridor, 
sitting up, 
leaning forward 
tripod position, 
cherry-red 
swollen 
epiglottis
Usually not hoarse 
or coughing
Lateral neck 
radiograph 
shows “thumb 
sign” of swollen 
epiglottis
Low-grade fever, 
barking cough, 
hoarseness, aphonia, 
stridor; mild 
retractions; 
radiograph shows 
“steeple sign” of 
subglottic narrowing 
on anteroposterior 
neck view
Prior history of 
croup with 
sudden 
onset of 
respiratory 
distress, 
high fever, 
“toxic” 
appearance, 
hoarseness, 
stridor, 
barking 
cough, 
tripod sitting 
position; 
radiograph 
as per croup 
plus ragged 
tracheal air 
column
Prior pharyngitis 
with sudden-
onset fever, chills, 
odynophagia, 
neck pain, septic 
thrombophlebitits 
of internal jugular 
vein with septic 
emboli (e.g., 
lungs, joints), 
bacteremia
TABLE 1.4  Distinguishing Features of Parapharyngeal–Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
*Often odontogenic; check for tooth abscess, caries, tender teeth.
†Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides.
4
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
coryza, and conjunctivitis, the pharynx may be intensely and diffusely 
erythematous, without tonsillar enlargement or exudate. The presence 
of Koplik spots, the pathognomonic white or blue-white enanthem of 
measles, on the buccal mucosa near the mandibular molars provides 
the evidence of the correct diagnosis before the rash develops. Measles 
can be complicated by pneumonia and encephalitis. In the United 
States, widespread use of the measles vaccine has virtually eliminated 
transmission of natural measles infection except among unvaccinated 
subpopulations (children <12 months old, families who have refused 
immunization). Most cases are imported by unimmunized visitors 
from countries with endemic measles.
INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS
 Pathogenesis
Acute exudative pharyngitis commonly occurs with infectious mono­
nucleosis caused by primary infection with the Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV). Mononucleosis is a febrile, systemic, self-limited lymphopro­
liferative disorder that is usually associated with hepatosplenomegaly 
and generalized lymphadenopathy. Acute pharyngitis may be mild 
or severe, with significant tonsillar hypertrophy (possibly producing 
airway obstruction), erythema, and impressive tonsillar exudates. 
Regional lymph nodes may be particularly enlarged and slightly tender. 
Infectious mononucleosis usually occurs in adolescents and young 
adults; EBV infection is generally milder or subclinical in preado­
lescent children. In U.S. high school and college students, attack rates 
are 200-800 per 100,000 per year. EBV is transmitted primarily by 
saliva.
 Clinical Features
After a 2-4 week incubation period, patients with infectious mono­
nucleosis usually experience an abrupt onset of malaise, fatigue, fever, 
and headache, followed closely by pharyngitis. The tonsils are enlarged 
with exudates and cervical adenopathy. More generalized adenopathy 
with hepatosplenomegaly often follows. Fever and pharyngitis typi­
cally last 1-3 weeks, and lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly 
resolve over 3-6 weeks. Malaise and lethargy can persist for several 
months and can affect school or work performance.
 Diagnosis
Laboratory studies of diagnostic value include atypical lymphocytosis; 
these lymphocytes are primarily EBVspecific, cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
that represent a reactive response to EBV-infected B lymphocytes. A 
modest elevation of serum transaminase levels, reflecting EBV hepati­
tis, is common. Tests useful for diagnosis include detection of hetero­
phile antibodies that react with bovine erythrocytes (most often 
detected by the monospot test) and a specific antibody against EBV 
viral capsid antigen (VCA), early antigen (EA), and nuclear antigen 
(EBNA). Acute infectious mononucleosis is usually associated with 
a positive heterophile test result and antibody to VCA and EA 
(Fig. 1.2).
The findings of acute exudative pharyngitis together with hepato­
megaly, splenomegaly, and generalized lymphadenopathy suggest 
infectious mononucleosis. Early in the disease and in cases without 
liver or spleen enlargement, differentiation from other causes of phar­
yngitis, including streptococcal pharyngitis, is difficult. Indeed, a small 
number of patients with infectious mononucleosis have a throat 
culture positive for group A streptococci. (They are likely streptococcal 
carriers; see subsequent text.) An indistinguishable syndrome can 
occur with cytomegalovirus, but differentiation is rarely of clinical 
importance. Serologic evidence of mononucleosis should be sought 
Toxic appearance
Shock
Fever >2 wk
Duration of sore throat >2 wk
Trismus
Drooling
Cyanosis
Hemorrhage
Asymmetric tonsillar swelling or asymmetric cervical adenopathy
Respiratory distress (airway obstruction or pneumonia)
Suspicion of parapharyngeal space infection
Suspicion of diphtheria (bull neck, uvula paralysis, thick membrane)
Apnea
Severe, unremitting pain
“Hot potato” voice
Chest or neck pain
Weight loss
TABLE 1.5  Red Flags Associated with 
Sore Throat
to oral prednisone or cimetidine. There are reports of improvement 
after tonsillectomy. In most patients PFAPA completely resolves before 
puberty without sequelae. The diagnosis is based on clinical criteria 
after excluding cyclic neutropenia, other periodic fever syndromes, 
infections, and malignancy.
Infants and toddlers with measles often have prominent oral find­
ings early in the course of the disease. In addition to high fever, cough, 
FIGURE 1.1  Aphthous stomatitis (“canker sore”). (From Reilly BM. 
Sore throat. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
4.e1
(See Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, p. 1586)
Gingivostomatitis
Herpangina
Hand-Foot-
Mouth 
Disease
Chickenpox
Systemic 
Lupus 
Erythematosus 
(SLE)
Inflammatory 
Bowel 
Disease (IBD)
Aphthous 
Stomatitis
Behçet 
Disease
Vincent 
Stomatitis
Recurrent 
Scarifying 
Ulcerative 
Stomatitis 
(Sutton 
Disease)
Etiology
Herpes simples virus 
(HSV I)
Cocksackievirus 
A, B; 
echovirus or 
HSV (rarely)
Cocksackievirus 
A, 
cocksackievirus 
B (rarely)
Varicella-zoster 
virus
Autoimmune
Autoimmune
Unknown
Unknown; 
vasculitis
Unknown; or 
anaerobic 
bacteria
Unknown
Location
Ulcerative vesicles of 
pharynx, tongue, and 
palate plus lesions of 
mucocutaneous 
(perioral) margin
Anterior fauces 
(tonsils), soft 
palate 
(uvula), less 
often pharynx
Tongue, buccal 
mucosa, 
palate, palms, 
soles, anterior 
oral cavity
Tongue, 
gingiva, 
buccal 
mucosa, 
marked 
cutaneous 
lesions; trunk 
> face
Oral, nasal mucosa; 
palate, pharynx, 
buccal mucosa
Lips, tongue, 
buccal mucosa, 
oropharynx
As in IBD
Oral (similar to 
IBD); genital 
ulcers
Gingiva; ulceration 
at base of teeth
Tongue; 
buccal 
mucosa
Age
Less than 5 yr
3-10 yr
1 yr-teens
Any age
Any age
Any age
Teens and 
adulthood
Teens, adulthood, 
occasionally 
<10 yr
Teens; if younger, 
consider 
immunodeficiency 
and blood 
dyscrasia
Teens
Manifestations
Fever, mouth pain, 
toxic, fetid breath, 
drooling, anorexia, 
cervical 
lymphadenopathy; 
cracked, swollen 
hemorrhagic 
gums; secondary 
inoculation possible 
(fingers, eye, skin); 
reactivation with 
long latency (any 
age)
Fever, sore 
throat, 
odynophagia; 
summer 
outbreaks; 
6-12 lesions 
(2-4 mm 
papule) → 
vesicle → 
ulceration; 
headache, 
myalgias
Painful bilateral 
vesicles, fever
Fever, pruritic 
cutaneous 
vesicles, 
painful oral 
lesions
Renal, central 
nervous system, 
arthritis, 
cutaneous, 
hematologic, 
other organ 
involvement; 
ulcers minimally 
to moderately 
painful; may be 
painless
Multiple 
recurrences; 
painful 
ulcerations 
1-2 mm, but 
may be 
5-15 mm
Similar to 
IBD
Painful 
ulcerations 
(heal without 
scarring); 
uveitis, 
arthralgia, 
arthritis, lower 
gastrointestinal 
ulceration 
(similar to IBD); 
recurrences; 
spontaneous 
remissions
Fever, bleeding 
gums; gray 
membrane
Deep, large, 
painful 
ulcerations; 
relapsing; 
scarring 
with 
distortion 
of mucosa
TABLE 1.6  Vesicular-Ulcerating Eruptions of the Mouth and Pharynx
6
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
Spread of GAS in classrooms and among family members is common, 
especially in the presence of crowded living conditions. Transmission 
occurs primarily by the inhalation of organisms in large droplets or by 
direct contact with respiratory secretions. Pets do not appear to be a 
frequent reservoir. Untreated streptococcal pharyngitis is particularly 
contagious early in the acute illness and for the first 2 weeks after the 
organism has been acquired, but antibiotic therapy effectively prevents 
disease transmission. Within 24 hours of institution of therapy with 
penicillin, it is difficult to isolate GAS from patients with acute strep­
tococcal pharyngitis, and infected children can return to school.
Molecular epidemiology studies of streptococcal pharyngitis have 
shown that the prevalent M protein types vary among communities 
and over time. Numerous distinct strains of GAS can circulate simul­
taneously in a community during the peak season. GAS M proteins 
can be identified in research studies by using PCR to establish the 
specific M protein gene (emm gene); M protein identification is not 
available for use in clinical care. Children with streptococcal pharyn­
gitis can serve as a local reservoir for strains that cause invasive disease 
(e.g., sepsis, streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, cellulitis, necrotizing 
fasciitis) in the same geographic area and season.
 Clinical Features
The classic patient presentation of acute streptococcal pharyngitis 
involves a sudden onset of fever and sore throat. Headache, malaise, 
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting occur frequently. Cough, rhinor­
rhea, conjunctivitis, stridor, diarrhea, discrete ulcerated lesions, and 
hoarseness are distinctly unusual and suggest a viral etiology.
Examination of the patient reveals marked pharyngeal erythema. 
Petechiae may be noted on the palate, but they can also occur in viral 
pharyngitis, especially mononucleosis. Tonsils are enlarged, symmet­
ric, and red, with patchy exudates on their surfaces. The papillae of the 
when splenomegaly or other features are present or if symptoms persist 
longer than expected.
Primary infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
may produce a mononucleosis-like illness with sore throat, fever, 
lymphadenopathy, rash, myalgias, and hepatosplenomegaly. Early 
infection may be detected by viral RNA or DNA load because immu­
noglobulin (Ig)M or IgG titers may have not yet developed.
GROUP A STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTION
In the evaluation of a patient with sore throat, the primary concern 
in the United States is usually accurate diagnosis and treatment of 
pharyngitis caused by group A streptococci (GAS) or Streptococcus 
pyogenes, which accounts for about 15% of all episodes of pharyngitis. 
The sequelae of GAS pharyngitis, especially acute rheumatic fever 
(ARF) and acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), at one time resulted in 
considerable morbidity and mortality in the United States and con­
tinue to do so in other parts of the world. Prevention of ARF in par­
ticular depends on timely diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis and 
prompt antibiotic treatment. Group A streptococci are characterized 
by the presence of group A carbohydrate in the cell wall, and they are 
further distinguished by several cell wall protein antigens (M, R, T). 
These protein antigens, especially the M protein, a virulence factor, are 
useful for studies of epidemiology and pathogenesis but are not used 
in clinical care.
 Epidemiology
GAS pharyngitis is endemic in the United States; epidemics occur 
sporadically. Episodes peak in the late winter and early spring. Rates 
of GAS pharyngitis are highest among children aged 5-11 years old. 
FIGURE 1.2  Schematic representation of the evolution of antibodies to various Epstein-Barr virus antigens 
in patients with infectious mononucleosis. The titers are geometric mean values expressed as reciprocals 
of the serum dilution. The minimal titer tested for viral capsid antigen (VCA) and early antigen antibodies 
was 1 : 10; for Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen, it was 1 : 2.5. The immunoglobulin (Ig)M response to capsid 
antigen was divided because of the significant differences noted according to age. (From Jenson HB, Ench 
Y, Sumaya CV. Epstein-Barr virus. In: Rose NR, de Macario EC, Folds JD, et al, editors. Manual of Clinical 
Laboratory Immunology. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology; 1997. p. 634-43.)
Heterophile antibody
Infectious mononucleosis
Antibody titer
1:320
1:160
1:80
1:40
1:20
1:10
0
0
2
4
2
4
Weeks
IgM-VCA
(4 years)
IgM-VCA
(4 years)
IgG-VCA
Early antigen
Nuclear antigen
Months
Time after Clinical Onset
6
1
Years
3
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
6.e1
(See Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, p. 2018)
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
7
the area around the mouth often appears pale in comparison, giving 
the appearance of circumoral pallor. Accentuation of erythema occurs 
in flexor skin creases, especially in the antecubital fossae (Pastia lines). 
The erythema begins to fade within a few days. Desquamation begins 
within a week of onset on the face and progresses downward, often 
resembling that seen after mild sunburn. On occasion, sheet-like des­
quamation occurs around the free margins of the fingernails; this is 
usually coarser than the desquamation seen with Kawasaki disease. The 
differential diagnosis of scarlet fever includes Kawasaki disease, 
measles, and staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome (Table 1.7).
 Diagnosis
Although signs and symptoms may strongly suggest acute streptococ­
cal pharyngitis, laboratory diagnosis is strongly recommended, even 
for patients with scarlet fever (Fig. 1.3). Scoring systems for diagnosing 
acute GAS pharyngitis on clinical grounds have not proved very satis­
factory. Using clinical criteria alone, physicians overestimate the likeli­
hood that patients have streptococcal infection. The throat culture on 
blood agar plate has traditionally been used to diagnose streptococcal 
pharyngitis. Plating a swab of the posterior pharynx and tonsils on 
sheep blood agar, identifying β-hemolytic colonies, and testing them 
for the presence of sensitivity to a bacitracin-impregnated disk has 
long been the “gold standard” diagnostic test, but it takes 24-48 hours 
to obtain results. Rapid antigen detection tests (RADTs) that take less 
than 15 minutes can detect the presence of the cell wall group A car­
bohydrate antigen after acid extraction of organisms obtained by 
throat swab. RADTs are highly specific (generally >95%) when com­
pared to throat culture. In comparison to hospital or reference labora­
tory throat culture results, the sensitivities of these tests are generally 
75-85% and can be lower. The low sensitivity of these tests, coupled 
tongue may be red and swollen, hence the designation “strawberry 
tongue.” Anterior cervical lymph nodes are often tender and enlarged.
Combinations of these signs can be used to assist in diagnosis; in 
particular, tonsillar exudates in association with fever, palatal pete­
chiae, and tender anterior cervical adenitis strongly suggest infection 
with GAS. However, other diseases can produce this constellation of 
findings, including infectious mononucleosis. Some or all of these 
classic characteristics may be absent in patients with streptococcal 
pharyngitis. Symptoms usually resolve within 5 days even in the 
absence of antibiotic therapy. Younger children can have a syndrome 
called streptococcosis―coryza with crusting below the nares, more 
generalized adenopathy, and a more chronic course. When rash accom­
panies the illness, accurate clinical diagnosis is easier. Scarlet fever, 
so-called because of the characteristic fine, diffuse red rash, is essen­
tially pathognomonic for infection with group A streptococci. Scarlet 
fever is rarely seen in children younger than 3 years old or in adults.
Scarlet Fever
The rash of scarlet fever is caused by infection with a strain of GAS 
that contains a bacteriophage encoding for production of an erythro­
genic (redness producing) toxin, usually erythrogenic (also called 
pyrogenic) exotoxin A (designated SPE A). Scarlet fever is simply GAS 
pharyngitis with a rash and should be explained as such to patients 
and their families. Although patients with the streptococcal toxic shock 
syndrome are also infected with GAS that produces SPE A, most GAS 
pharyngeal infections are not associated with development of severe 
invasive or systemic disease.
The rash of scarlet fever has a texture like sandpaper and blanches 
with pressure. It usually begins on the face, but after 24 hours, it 
becomes generalized. The face is red, especially over the cheeks, and 
Scarlet Fever
Kawasaki Disease
Measles
Staphylococcal 
Toxic Shock 
Syndrome
Staphylococcal 
Scalded Skin 
Syndrome
Agent
Group A streptococci
Unknown
Measles virus
Staphylococcus aureus
S. aureus
Age range
All (peak, 5-15 yr)
Usually <5 yr
<2 yr, 10-20 yr
All (especially >10 yr)
Usually <5 yr
Prodrome
No
No
Fever, coryza, cough, 
conjunctivitis
Usually no
No
Enanthem
No
Occasionally
Koplik spots
No
Limited
Mouth
Strawberry tongue, 
exudative pharyngitis, 
palatal petechiae
Erythema; red, cracked lips, 
strawberry tongue
Diffusely red, no 
cracked lips
Usually normal
Erythema
Rash
Fine, red, “sandpaper,” 
membranous 
desquamation, 
circumoral pallor, 
Pastia lines
Variable polymorphic; 
erythematous face, trunk, 
and diaper area; tips of 
fingers and toes 
desquamate
10–28 days after onset
Maculopapular; 
progressing from 
forehead to feet; 
may desquamate
Diffuse erythroderma; 
desquamates
Erythema, painful bullous 
lesions; positive 
Nikolsky sign; 
desquamates
Other
Cervical adenitis, 
gallbladder hydrops, 
fever
Coronary artery disease; 
fever >5 days; 
conjunctival (nonpurulent) 
injection; tender, swollen 
hands and feet; cervical 
adenopathy (size 
>1.5 cm); thrombocytosis;
pyuria (sterile); gallbladder 
hydrops
“Toxic” appearance; 
dehydration; 
encephalitis, 
pneumonia; fever
Shock (hypotension, 
including orthostatic); 
encephalopathy; 
diarrhea; headache
Fever, cracked lips; 
conjunctivitis
TABLE 1.7  Differential Diagnosis of Scarlet Fever
8
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
FIGURE 1.3  Management of patients with sore throat. GAS, group A 
streptococci. 
Signs and Symptoms Compatible with GAS
Scarlet fever?
Positive
Yes
No
Confirm with rapid test,
throat culture, or
molecular test; treat 
with antibiotics
Viral pharyngitis
Symptomatic therapy
(No antibiotics)
Treat with
antibiotics
Sore throat persists
≥7 days?
Positive
1) Repeat testing for GAS
2) Mono test
Throat culture
or
Molecular test
Negative
Viral
  pharyngitis
Symptomatic
  therapy
(No antibiotics)
Yes
GAS pharyngitis
No
Rapid
test
Negative
Not GAS
pharyngitis
GAS
pharyngitis
GAS
pharyngitis
Positive
No
Negative
Negative
Viral pharyngitis
Viral pharyngitis
Symptomatic therapy
(No antibiotics)
No antibiotics
Mononucleosis
Positive
Yes
with their excellent specificity, has led to the recommendation that two 
throat swabs be obtained simultaneously from patients with suspected 
GAS pharyngitis. One swab is used for a rapid test. When the RADT 
result is positive, it is highly likely that the patient has GAS pharyngitis, 
and the extra swab can be discarded. When the RADT is negative, GAS 
may nonetheless be present; thus, the extra swab should be processed 
for culture. The sensitivity of rapid tests can be improved by restricting 
testing to patients most likely to have acute GAS pharyngitis and avoid­
ing testing patients more likely to have viral pharyngitis. This takes 
advantage of the spectrum effect (or spectrum bias) associated with 
many clinical tests including RADTs and throat cultures; the pretest 
probability of having the disease affects test results. One of the best 
validated scoring systems for children was developed by McIsaac, et al. 
Patients with greater likelihood of GAS infection tend to have more 
McIsaac criteria (fever, cervical adenopathy, tonsillar exudates, no 
cough, 3-15 years old), but the positive predictive value of the highest 
McIsaac score is only about 60% (Table 1.8). In contrast, a score ≤2 is 
associated with a negative predictive value of about 80%. The presence 
of viral symptoms such as cough, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, laryngitis, 
stridor, croup, or diarrhea decreases the likelihood that the illness is 
due to GAS. Patients with a negative RADT result should not be treated 
before culture verification unless there is a particularly high suspicion 
of GAS infection (e.g., scarlet fever, peritonsillar abscess, or tonsillar 
exudates in addition to tender cervical adenopathy, palatal petechiae, 
fever, and recent exposure to a person with GAS pharyngitis).
Molecular “PCR-like” tests for GAS are available for use in hospital 
and reference laboratories. Some are cleared by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for use in physician office laboratories, particu­
larly those offices that are certified to perform CLIA-moderate tests. 
These simplified molecular tests use methods that amplify the DNA of 
a specific GAS gene. They take less than 1 hour to perform and are 
reported to have both sensitivity and specificity ≥99% when compared 
to standard throat culture and PCR. They can be used as a “stand-
alone” test for GAS or as a confirmatory test when the RADT is nega­
tive. There are three concerns with these molecular tests: (1) they are 
so sensitive it is likely they will identify more patients who are carriers 
than would ordinarily be identified by RADT and/or culture; (2) unless 
rigorous technique is followed they may be prone to contamination 
with exogenous GAS DNA from other swabs, a particular concern in 
physician offices when performed by staff who are not trained labora­
tory technologists; and (3) they are much more expensive than throat 
culture, and their costs may not be covered by all insurance plans.
Testing patients for serologic evidence of an antibody response to 
extracellular products of GAS is not useful for diagnosing acute phar­
yngitis. Because it generally takes several weeks for antibody levels to 
rise, streptococcal antibody tests are valid only for determining past 
infection. Specific antibodies that are often measured in the appropri­
ate clinical setting include antistreptolysin O (ASO), anti-DNase B, and 
antihyaluronidase (AHT). When antibody testing is desired in order to 
evaluate a possible poststreptococcal illness, more than one of these 
tests should be performed to improve sensitivity.
 Treatment
Treatment begun within 9 days of the onset of GAS pharyngitis is 
effective in preventing acute rheumatic fever (ARF). Therapy does not 
McIsaac Score
Number of 
Patients (%)
GAS Culture-
Positive† n (%)
0
42 (2%)
3 (7%)
1
200 (11%)
37 (19%)
2
576 (31%)
118 (20%)
3
552 (30%)
162 (29%)
4
365 (20%)
163 (45%)
5
113 (6%)
70 (62%)
TABLE 1.8  Distribution of McIsaac 
Scores in a Study of Pediatric Patients 
With Pharyngitis*
From Tanz RR, Gerber MA, Kabat W, et al. Performance of a rapid 
antigen detection test and throat culture in community pediatric 
offices: implications for management of pharyngitis. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:437-444.
*McIsaac criteria: Fever (temperature >38°C), tender anterior cervical 
adenopathy, tonsillar swelling or exudates, absence of cough, and 
age <15 years. One point is awarded for each criterion.
†Hospital laboratory throat culture result.
GAS, group A streptococci.
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
9
appear to affect the risk of acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis 
(AGN). Antibiotic therapy also reduces the incidence of suppurative 
sequelae of GAS pharyngitis, such as peritonsillar abscess and cervical 
adenitis. In addition, treatment produces a more rapid resolution of 
signs and symptoms and terminates contagiousness within 24 hours. 
For these reasons, antibiotics should be instituted as soon as the diag­
nosis is supported by laboratory studies.
There are numerous antibiotics available for treating streptococcal 
pharyngitis (Table 1.9). The drugs of choice are penicillin and amoxi­
cillin. Despite the widespread use of penicillin to treat streptococcal 
and other infections for many decades, resistance of GAS to penicillin 
or any other β-lactam antibiotic has not developed. Amoxicillin has 
been demonstrated to be effective in eradicating GAS when given by 
mouth once daily for 10 days. The convenience of once-daily dosing 
and palatability make amoxicillin an attractive approach despite its 
somewhat broader spectrum of antimicrobial activity. Penicillin can 
be given by mouth twice daily for 10 days or intramuscularly as a single 
injection of benzathine penicillin. Intramuscular benzathine penicillin 
alleviates concerns about patient compliance. A less painful parenteral 
alternative is benzathine penicillin in combination with procaine peni­
cillin. Intramuscular procaine penicillin alone is not effective for pre­
vention of ARF because adequate levels of penicillin are not present in 
blood and tissues for a sufficient time. Other β-lactams, including 
semisynthetic derivatives of penicillin and the cephalosporins, are at 
least as effective as penicillin for treating streptococcal pharyngitis. The 
broader spectrum of the cephalosporins and their higher cost relegate 
them to second-line status. The decreased dosing frequency of amoxi­
cillin and some cephalosporins may improve patient adherence.
Patients who are allergic to penicillin can receive a cephalosporin 
if they have not had an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. Erythro­
mycin or another non-β-lactam antibiotic, such as clarithromycin, 
azithromycin, or clindamycin, can be used. Resistance of GAS to mac­
rolides has increased dramatically in many areas of the world where 
erythromycin has been widely used. Macrolide resistance also affects 
azithromycin and can affect clindamycin. Although this resistance has 
Dose/Route
Duration
Frequency
Standard Treatment
Amoxicillin
50 mg/kg up to 1000 mg/Oral
10 days
Once daily
Penicillin V
250 mg (500 mg for adolescents 
and adults)/Oral
10 days
bid
Benzathine penicillin G
600,000 U (weight <27 kg)/IM
1.2 million U (weight ≥27 kg)/IM
N/A
N/A
Once
Oral Dose
Duration
Frequency
Treatment for Penicillin-Allergic Patients
Clarithromycin
15 mg/kg/day up to 500 mg/day
10 days
bid
Azithromycin†
12 mg/kg on day 1 then 6 mg/kg/d 
on days 2-5
5 days
Once daily
Clindamycin
21 mg/kg/day 20 mg/kg/day up to 
900 mg/day
10 days
tid
Cephalosporins‡
  Cephalexin
40 mg/kg/day up to 1000 mg/day
10 days  
bid
  Cefadroxil
30 mg/kg/day up to 1000 mg/day
10 days
Once daily
TABLE 1.9  Recommended Treatment Regimens for Acute Streptococcal Pharyngitis*
*Based on Infectious Diseases Society of America 2012 and AAP Red Book recommendations.
†Maximum dose for children is 500 mg/day. Adult dosage: 500 mg the first day, 250 mg the subsequent 4 days.
‡First-generation cephalosporins (e.g., cephalexin and cefadroxil) are preferred but all cephalosporins are effective. Dosage and frequency vary 
among agents. Avoid use in patients with history of immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity to penicillin or other β-lactam antibiotics.
not yet emerged as a major problem in the United States, where the 
rate of macrolide resistance among GAS is generally 5-8%, there is 
much local variation. GAS resistance to clindamycin is in the range of 
1-2%. Of note, both macrolide and clindamycin resistance are more 
common in Canada than in the United States. Sulfa drugs (including 
sulfamethoxazole combined with trimethoprim), tetracyclines, and 
chloramphenicol should not be used for treatment of acute streptococ­
cal pharyngitis because they do not eradicate GAS.
Suppurative Complications
Antibiotic therapy has greatly reduced the likelihood of developing 
suppurative complications caused by spread of GAS from the pharynx 
or middle ear to adjacent structures. Peritonsillar abscess (“quinsy”) 
manifests with fever, severe throat pain, dysphagia, “hot potato voice,” 
pain referred to the ear, and bulging of the peritonsillar area with 
asymmetry of the tonsils and sometimes displacement of the uvula 
(Fig. 1.4; see also Table 1.4). There can be peritonsillar cellulitis without 
a well-defined abscess cavity. Trismus may be present. When an abscess 
is found clinically or by an imaging study such as a computed tomo­
graphic (CT) scan, surgical drainage is indicated. Peritonsillar abscess 
occurs most commonly in older children and adolescents.
Retropharyngeal abscess represents extension of an infection from 
the pharynx or peritonsillar region into the retropharyngeal (prever­
tebral) space, which is rich in lymphoid structures (Figs. 1.5 and 1.6; 
see also Table 1.4). Children younger than 4 years old are most often 
affected. Fever, dysphagia, drooling, stridor, extension of the neck, and 
a mass in the posterior pharyngeal wall may be noted. Surgical drain­
age is often required if frank suppuration has occurred. Spread of GAS 
via pharyngeal lymphatic vessels to regional nodes can cause cervical 
lymphadenitis. The markedly swollen and tender anterior cervical 
nodes that result can suppurate. Otitis media, mastoiditis, and sinusitis 
also may occur as complications of GAS pharyngitis. Additional para­
pharyngeal suppurative infections that may mimic streptococcal 
disease are noted in Table 1.4. Furthermore, any pharyngeal infectious 
process may produce torticollis if there is inflammation that extends 
10
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
to the paraspinal muscles and ligaments, producing pain, spasm, and, 
on occasion, rotary subluxation of the cervical spine. Oropharyngeal 
torticollis lasts less than 2 weeks and is not associated with abnormal 
neurologic signs or pain over the spinous process. Invasive sterile 
site or bacteremic infection with GAS is unusual as sequelae to 
pharyngitis.
Nonsuppurative Sequelae
Nonsuppurative complications include acute rheumatic fever (ARF), 
acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), and possibly reactive arthritis/
synovitis. In addition, an association between streptococcal infection 
and neuropsychiatric disorders such as tic disorder, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, and Tourette syndrome has been postulated. This 
possible association has been called PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune 
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococci). The termi­
nology has been modified to “pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric 
syndrome” (PANS) or “childhood acute neuropsychiatric syndrome” 
(CANS), in recognition that the etiologic role of GAS and benefit from 
antibiotic treatment have been difficult to establish, and it is likely that 
infections other than GAS infection are associated with the develop­
ment, recurrence, or exacerbation of neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Therapy with an appropriate antibiotic within 9 days of onset of 
symptoms is highly effective in preventing ARF. Except in certain geo­
graphic areas (e.g., Salt Lake City) and populations (e.g., Hasidic 
Jewish communities) ARF is quite rare in North America. The impres­
sive reduction in ARF prevalence in the United States since the mid-
1960s may be related to reductions in the prevalence of so-called 
“rheumatogenic” GAS M types. The reason for the near disappearance 
of rheumatogenic types in the United States is unknown. Areas of the 
world with persistently high rates of ARF have different M types than 
the United States had in the past and has currently. AGN is not pre­
vented by treatment of the antecedent streptococcal infection. Pharyn­
gitis caused by one of the “nephritogenic” strains of GAS precedes 
FIGURE 1.5  Retropharyngeal abscess in a 3-year-old female with sore throat and fever. A, Lateral soft tissue 
neck radiograph reveals extensive soft tissue swelling displacing the airway anteriorly from the skull base 
to C6 (arrow). B, Sagittal reconstructed contrast-enhanced computed tomography confirms thickened, 
enhancing retropharyngeal soft tissues indicating cellulitis. Region of hypoattenuating fluid is concerning for 
retropharyngeal abscess (asterisk). (From Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and inflammation. In: Caffey’s Pedi­
atric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 138; Figure 15.4.)
2
*
A
B
FIGURE 1.4  Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy, sore throat). The left tonsil 
is asymmetrically inflamed and swollen; there is displacement of the 
uvula to the opposite side. The supratonsillar space (arrow) is also 
swollen; this is the usual site of the surgical incision for drainage. 
Prominent unilateral cervical adenopathy typically coexists. (From Reilly 
BM. Sore throat. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
11
FIGURE 1.6  In an adolescent, the retropharyngeal space normally 
does not exceed 7 mm when measured from the anterior aspect of the 
C2 vertebral body to the posterior pharynx. In infants the retropharyn­
geal space is usually less than one width of the adjacent vertebral body. 
However, during crying, this distance may be three widths of the ver­
tebral body. In addition, under normal circumstances, the retrotracheal 
space does not exceed 22 mm in adolescents when measured from 
the anterior aspect of C6 to the trachea. Dotted lines depict the “thumb­
print” sign, noted on a lateral neck radiograph, made by a swollen 
epiglottis. (From Reilly BM. Sore throat. In: Practical Strategies in Out­
patient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
Tongue
Epiglottis
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Retropharyngeal
space
Retrotracheal
space
spread of GAS in the community. There is no reason to exclude carriers 
from school. There is no easy way to identify chronic carriers prospec­
tively among patients with symptoms of acute pharyngitis. The patho­
physiology of chronic carriage is unknown. As resistance to penicillin 
is not a factor, many other causes have been hypothesized including 
non-adherence to antibiotic treatment, tolerance to antibiotics (sup­
pression but lack of killing by antimicrobials), internalization of 
GAS by epithelial cells, and presence of β-lactamase-producing 
“co-pathogens,” but none has been proven. The clinician should con­
sider the possibility of chronic GAS carriage when a patient or a family 
member has multiple test-positive episodes of pharyngitis, especially 
when symptoms are mild or atypical. A culture or other test is usually 
positive for GAS when the suspected carrier is symptom-free or is 
receiving antibiotic treatment (intramuscular benzathine penicillin is 
recommended in order to eliminate concerns about compliance).
Carriers often receive multiple unsuccessful courses of antibiotic 
therapy in attempts to eliminate GAS. Physician and patient anxiety is 
common and can develop into “streptophobia.” Unproven and ineffec­
tive therapies include tonsillectomy, prolonged administration of anti­
biotics, use of β-lactamase-resistant antibiotics, and culture or 
treatment of pets. Available treatment options for the physician faced 
with a chronic streptococcal carrier include the following:
1.	 Evaluate for GAS pharyngitis by throat swab each time the 
patient has pharyngitis with features that suggest streptococcal 
pharyngitis. Treat as acute GAS pharyngitis with amoxicillin or 
penicillin (or an alternative agent) each time a test is positive; 
this will prevent ARF if the GAS identified has been newly 
acquired. Avoid testing patients who do not have signs and 
symptoms suggestive of acute GAS pharyngitis.
glomerulonephritis by about 10 days. Unlike ARF, which occurs only 
after GAS pharyngitis, AGN also can follow GAS skin infection.
Treatment Failure and Chronic Carriage
Treatment with penicillin cures GAS pharyngitis but does not eradicate 
GAS from the pharynx in as many as 25% of patients (Fig. 1.7). This 
causes considerable consternation among affected patients and their 
families. Resistance to penicillin is not the cause of treatment failure. 
A few such patients are symptomatic and are characterized as having 
clinical treatment failure. Re-infection with the same strain or a differ­
ent strain is possible, as is intercurrent viral pharyngitis. Some of these 
patients may be chronic pharyngeal carriers of GAS who are suffering 
from a new superimposed viral infection; others may have been non-
adherent to therapy. Many patients who continue to have positive tests 
for GAS despite antimicrobial treatment are asymptomatic and are 
identified only when follow-up throat swabs are obtained, a practice 
that is usually unnecessary in North America. Patients who adhered to 
therapy are at minimal risk for ARF. One explanation for asymptom­
atic persistence of GAS after treatment is that these patients are chroni­
cally colonized with GAS, were initially symptomatic because of a viral 
pharyngitis, and did not truly have acute streptococcal pharyngitis.
Patients who are chronically colonized with GAS are called chronic 
carriers. Carriers do not appear to be at risk for ARF or for develop­
ment of suppurative complications, and they are rarely sources of 
FIGURE 1.7  Management of patients with repeated or frequent posi­
tive rapid tests or throat cultures. GAS, group A streptococci; IM, 
intramuscular. 
Signs and Symptoms of bona fide
Acute GAS Pharyngitis
No
Yes
Throat culture
or
Molecular test
Positive
Negative
Probable GAS carrier
GAS carrier
Antibiotic treatment (optional)
1.Oral clindamycin or
2.IM benzathine penicillin plus
  oral rifampin
Recurrent pharyngitis
No
Yes
Special situation?
Family or physician
overly concerned?
Evaluate and treat
each symptomatic
episode individually
12
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
cause self-limited infections. Acute rheumatic fever is not a sequela 
to these infections but acute glomerulonephritis has been documented 
in rare cases after epidemic group C and group G streptococcal 
pharyngitis.
FUSOBACTERIUM NECROPHORUM
Fusobacterium necrophorum, an anaerobic gram-negative organism, is 
increasingly recognized as a cause of pharyngitis in older adolescents 
and adults (ages 15-30 years). Prevalence in studies in Europe is 
reported to be about 10% in patients with pharyngitis not caused by 
GAS, but large surveillance studies have not been performed. In a U.S. 
study of students at a university health clinic, F. necrophorum was 
detected by PCR in 20.5% of patients with pharyngitis and 9.4% of an 
asymptomatic convenience sample; some had more than one bacte­
rium detected by PCR of throat swabs. Many of the pharyngitis patients 
with F. necrophorum had signs and symptoms indistinguishable from 
patients with increased likelihood for GAS pharyngitis: About one-
third had fever, one-third had tonsillar exudates, two-thirds had ante­
rior cervical adenopathy, and most did not have cough. The 
symptomatic overlap of F. necrophorum and GAS and the presence of 
asymptomatic carriage could complicate the clinical assessment of sore 
throat in adolescents but F. necrophorum is difficult to culture from 
the throat and neither a rapid test nor PCR is available for use in 
clinical care.
F. necrophorum pharyngitis can be associated with development of 
septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein, known as 
Lemierre syndrome (Fig. 1.8). Approximately 80% of cases of Lemierre 
syndrome are due to this bacterium, but the proportion of patients 
infected or colonized with F. necrophorum who develop pharyngitis 
and Lemierre syndrome is unknown. Patients present initially with 
fever, sore throat, exudative pharyngitis, and/or peritonsillar abscess. 
The symptoms persist, severe neck pain and swelling develop, and the 
patient appears toxic. Septic shock may ensue along with metastatic 
complications, especially septic pulmonary emboli. Diagnosis is con­
firmed by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of 
the neck and isolation of the organism on anaerobic blood culture. 
F. necrophorum is usually sensitive in vitro to penicillin, but some 
isolates produce β-lactamases, and treatment failure with penicillin 
has been reported. Many expert clinicians use metronidazole, clinda­
mycin, a β-lactam in combination with a β-lactamase inhibitor (such 
as ampicillin-sulbactam), or a carbapenem. The septic thrombophle­
bitis of Lemierre syndrome can be polymicrobial; combination anti­
biotic therapy may be beneficial. Some patients require surgical 
debridement and/or incision and drainage. The case-fatality rate may 
be as high as 4-9%.
ARCANOBACTERIUM INFECTION
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum is a gram-positive rod that has been 
reported to cause acute pharyngitis and scarlet fever-like rash, particu­
larly in teenagers and young adults. Detecting this agent requires 
special methods for culture, and it has not routinely been sought in 
patients with scarlet fever or pharyngitis. The clinical features of A. 
haemolyticum are indistinguishable from GAS pharyngitis; pharyngeal 
erythema is present in almost all patients, patchy white to gray exu­
dates in about 70%, cervical adenitis in about 50%, and moderate fever 
in 40%. Palatal petechiae and strawberry tongue may also occur. The 
scarlatiniform rash usually spares the face, palms, and soles. The rash 
is erythematous and blanches; it may be pruritic and demonstrate 
minimal desquamation. Erythromycin appears to be the treatment of 
choice.
2.	 Treating with one of the regimens effective for terminating 
chronic carriage.
The first option is simple, as safe as amoxicillin and penicillin, and 
appropriate for most patients. The second option should be reserved 
for particularly anxious patients; those with a history of ARF or living 
with someone who had it; or those living or working in nursing homes, 
chronic care facilities, and hospitals. Two antibiotic treatment regi­
mens have been demonstrated in randomized trials to be effective for 
eradication of the carrier state:
•	
Intramuscular benzathine penicillin plus oral rifampin (10 mg/
kg/dose up to 300 mg, given twice daily for 4 days beginning on 
the day of the penicillin injection)
•	
Oral clindamycin, given for 10 days (20 mg/kg/day up to 
450 mg, divided into three equal doses)
Clindamycin is easier to use than intramuscular penicillin plus oral 
rifampin and may be somewhat more effective. Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
(40 mg amoxicillin/kg/day up to 2000 mg amoxicillin/day divided tid 
for 10 days) has also been used. Successful eradication of the carrier 
state makes evaluation of subsequent episodes of pharyngitis much 
easier, although chronic carriage can recur upon re-exposure to GAS.
Recurrent Acute Pharyngitis
Some patients seem remarkably susceptible to developing GAS phar­
yngitis. The reasons for frequent bona fide acute GAS pharyngitis are 
obscure. In contrast to chronic carriers, appropriate antibiotic treat­
ment of each episode results in eradication of the organism.
The role of tonsillectomy in the management of patients with mul­
tiple episodes of streptococcal pharyngitis is controversial. The pres­
ence of tonsils is not necessary for GAS to infect the throat. Fewer 
episodes of sore throat were reported among patients treated with 
tonsillectomy (in contrast to patients treated without surgery) during 
the first 2 years after operation. Patients had experienced numerous 
episodes of pharyngitis over several years, and it appears that not all 
episodes were caused by GAS. By 2 years after tonsillectomy there was 
no difference between the groups in the frequency of pharyngitis. The 
postoperative complication rate among tonsillectomy patients was 
14%. Tonsillectomy cannot be recommended for treatment of recurrent 
pharyngitis except in unusual circumstances. It is preferable to treat 
most patients with penicillin or amoxicillin whenever symptomatic 
GAS pharyngitis occurs. Obtaining follow-up throat specimens for 
culture can help distinguish recurrent pharyngitis from chronic car­
riage but is unnecessary in most instances.
INFECTION WITH STREPTOCOCCI THAT ARE NOT 
GROUP A (NON-A STREPTOCOCCI)
Certain β-hemolytic streptococci of serogroups other than group A 
cause acute pharyngitis. Well-documented epidemics of food-borne 
group C and group G streptococcal pharyngitis have been reported 
in young adults. In these situations, a high percentage of individuals 
who had ingested the contaminated food promptly developed acute 
pharyngitis, and throat cultures yielded virtually pure growth of the 
epidemiologically linked organism. There have been outbreaks of 
group G streptococcal pharyngitis among children. However, the role 
of non-A streptococcal organisms as etiologic agents of acute phar­
yngitis in endemic circumstances has been difficult to establish. Group 
C and group G streptococci may be responsible for acute pharyngitis, 
particularly in adolescents. However, the exact role of these agents, 
most of which are carried asymptomatically in the pharynx of some 
children and young adults, remains to be fully characterized. When 
they are implicated as agents of acute pharyngitis, groups C and G 
organisms do not appear to necessitate treatment, inasmuch as they 
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
13
EPIGLOTTITIS AND BACTERIAL TRACHEITIS
Epiglottitis (or supraglottitis) is a life-threatening infection of the 
airway proximal to the vocal cords (Fig. 1.9; see also Fig. 1.6). Histori­
cally, it was an infection in 1-4 year-old children caused by Haemophi­
lus influenzae type b. It presents with acute onset of fever and severe 
sore throat. This disease progresses rapidly to airway compromise. 
Patients are often drooling and leaning forward with the neck extended. 
Some patients may have stridor, but a muffled voice is more common. 
Management depends on establishing a secure airway by intubation 
and treating with antibiotics. When epiglottitis is suspected, the oro­
pharynx should not be visualized or manipulated except in a con­
trolled environment (intensive care unit or operating room) by 
someone with expertise in management of the airway who is prepared 
to immediately intubate the patient. Vaccination against H. influenzae 
type b has nearly eliminated this disease in childhood; however, epi­
glottitis caused by GAS, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphyloccocus 
aureus, and non-type b H. influenzae occurs occasionally.
Bacterial tracheitis (bacterial croup, bacterial laryngotracheitis) is 
a rare complication of viral croup. S. aureus is the most common 
superinfecting bacteria identified. Patients have a history of prolonged 
croup symptoms that become dramatically worse with fever and signs 
of airway obstruction. While sore throat may have been present at the 
onset of croup, it is not a prominent complaint once bacterial infection 
of the airway occurs. The clinical appearance of patients with bacterial 
tracheitis may mimic that of patients with epiglottitis.
DIPHTHERIA
Diphtheria is a very serious disease that is caused by pharyngeal infec­
tion by toxigenic strains of Corynebacterium diphtheriae. It has become 
very rare in the United States and other developed countries as a result 
of immunization. The few diphtheria cases recognized annually in the 
United States usually occur in unimmunized individuals; the fatality 
rate is about 5%.
FIGURE 1.9  Epiglottis in a 5-year-old boy with respiratory distress and 
drooling. A lateral soft tissue neck radiograph shows a markedly thick­
ened epiglottis (white arrow), which is referred to as the “thumb” sign. 
The aryepiglottic folds (black arrow) also are thickened. (From Laya BF, 
Lee EY. Upper airway disease. In: Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 
12th ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 529; Figure 51.2.)
FIGURE 1.8  Lemierre syndrome (Fusobacterium necrophorum infection) complicated by stroke in a 6-year-
old female presenting with fever, difficulty swallowing, and nuchal rigidity. A, Axial contrast enhanced 
computed tomography image shows low-attenuation retropharyngeal fluid (asterisk). B, Magnetic resonance 
imaging 2 days later, performed because of acute left arm weakness, confirms lack of left internal jugular 
vein patency on magnetic resonance venogram. C, Diffusion-weighted image of the brain reveals multiple 
small foci of bright signal infarction secondary to emboli from thrombophelebitis, vasospasm, or both. (From 
Lowe LH, Smith CJ. Infection and inflammation. In: Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Vol 1. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 137; Figure 15.2.)
*
A
B
C
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
13.e1
(See Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, p. 2035)
14
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
oral-genital contact. In cases involving young children, sexual abuse 
must be suspected. The infection usually manifests as an ulcerative, 
exudative tonsillopharyngitis but may be asymptomatic and resolve 
spontaneously. Gonococcal pharyngitis occurs after fellatio in homo­
sexual men and heterosexual women and is less readily acquired after 
cunnilingus. Gonorrhea rarely is transmitted from the pharynx to a 
sex partner, but pharyngitis can serve as a source for gonococcemia. 
Diagnosis requires culture on appropriate selective media (e.g., Thayer-
Martin medium). Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) may also 
detect the organism from pharyngeal and other sites. Examination and 
testing for other sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy are 
recommended.
CHLAMYDIAL AND MYCOPLASMAL INFECTIONS
Chlamydia species and Mycoplasma pneumoniae may cause phar­
yngitis, although the frequency of these infections is unclear. Chla­
mydia trachomatis has been implicated serologically as a cause of 
pharyngitis in as many as 20% of adults with pharyngitis, but 
isolation of the organism from the pharynx has proved more dif­
ficult. Chlamydia pneumoniae has also been identified as a cause 
of pharyngitis. Because antibodies to this organism show some 
cross reaction with C. trachomatis, it is possible that infections 
formerly attributed to C. trachomatis were really caused by C. pneu­
moniae. Diagnosis of chlamydial pharyngitis is difficult, whether by 
culture or serologically, and neither method is readily available to 
the clinician.
M. pneumoniae most likely causes pharyngitis. Serologic (positive 
mycoplasma IgM) or, less often, culture methods can be used to iden­
tify this infectious agent, which was found in 33% of college students 
with pharyngitis in one study. PCR is diagnostic but there is no need 
to seek evidence of these organisms routinely in pharyngitis patients 
in the absence of ongoing research studies of nonstreptococcal phar­
yngitis. The efficacy of antibiotic treatment for M. pneumoniae and 
chlamydial pharyngitis is not known, but these illnesses appear to be 
self-limited.
 Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of diphtheria involves nasopharyngeal mucosal colo­
nization by C. diphtheriae and toxin elaboration after an incubation 
period of 1-5 days. Toxin leads to local tissue inflammation and necro­
sis (producing an adherent grayish membrane made up of fibrin, 
blood, inflammatory cells, and epithelial cells) and it is absorbed into 
the bloodstream. Fragment B of the polypeptide toxin binds particu­
larly well to cardiac, neural, and renal cells, and the smaller fragment 
A enters cells and interferes with protein synthesis. Toxin fixation by 
tissues may lead to fatal myocarditis (with arrhythmias) within 10-14 
days and to peripheral neuritis within 3-7 weeks.
 Clinical Features
Acute tonsillar and pharyngeal diphtheria is characterized by sore 
throat, anorexia, malaise, and low-grade fever. The grayish membrane 
forms within 1-2 days over the tonsils and pharyngeal walls and occa­
sionally extends into the larynx and trachea. Cervical adenopathy 
varies but may be severe and associated with development of a “bull 
neck.” In mild cases, the membrane sloughs after 7-10 days, and the 
patient recovers. In severe cases, an increasingly toxic appearance can 
lead to prostration, stupor, coma, and death within 6-10 days. Distinc­
tive features include palatal paralysis, laryngeal paralysis, ocular palsies, 
diaphragmatic palsy, and myocarditis. Airway obstruction (from mem­
brane formation) may complicate the toxigenic manifestations.
 Diagnosis
Accurate diagnosis requires isolation of C. diphtheriae on culture of 
material from beneath the membrane, with confirmation of toxin pro­
duction by the organism isolated. Laboratories must be forewarned 
that diphtheria is suspected. Other tests are of little value.
GONOCOCCAL PHARYNGITIS
Acute symptomatic pharyngitis caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae occurs 
occasionally in sexually active individuals as a consequence of 
S U M M A R Y  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Sore throat is a common complaint. Most children with acute sore 
throat have a viral illness. Accurate diagnosis of acute streptococcal 
pharyngitis is essential because appropriate therapy ensures prevention 
of serious suppurative and nonsuppurative complications. Life-
threatening infectious complications of oropharyngeal infections may 
manifest with mouth pain, pharyngitis, parapharyngeal space infec­
tious extension, and/or airway obstruction. Other red flags are pro­
longed fever, prolonged sore throat, drooling, trismus, and severe, 
unremitting pain (see Table 1.5).
REFERENCES
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com
CHAPTER 1  Sore Throat
14.e1
REFERENCES
Group A Streptococci
Anderson NW, Buchan BW, Mayne D, et al. Multicenter clinical evaluation of 
the illumigene group A streptococcus DNA amplification assay for 
detection of group A streptococcus from pharyngeal swabs. J Clin 
Microbiol. 2013;51:1474-1477.
Attia MW, Zaoutis T, Klein JD, et al. Performance of a predictive model for 
streptococcal pharyngitis in children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2001;155:687-691.
Bisno AL. Group A streptococcal infections and acute rheumatic fever. N Engl 
J Med. 1991;325:783-793.
Bisno AL. Acute pharyngitis. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:205-211.
Carapetis JR, Steer AC, Mulholland EK, et al. The global burden of group A 
streptococcal diseases. Lancet Infect Dis. 2005;5:685-694.
Gerber MA, Shulman ST. Rapid diagnosis of pharyngitis caused by group A 
streptococci. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2004;17:571-580.
Gerber MA, Tanz RR, Kabat W, et al. Potential mechanisms for failure to 
eradicate group A streptococci from the pharynx. Pediatrics. 
1999;104:911-917.
Henson AM, Carter D, Todd K, et al. Detection of Streptococcus pyogenes 
using the illumigene group A Streptococcus assay. J Clin Microbiol. 
2013;51:4207-4209.
Hoge CW, Schwartz B, Talkington DF, et al. The changing epidemiology of 
invasive group A streptococcal infections and the emergence of 
streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome: A retrospective population-based 
study. JAMA. 1993;269:384-389.
Leckman JF, King RA, Gilbert DL, et al. Streptococcal upper respiratory tract 
infections and exacerbations of tic and obsessive-compulsive symptoms: 
A prospective longitudinal study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2011;50:108-118.
McIsaac WJ, Kellmer JD, Aufricht P, et al. Empirical validation of guidelines 
for the management of pharyngitis in children and adults. JAMA. 
2004;291:1587-1595.
Podbielski A, Kreikemeyer B. Persistence of group A streptococci in 
eukaryotic cells—A safe place? Lancet. 2001;358:3.
Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the 
diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 
2012;55:e86-e102.
Shulman ST, Stollerman G, Beall B, et al. Temporal changes in streptococcal 
M protein types and the near-disappearance of acute rheumatic fever in 
the U.S. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;42:441-447.
Singer HS, Gilbert DL, Wolf DS, et al. Moving from PANDAS to CANS. 
J Pediatr. 2012;160:725-731.
Tanz RR, Shulman ST. Streptococcal pharyngitis: The carrier state, definition 
and management. Pediatr Ann. 1998;27:281-285.
Tanz RR, Gerber MA, Kabat W, et al. Performance of a rapid antigen 
detection test and throat culture in community pediatric offices: 
Implications for management of pharyngitis. Pediatrics. 2009;123:
437-444.
Torres-Martinez C, Mehta D, Butt A, et al. Streptococcus associated toxic 
shock. Arch Dis Child. 1992;67:126-130.
Veasy LG, Tani LY, Hill HR. Persistence of acute rheumatic fever in the 
intermountain area of the United States. J Pediatr. 1994;124:9-16.
Wheeler MC, Roe MH, Kaplan EL, et al. Outbreak of group A streptococcus 
septicemia in children: Clinical, epidemiologic, and microbiological 
correlates. JAMA. 1991;266:533-537.
Working Group on Severe Streptococcal Infections. Defining the group A 
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome: Rationale and consensus definition. 
JAMA. 1993;269:390-391.
Other Causes
Centor RM, Arkinson TP, Ratliff AE, et al. The clinical presentation of 
Fusobacterium-positive pharyngitis at a university health clinic: A 
cross-sectional study. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:241-247.
Feder HM Jr. Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis: clinical 
review of a new syndrome. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2000;12:253-256.
Gerber MA, Randolph MF, Martin NJ, et al. Community-wide outbreak of 
group G streptococcal pharyngitis. Pediatrics. 1991;87:598-603.
Karpathios T, Drakonaki S, Zervoudaki A, et al. Arcanobacterium 
haemolyticum in children with presumed streptococcal pharyngotonsillitis 
or scarlet fever. J Pediatr. 1992;121:735-737.
Komaroff AL, Branch WT, Aronson MD, et al. Chlamydial pharyngitis. Ann 
Intern Med. 1989;111:537-538.
Lajo A, Borque C, Del Castillo F, et al. Mononucleosis caused by Epstein-Barr 
virus and cytomegalovirus in children: A comparative study of 124 cases. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1994;13:56-60.
McMillan JA, Weiner LB, Higgins AM, et al. Pharyngitis associated with 
herpes simplex virus in college students. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
1993;12:280-284.
Nakayama M, Miyazaki C, Ueda K, et al. Pharyngoconjunctival fever caused 
by adenovirus type 11. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1992;11:6-9.
Straus SE, Cohen JI, Tosato G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus infections: Biology, 
pathogenesis, and management. Ann Intern Med. 1993;118:45-58.
Sumaya CV, Ench Y. Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis in children: 
I. Clinical and general laboratory findings. Pediatrics. 1985;75:1003-1010.
Sumaya CV, Ench Y. Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis in children: 
II. Heterophil antibody and viral-specific responses. Pediatrics. 
1985;75:1011-1019.
Waagner DC. Arcanobacterium haemolyticum: Biology of the organism and 
diseases in man. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1991;10:933-939.
Wurster VM, Carlucci JG, Feder HM Jr, et al. Long-term follow-up of 
children with periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical 
adenitis syndrome. J Pediatr. 2011;159:958-964.
Complications
Chow AW. Life-threatening infections of the head and neck. Clin Infect Dis. 
1992;14:991-1004.
de Marie S, Tham RT, van der Mey AGL, et al. Clinical infections and 
nonsurgical treatment of parapharyngeal space infections complicating 
throat infection. Rev Infect Dis. 1989;11:975-982.
Fiesseler FW, Riggs RL. Pharyngitis followed by hypoxia and sepsis: Lemierre 
syndrome. Am J Emerg Med. 2001;19:320-322.
Savolainen S, Jousimies-Somer HR, Makitie AA, et al. Peritonsillar abscess: 
Clinical and microbiologic aspects and treatment regimens. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1993;119:521-524.
Wald ER, Guerra N, Byers C. Upper respiratory tract infections in young 
children: Duration of and frequency of complications. Pediatrics. 
1991;87:129-133.
White B. Deep neck infections and respiratory distress in children. Ear Nose 
Throat J. 1985;64:30-38.
Treatment
Feder HM Jr, Gerber MA, Randolph MF, et al. Once-daily therapy for 
streptococcal pharyngitis with amoxicillin. Pediatrics. 1999;103:47-51.
Markowitz M, Gerber MA, Kaplan EL. Treatment of streptococcal 
pharyngotonsillitis: Reports of penicillin’s demise are premature. J Pediatr. 
1993;123:679-685.
Massel BF, Chute CG, Walker AM, et al. Penicillin and the marked decrease 
in morbidity and mortality from rheumatic fever in the United States. 
N Engl J Med. 1988;318:280-286.
Paradise JL, Bluestone CD, Bachman RZ, et al. Efficacy of tonsillectomy for 
recurrent throat infection in severely affected children: Results of parallel 
randomized and nonrandomized clinical trials. N Engl J Med. 
1984;310:674-683.
Randolph MF, Gerber MA, DeMeo KK, et al. Effect of antibiotic therapy on 
the clinical course of streptococcal pharyngitis. J Pediatr. 
1985;106:870-875.
Seppala H, Nissinen A, Jarvinen H, et al. Resistance to erythromycin in group 
A streptococci. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:292-297.
Shulman ST, Gerber MA, Tanz RR, et al. Streptococcal pharyngitis: The case 
for penicillin therapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1994;13:1-7.
(See Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, p. 1493)
14.e2
Section 1  Respiratory Disorders
Snellman LW, Stang HJ, Stang JM, et al. Duration of positive throat cultures 
for group A streptococci after initiation of antibiotic therapy. Pediatrics. 
1993;91:116-117.
Tanz RR, Poncher JR, Corydon KE, et al. Clindamycin treatment of 
chronic pharyngeal carriers of group A streptococci. J Pediatr. 
1991;119:123-128.
Tanz RR, Shulman ST, Shortridge VD, et al. and the North American 
Streptococcal Pharyngitis Surveillance Group. U.S. community-based 
surveillance of macrolide-resistant pharyngeal group A streptococci 
during three respiratory disease seasons. Clin Infect Dis. 
2004;39:1794-1801.
