1114
The presence of an acid–base or an electrolyte disorder may explain a 
patient’s symptoms or may lead to a specific diagnosis.
ACID–BASE BALANCE
Normal acid–base balance is maintained by the lungs and kidneys. 
Carbon dioxide, a by-­product of normal metabolism, is a weak acid. 
The lungs are able to prevent an increase in the partial pressure of car­
bon dioxide (Pco2) in the blood by excreting the carbon dioxide (CO2) 
produced by the body. The pulmonary response to changes in the CO2 
concentration is fast, as it occurs via central sensing of the Pco2, and 
there is a subsequent increase or decrease in ventilation to maintain a 
normal Pco2 (35–45 mm Hg). There is an inverse relationship between 
Pco2 and ventilation because an increase in ventilation decreases the 
Pco2, and a decrease in ventilation increases the Pco2.
The kidneys are responsible for excreting acid produced by the 
body. Sources of hydrogen ions include protein metabolism and 
incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates and fat; urine or stool losses 
of bicarbonate may contribute to acidemia. The hydrogen ions formed 
from endogenous acid production are neutralized by bicarbonate from 
the bicarbonate buffer system. The bicarbonate buffer system, based on 
the relationship between carbon dioxide and bicarbonate (HCO –
3 ), is 
displayed by the following equation:
CO2 + H2O ↔H+ + HCO −
3
This equation can help us understand how changes in CO2 or 
HCO –
3  affect the acid–base balance.
ACID–BASE DISORDERS
A pH <7.35 is defined as acidosis, and a pH >7.45 is defined as alkalo­
sis. An acid–base disorder is respiratory in etiology when it is caused 
by a primary abnormality in respiratory function (a change in Paco2) 
and is metabolic when the primary change is due to a variation in 
bicarbonate concentration. Acid–base disorders may also be mixed, 
which occurs when two or even three primary events act to alter the 
acid–base state at the same time.
In metabolic disorders, extracellular buffers (bicarbonate) rapidly 
titrate the presence of strong acids or bases. Intracellular buffers chiefly 
accomplish the buffering of respiratory disorders. Secondary respira­
tory compensation for metabolic acid–base disorders begins within 
minutes by changes in ventilation and is usually complete in 12–24 
hours. In contrast, secondary metabolic compensation for respiratory 
disorders occurs more slowly, beginning within hours but requiring 
2–5 days for completion. The kidneys increase net acid excretion in 
response to a primary respiratory acidosis; renal net acid excretion also 
increases during a metabolic acidosis if the kidneys themselves are not 
the cause of the metabolic acidosis. The expected compensation for 
primary acid–base disorders is shown in Table 59.1. These compensa­
tory mechanisms never return the pH back to normal until the underly­
ing disease process has subsided or has been effectively treated.
When only one primary acid–base abnormality occurs and its com­
pensatory mechanisms are activated, the disorder is classified as a sim­
ple acid–base disorder. When a combination of acid–base disturbances 
occurs, the disorder is classified as a mixed acid–base disorder. The 
latter should be suspected if the compensation in a given patient differs 
from the predicted values (see Table 59.1). Interpretation of data in 
infants and young children requires caution. Crying results in hyper­
ventilation and can quickly change Pco2 and consequently the pH.
SYMPTOMS OF ACID–BASE DISORDERS
History and clinical evaluation are the first steps in assessing a patient 
with an acid–base disorder. Although the signs and symptoms associ­
ated with an acid–base abnormality can be nonspecific, there are cer­
tain clues that one can obtain from manifestations that can assist in 
the diagnosis of the acid–base disorder. Metabolic acidosis results in 
increased minute ventilation (manifesting as increased respiratory rate 
and/or effort) because of respiratory compensation. A patient may have 
tachypnea with a metabolic acidosis from a diarrheal illness, dehydra­
tion, poisoning, diabetic ketoacidosis, inborn errors of metabolism, or 
infection. In more severe acidosis (pH <7.20), the respiratory pattern is 
characterized by deep and rapid breaths (Kussmaul respiration). Severe 
acidosis may also lead to hypotension, pulmonary edema, and asystole; 
its harmful effects are accentuated in the presence of hypoxia. Chronic 
metabolic acidosis leads to poor growth and hypercalciuria with sub­
sequent bone disease because bone buffering of acid produces marked 
mineral losses.
A child with metabolic alkalosis may be asymptomatic. In some 
cases, careful examination of the child may detect hypoventilation. 
One should consider metabolic alkalosis in a child who has been vom­
iting or in a child who has had chronic diuretic use. Severe alkalosis 
(pH >7.55) can lead to tissue hypoxia, mental confusion, obtundation, 
muscular irritability, tetany, and an increased risk of seizures and car­
diac arrhythmias. Some of these signs and symptoms are related to 
decreased concentration of serum ionized calcium as a result of its 
increased binding to protein in the presence of alkalosis. Acid–base 
disturbances can be assessed through laboratory analysis by obtaining 
a basic chemistry panel and/or a blood gas analysis.
RENAL REGULATION OF ACID–BASE BALANCE
The kidneys are the principal regulator of bicarbonate homeostasis. 
The renal regulation of HCO –
3  can be divided into two processes: reab­
sorption of HCO –
3  and excretion of H+. The first role of the kidneys is to 
reabsorb the filtered HCO –
3  so that this important extracellular buffer 
Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Sarah Vepraskas, Heather Toth, and Michael Weisgerber
59
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1115
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
is not excreted in the urine. The second role of the kidneys is to excrete 
H+ that is produced from protein and phospholipid catabolism.
Most (80–90%) of the filtered HCO –
3  is reabsorbed in the proximal 
tubule. Bicarbonate reabsorption at this site is increased by the con­
traction of the extracellular fluid (ECF) volume, activation of the renin-­
angiotensin system (mainly through the effect of angiotensin II), elevated 
Pco2, and hypokalemia. Conversely, HCO –
3  reabsorption is decreased 
when there is expansion of the ECF volume, inhibition of angiotensin II, 
a fall in Pco2, and an elevation of the parathyroid hormone level.
The distal tubule and collecting duct regenerate bicarbonate via H+ 
ion secretion into the tubular lumen by an H+-­adenosine triphospha­
tase (H+-­ATPase) pump in the luminal membrane. This active secre­
tion can generate an H+ ion gradient of 1,000:1 between tubular fluid 
and cells, permitting the urine pH to fall to as low as 4.5. The active 
H+ secretion is significantly influenced by the luminal electronegativity 
caused by active Na+ reabsorption in the cortical collecting duct. Thus, 
in the cortical collecting duct, H+ excretion is influenced by distal Na+ 
delivery and reabsorption. In contrast, in the outer medullary portion 
of the collecting duct, aldosterone stimulates the H+ excretion inde­
pendently of Na+ delivery or reabsorption. Some of the H+ secreted 
is consumed in reclaiming the small amount of HCO –
3  that escaped 
reabsorption at proximal sites; the rest of the H+ is excreted in the 
urine. The ability to excrete a large amount of H+ ions is dependent on 
the presence of buffers. The H+ ions are buffered by phosphates and, 
to a lesser extent, by other non-­reabsorbable anions. The other very 
important urinary buffer is ammonia (NH3), which combines with 
a secreted H+ to generate an ammonium ion (NH4+). The proximal 
tubular cells generate ammonia through the metabolism of the amino 
acid glutamine. For every H+ that is finally excreted, an HCO –
3  is added 
to the ECF compartment. Metabolic acidosis by itself enhances NH4+ 
production and excretion. Ammonia genesis by proximal tubular 
cells is also stimulated by hypokalemia, whereas hyperkalemia inhib­
its ammonia genesis. The ability of the kidney to produce ammonia 
is markedly decreased in conditions such as chronic renal failure as a 
result of reduced renal mass and in some types of renal tubular acidosis 
(RTA). The ability to lower urine pH and increase net acid excretion 
may not be achieved until 4–6 weeks of age.
METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
A metabolic acidosis can result from addition of H+ to the body, failure 
to excrete H+, or loss of HCO –
3 . The differential diagnosis of metabolic 
acidosis is simplified by classifying the causes into those associated 
with a normal anion gap (also known as a hyperchloremic metabolic 
acidosis) and those associated with an increased anion gap (Table 59.2).
The anion gap is easily calculated: Na+ – (Cl– + HCO3–). The anion 
gap is normally 8–16 mEq/L. When a strong acid (e.g., lactic acid) is 
added to or produced in the body, hydrogen ions are neutralized by 
bicarbonate, HCO –
3  is consumed by the H+, and the bicarbonate con­
centration falls. The accompanying anion, such as lactate, is a new 
unmeasured anion, which increases the anion gap. The increase in the 
anion gap is usually proportional to the fall in serum (HCO –
3 ). In con­
trast, when HCO –
3  is lost from the body, no new anion is generated. In 
this situation, there is a reciprocal increase in the serum Cl− to main­
tain electroneutrality. The anion gap does not change; the rise in (Cl−) 
is proportional to the fall in (HCO –
3 ).
Normal Anion Gap (Hyperchloremic) Metabolic Acidosis
Renal Tubular Acidosis
RTA is a group of disorders characterized by impairment of renal 
HCO –
3  reabsorption and/or H+ excretion in the presence of a relatively 
normal glomerular filtration rate (GFR). On the basis of the distinctive 
pathophysiologic features, three types of RTA—type I (distal or clas­
sic), type II (proximal or bicarbonate wasting), and type IV (hyperka­
lemic)—are recognized (Table 59.3).
Type I RTA is caused by the inability to secrete H+ in the distal 
tubule, resulting in hypokalemic hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. 
These patients have a tendency to develop nephrocalcinosis and nephro­
lithiasis, which results from the excretion of large quantities of calcium, 
combined with an alkaline urine pH and hypocitraturia. In addition to 
the deficient H+ secretion, these patients are unable to increase ammonia 
genesis. The patient’s urine pH remains alkaline (>5.5) despite extreme 
systemic metabolic acidosis. Type I RTA may occur as an isolated con­
dition or may develop secondary to several diseases, medications, or 
toxins (Table 59.4). Type I RTA due to variants in the ATP6V1B1 gene is 
associated with early severe deafness, while variants in SLC4A1 may 
be associated with congenital hemolytic anemia.
Type II RTA is caused by an impairment of HCO –
3  reabsorption 
in the proximal tubule, resulting in hypokalemic hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis. Because the distal acidification mechanisms are 
intact, these patients can lower the urine pH to <5.5 and can excrete 
adequate amounts of NH4+ when the serum HCO –
3  is below the fil­
tration threshold. As a result, their acidosis is usually less profound 
than that which occurs in distal RTA. In some patients, there may be 
TABLE 59.1  Changes in Pco2, HCO ‐
3, and pH in Primary Acid–Base Disorders*
Disorder
Primary Event
Degree of Initial Disturbance
Compensation
Degree of Compensation
Metabolic acidosis
↓ [HCO –
3 ]
For every 10 mEq/L ↓ in HCO –
3 , pH ↓ by 0.15
↓ Pco2
For 1 mEq/L ↓ [HCO –
3 ], Pco2 ↓ 1–1.5 mm Hg
Metabolic alkalosis
↑ [HCO –
3 ]
For every 10 mEq/L ↑ in HCO –
3 , pH ↑ by 0.15
↑ Pco2
For 1 mEq/L ↑ [HCO –
3 ], Pco2 ↑ 0.5–1 mm Hg
Respiratory acidosis
For every 10 mm Hg ↑ in Pco2, pH ↓ by 0.08
Acute (<12–24 hr)
↑ Pco2
↑ [HCO –
3 ]
For 10 mm Hg ↑ Pco2, [HCO –
3 ] ↑ 1 mEq/L
Chronic (3–5 days)
↑ Pco2
↑↑ [HCO –
3 ]
For 10 mm Hg ↑ Pco2, [HCO –
3 ] ↑ 4 mEq/L
Respiratory alkalosis
For every 10 mm Hg ↓ in Pco2, pH ↑ by 0.08
Acute (<12 hr)
↓ Pco2
↓ [HCO –
3 ]
For 10 mm Hg ↓ Pco2, [HCO –
3 ] ↓ 1–3 mEq/L
Chronic (1–2 days)
↓ Pco2
↓↓ [HCO –
3 ]
For 10 mm Hg ↓ Pco2, [HCO –
3 ] ↓ 1–3 mEq/L
*Normal serum [HCO –
3 ] is 24 mEq/L, and normal arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) is 40 mm Hg.
↓, decrease; ↓↓, greater decrease; ↑, increase; ↑↑, greater increase.
Modified from Brewer ED. Disorders of acid-­base balance. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:429–447.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1116
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
an increase in urinary calcium excretion, but because citrate excretion 
is normal, nephrocalcinosis is uncommon. Type II RTA may rarely 
occur as an isolated defect, but it usually coexists with other defects 
in proximal tubule function. Fanconi syndrome is the combination 
of multiple defects in proximal tubule reabsorption and, in addition to 
type II RTA, includes excessive urinary losses of glucose, amino acids, 
phosphate, and uric acid. The excessive losses of phosphate often cause 
hypophosphatemic rickets. There are many causes of type II RTA (see 
Table 59.4).
Type IV RTA results from low circulating aldosterone concentra­
tions, partial or complete end-­organ resistance to aldosterone, or aldo­
sterone antagonism. Because of the lack of aldosterone effect, there is 
decreased distal acidification and decreased distal sodium reabsorp­
tion with hyperkalemic hyperchloremic acidosis. The hyperkalemia 
seen in type IV RTA is the most characteristic feature and differentiates 
it from the other two types.
The examination of a child with RTA may be normal. Poor skin 
turgor may be present from dehydration. Muscle weakness and mus­
cle aches from hypokalemia may occur. Low back pain and bone pain 
may be present in patients with abnormalities of calcium metabo­
lism (type II). All forms of RTA are associated with growth failure. 
Patients with Fanconi syndrome have severe rickets/osteomalacia and 
malnutrition.
Laboratory evaluation in all patients with RTA shows metabolic 
acidosis with hyperchloremia and a normal anion gap. The urine 
pH always exceeds 5.5 in type I RTA but can be <5.5 in type II and 
type IV RTA.
Type I and II RTA are treated with oral sodium bicarbonate titrated 
to correct the acidosis. Potassium supplementation is needed in hypo­
kalemic patients. Type IV RTA can be treated with furosemide to lower 
elevated potassium levels, along with sodium bicarbonate to correct 
significant acidosis. Fludrocortisone can be used to correct mineralo­
corticoid deficiency. In patients with secondary proximal RTA, treat­
ment should be aimed at the primary disorder.
There needs to be frequent monitoring of potassium levels in type 
IV RTA. Because of the common occurrence of nephrocalcinosis and 
nephrolithiasis in type I RTA, renal ultrasound can be used to mon­
itor these patients. A skeletal survey to look for bone disease should 
also be done, especially in cases of type II RTA. Patients with Fanconi 
syndrome should be evaluated for cystinosis, the most common cause 
of Fanconi syndrome in children. Some patients with inherited distal 
RTA have sensorineural deafness; therefore, infants and children with 
established distal RTA need routine audiograms.
TABLE 59.2  Causes of Metabolic Acidosis
NORMAL ANION GAP
Diarrhea
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA):
Distal (type I) RTA (OMIM 79800/602722/267300)*
Proximal (type II) RTA (OMIM 604278)†
Hyperkalemic (type IV) RTA (OMIM 201910/264350/177735/145260)‡
Urinary tract diversions
Post-­hypocapnia
Ammonium chloride intake
INCREASED ANION GAP
Lactic Acidosis
Tissue hypoxia
Shock
Hypoxemia
Severe anemia
Cyanide poisoning
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Methemoglobinemia
Liver failure
Lymphoma, leukemia, solid tumors
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Inborn errors of metabolism
Thiamine deficiency
Medications
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Metformin
Propofol
Other Causes
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Starvation ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Kidney failure/uremia
D-­Lactic acidosis
Poisoning
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylate
Toluene
Paraldehyde
Cocaine
*Along with these genetic disorders, distal RTA may be secondary to 
renal disease or medications.
†Most cases of proximal RTA are not caused by this primary genetic 
disorder. Proximal RTA is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has 
multiple etiologies.
‡Hyperkalemic RTA can be secondary to a genetic disorder (some of the 
more common are listed) or other etiologies.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).
From Greenbaum LA. Electrolyte and acid-­base disorders. In Kliegman 
RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:416.
TABLE 59.3  Differentiation of RTA Types
Factor
Type I
Type II
Type IV
Serum K+
Low or normal
Low
High, salt wasting
Renal function
Normal or near 
normal
Normal or near 
normal
Stage 3, 4, or 5 
chronic kidney 
disease
Urine pH during 
acidosis
High >5.5
Low <5.5 or 
normal
Low or high
Serum HCO3
–
(mmol/L)
10–20
16–18
16–22
Urine Pco2 (mm Hg)
<40
<40
>70
Urine citrate
Low
High
Low
Fanconi syndrome
No
May be present
No
Type III RTA combines features of type I and II RTA in patients with 
osteopetrosis.
From Palmer BF. Metabolic acidosis. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, Floege J, 
eds. Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
2015:153.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1117
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
TABLE 59.4  Common Causes of Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
PROXIMAL RTA/TYPE II RTA
Primary
Sporadic (common)
Inherited
 • Inherited renal disease (idiopathic Fanconi)
 • Autosomal dominant
 • Autosomal recessive
 • X-­linked (Dent disease)
 • Inherited syndromes
 • Cystinosis
 • Tyrosinemia type 1
 • Galactosemia
 • Oculocerebral dystrophy (Lowe syndrome)
 • Wilson disease
 • Hereditary fructose intolerance
 • Glycogen storage disease type 1
Secondary
Intrinsic renal disease
 • Autoimmune diseases (Sjögren syndrome)
 • Hypokalemic nephropathy
 • Renal transplant rejection
Hematologic disease
 • Myeloma
Drugs
 • Gentamicin
 • Cisplatin
 • Ifosfamide
 • Sodium valproate
Heavy metals
 • Lead
 • Cadmium
 • Mercury
Organic compounds
 • Toluene
Nutritional
 • Kwashiorkor
Hormonal
 • Primary hyperparathyroidism
DISTAL RTA/TYPE I RTA
Primary
Sporadic
Inherited
 • Inherited renal diseases
 • Autosomal dominant
 • Autosomal recessive
 • Autosomal recessive with early-­onset hearing loss
 • Autosomal recessive with later-­onset hearing loss
 • Inherited syndromes associated with type I RTA
 • Marfan syndrome
 • Wilson syndrome
 • Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
 • Familial hypercalciuria
DISTAL RTA/TYPE I RTA—cont’d
Secondary
Intrinsic renal
 • Interstitial nephritis
 • Pyelonephritis
 • Transplant rejection
 • Sickle cell nephropathy
 • Lupus nephritis
 • Nephrocalcinosis
 • Medullary sponge kidney
Urologic
 • Obstructive uropathy
 • Vesicoureteral reflux
 • Hepatic
 • Cirrhosis
Toxins or medications
 • Amphotericin B
 • Lithium
 • Toluene
 • Cisplatin
HYPERKALEMIC RTA/TYPE IV RTA
Primary
Sporadic
Genetic
 • Hypoaldosteronism
 • Addison disease
 • Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
 • Pseudohypoaldosteronism (type I or II)
Secondary
Urologic
 • Obstructive uropathy
Intrinsic renal
 • Pyelonephritis
 • Interstitial nephritis
Systemic
 • Diabetes mellitus
 • Sickle cell nephropathy
Drugs
 • Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
 • Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
 • Cyclosporine
 • Prolonged heparinization
Addison disease
From Sreedharan S, Avner ED. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:2530.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1118
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Additional Causes of Renal Loss of Bicarbonate
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazolamide inhibit the car­
bonic anhydrase present in the proximal tubule, thus preventing the 
reabsorption of HCO –
3 . The net effect is similar to that of proximal RTA.
Potassium-­sparing diuretics such as spironolactone or amiloride 
can impair H+ secretion by the distal nephron by blocking Na+ absorp­
tion in this segment.
Gastrointestinal Loss of Bicarbonate
Diarrhea is the most common cause of non–anion gap hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis in children. The acidosis is secondary to loss of stool 
bicarbonate. The degree of dehydration should be assessed, and appro­
priate fluid resuscitation should be given, which should help correct 
the acidosis. If there is persistent acidosis, one should consider addi­
tional etiologies such as worsening infection/sepsis, an inborn error of 
metabolism, adrenal insufficiency, or bacteria-­associated production of 
methemoglobinemia or D-­lactate.
Miscellaneous Causes of Hyperchloremic Acidosis
Recovery from ketoacidosis. During recovery from diabetic 
ketoacidosis (DKA), many patients may eliminate the organic anions 
(through increased renal clearance and utilization) faster than their 
acidosis resolves. The clinical picture can resemble normal anion gap 
acidosis. Excessive fluids with isotonic chloride levels may contribute 
to this acidemia.
Dilutional acidosis. The rapid expansion of ECF volume with 
fluids that do not contain HCO –
3  leads to a dilution of HCO –
3  and mild 
metabolic acidosis. In addition, the expansion of ECF volume by itself 
promotes urinary HCO –
3  loss, possibly contributing to the dilutional 
acidosis.
Parenteral alimentation. Amino acid infusions without concomitant 
administration of alkali (or alkali-­generating precursors) may produce a 
normal anion gap acidosis in a manner similar to that of addition of HCl.
Increased Anion Gap Acidosis
Increased Acid Production
Diabetic ketoacidosis. In DKA, the lack of insulin and excess of 
glucagon shunt free fatty acids into ketone body formation. The rate 
of formation of ketone bodies, principally β-­hydroxybutyrate and 
acetoacetate, exceeds the capacity for their peripheral utilization and 
renal excretion. Accumulation of ketoacids (both of which are relatively 
strong acids and dissociate rapidly into H+ and the ketoacid anions) 
results in metabolic acidosis. Acetone is formed by nonenzymatic 
conversion of acetoacetate and is responsible for the fruity odor of the 
patient’s breath (see Chapter 58).
Patients with DKA typically present with polyuria and polydipsia in 
addition to altered mental status (ranging from confusion and drowsi­
ness, which can progress to obtundation and loss of consciousness) and 
deep, sighing respirations (Kussmaul respirations). Additional clinical 
manifestations of DKA can be dehydration, nausea, vomiting, abdom­
inal pain, and tachypnea. Laboratory analysis of a patient with DKA is 
significant for a severely increased anion gap metabolic acidosis with 
pH values that may be lower than 7.0. Initially, the increase in the anion 
gap is in proportion to the decrease in HCO –
3 , but once the patients 
start recovering with successful management, the kidneys clear the 
ketoacid anions, and the increase in the anion gap becomes less than 
the fall in HCO –
3 . The loss of ketoacid anions in urine increases the 
urinary losses of Na+ and K+ as the accompanying cations.
The diagnosis of DKA is made by the combination of increased 
anion gap metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, and demonstration of 
serum (or urine) ketoacid anions. The therapy for DKA includes careful 
volume repletion, insulin, and correction of electrolyte disturbances. 
Severe acidosis is reversible by fluid and insulin replacement. Insulin 
inhibits ketosis and allows ketoacids to be metabolized, which gener­
ates bicarbonate. Treatment of hypovolemia improves tissue perfusion 
and renal function, thereby increasing the excretion of organic acids. 
Most patients with DKA present with considerable total body deficits 
of potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus, even though serum levels, 
particularly of potassium, may actually be high on presentation.
Lactic acidosis. Under normal conditions, lactate is formed in 
relatively small amounts and is further metabolized by the liver. 
Pathologic conditions associated with either local or systemic hypoxia 
or ischemia, hypotension (shock), impaired oxidative metabolism, or 
impaired hepatic clearance can cause significant lactic acidosis.
The diagnosis of lactic acidosis must be considered in all forms 
of increased anion gap metabolic acidosis. The diagnosis can be con­
firmed by measuring the serum lactate level, and treatment must be 
directed at the underlying pathophysiologic process (see Table 59.2).
GRACILE syndrome (growth retardation, amino aciduria, 
cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acidosis, and early death) is a rare 
lethal autosomal recessive disease caused by a point variant in the 
BCS1L gene encoding a mitochondrial protein. In a Finnish study 
describing 17 newborn infants with this disorder, the infants presented 
with aminoaciduria and failure to thrive, with 9 of them dying by 
12 days of life and the 8 other infants dying by age 1–4 months. The 
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance makes GRACILE syndrome 
different from neonatal hemochromatosis and hepatitis and should be 
considered in a neonate presenting with significant fetal growth distur­
bance and severe lactic acidosis.
Inborn errors of metabolism. Most patients with inborn errors of 
metabolism that cause a metabolic acidosis present in the neonatal 
period or shortly thereafter. Organic acidemias, aminoacidopathies, 
disorders of fatty acid oxidation, mitochondrial disorders, and defects 
in carbohydrate metabolism are associated with acidosis. Associated 
presenting signs and symptoms may include vomiting, failure to thrive, 
lethargy, seizures, developmental abnormalities, hepatomegaly, and 
elevated blood or urine levels of a particular metabolite. Some of these 
disorders will be detected by the state newborn screening protocols. In 
contrast, urea cycle disorders during the first few days of life manifest 
with respiratory alkalosis because of stimulation of the respiratory 
center by increased ammonia levels. Congenital lactic acidosis may 
be due to mitochondrial gene variants or enzymes involved in glucose 
metabolism (pyruvate dehydrogenase complex); the latter presents with 
severe lactic acidosis after birth, while the presentation of mitochondrial 
gene variants can be variable.
Poisonings. A variety of toxic agents may be associated with increased 
anion gap metabolic acidosis; these include salicylate intoxication, ethylene 
glycol (a component of antifreeze), and methanol. Carbon monoxide, 
cyanide poisoning, or methemoglobinemia induces hypoxic acidosis.
Classically, salicylate intoxication is described as causing respi­
ratory alkalosis (stimulation of the respiratory center), followed by 
increased anion gap metabolic acidosis (accumulation of salicylic acid 
itself and lactic acidosis as a result of uncoupling of mitochondrial oxi­
dative phosphorylation). However, children may present with simple 
increased anion gap metabolic acidosis. Nausea, tinnitus, noncardio­
genic pulmonary edema, and prolonged prothrombin time are other 
associated features. Alkalization of the blood and urine with sodium 
bicarbonate is beneficial despite the potential problems associated with 
its use in acute metabolic acidosis. Alkalization of the plasma decreases 
the diffusion of salicylate into the central nervous system, and alkaline 
urine improves renal excretion. In severe poisoning, hemodialysis is 
quite effective at removing salicylate from the body. In cases of poi­
sonings, dialysis serves the dual purposes of removing the poison (if 
dialyzable) and correcting the acid–base and electrolyte abnormalities.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1119
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Propofol-related infusion syndrome (PRIS) usually results with 
prolonged (>48 hour) high-­dose (>4 mg/kg/hr) infusions and mani­
fests with lactic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac failure, and shock. 
PRIS may result from propofol-­induced mitochondrial impairment.
Failure of Acid Excretion
In both acute and chronic renal failure, the kidneys fail to excrete the 
acid produced from normal daily metabolism. Both H+ and anions 
accumulate in the body, resulting in slow consumption of bicarbonate 
stores. However, the acidosis is generally not severe unless a markedly 
catabolic state occurs or other associated conditions coexist. In acute 
renal failure, there is abrupt and complete inhibition of acid excretion, 
whereas in chronic renal failure, there initially is enhanced ammonia 
genesis by the remaining nephrons. As renal failure progresses, excre­
tion of both NH4+ and phosphate declines. In addition, the secondary 
hyperparathyroidism seen with chronic renal failure decreases proxi­
mal tubular HCO –
3  reabsorption and adds a component of hyperchlor­
emic acidosis to the increased anion gap acidosis.
Treatment of Metabolic Acidosis
The morbidity and mortality caused by metabolic acidosis are deter­
mined not only by the severity of acidosis but also by the amenability of 
the underlying disorder to medical management. During treatment of 
metabolic acidosis, the primary effort should focus on the management 
of the underlying condition. The recommendations and goals of buffer 
therapy differ for acute acidotic disorders such as DKA and for chronic 
acidotic states such as RTA.
During the correction of acute metabolic acidosis, particular 
attention should be paid to ensure an appropriate potassium bal­
ance. During an episode of metabolic acidosis, potassium shifts 
from the intracellular space to the extracellular space in exchange 
for H+, and thus the presence of a total body potassium deficit 
may not be appreciated. Hypokalemia may become evident only as 
the pH increases and potassium returns to the intracellular space. 
Chronic metabolic acidosis slows linear growth and interferes with 
bone mineralization. In chronic metabolic acidosis, there is a need 
for alkali therapy.
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS
Metabolic alkalosis (pH >7.45) occurs as a result of a primary increase 
in the serum HCO –
3 , which may occur as a result of (1) net loss of 
H+, (2) net gain of HCO –
3  (or its precursors), or (3) loss of fluid with 
more Cl− than HCO –
3 . Normally functioning kidneys can excrete large 
amounts of HCO –
3  and should offset any increase in serum HCO –
3  
resulting from these causes. Therefore, factors that prevent the kidneys 
from excreting HCO –
3  also must be present to maintain the metabolic 
alkalosis.
Factors Initiating Metabolic Alkalosis
The H+ can be lost externally, either through the gastrointestinal tract 
or through the kidneys. For every H+ lost at these sites, the body gains 
one HCO –
3  ion. This is because H+ production at both these sites (gas­
tric parietal cell and renal tubular cells) is associated with generation 
of an equivalent number of HCO –
3  molecules. H+ can also be “lost” 
internally, by shifting into the intracellular compartment. This occurs 
in states of severe potassium depletion (H+ moves in, whereas K+ exits 
the cell, to maintain electroneutrality).
The administration of HCO –
3  or its precursors (such as lactate, 
citrate, and acetate) at a rate greater than normal metabolic production 
of acid can lead to net gain of HCO –
3  by the body.
External loss of fluid (gastric fluid) containing more Cl− than 
HCO –
3  raises the concentration of HCO –
3  in the body. One of the 
factors responsible for this type of alkalosis is the associated volume 
contraction, which leads to increased bicarbonate reabsorption by the 
proximal tubule of the kidney.
Factors Responsible for Sustaining Alkalosis
Decrease in effective blood volume and kidney perfusion causes 
increased Na+ reabsorption in both the proximal tubule (angiotensin 
II effect) and the distal renal tubule (mineralocorticoid effect), thereby 
increasing H+ excretion.
Increased mineralocorticoid levels directly increase H+ secretion in 
the outer medullary collecting duct.
Chloride depletion increases HCO –
3  reabsorption in the proximal 
tubule. This effect is independent of ECF volume status.
Hypokalemia sustains metabolic alkalosis by decreasing bicar­
bonate loss. Hypokalemia promotes hydrogen ion secretion in the 
distal nephron and stimulates ammonia genesis in the proximal 
tubular cells. When produced, ammonia enhances renal excretion of 
hydrogen ions.
Hypercapnia induces a state of intracellular acidosis, which increases 
H+ secretion. Although Pco2 increases as a normal compensatory 
response to metabolic alkalosis, the elevated Pco2 prevents the renal cor­
rection of alkalosis.
Differential Diagnosis of Metabolic Alkalosis
The causes of metabolic alkalosis can be divided into two categories 
on the basis of the urinary chloride level. The alkalosis in patients 
with low urinary chloride is maintained by volume depletion; volume 
repletion is needed to correct the alkalosis. In the process of volume 
depletion, there are losses of sodium, potassium, and chloride, but the 
loss of chloride is usually greater than the losses of sodium and potas­
sium combined. Since chloride losses are the main cause of the volume 
depletion, these patients require chloride to correct the volume deficit 
and metabolic alkalosis; these patients have chloride-­responsive meta­
bolic alkalosis. Conversely, patients with alkalosis and an elevated uri­
nary chloride concentration do not respond to volume repletion and 
have chloride-­resistant metabolic alkalosis. Blood pressure can also be 
useful when considering the etiology of a patient’s chloride-­resistant 
metabolic alkalosis (Table 59.5).
Urinary Chloride Level Lower Than 15 mEq/L
Chloride-­deficient diet. Although uncommon in developed 
countries, the ingestion of milk formula with low chloride content 
has been shown to result in hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis and 
failure to thrive in infants and to result in later neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities in childhood.
Upper gastrointestinal losses. The gastric fluid has a high H+ 
concentration; loss of gastric fluid by vomiting or by nasogastric drainage 
leads to a net gain of HCO –
3  in the body. Although this is the initiating 
factor, the alkalosis is sustained by concomitant Cl− and K+ losses. 
Secondary hyperaldosteronism, resulting from volume contraction, 
promotes further urinary potassium and H+ excretion, worsening the 
hypokalemia and alkalosis; urine is the source of most of the potassium 
losses caused by emesis. The degree of metabolic alkalosis associated 
with vomiting is generally mild except in conditions in which gastric 
secretions are greatly stimulated (e.g., Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome) or 
there is protracted vomiting (e.g., pyloric stenosis).
Metabolic alkalosis can also be seen in newborns of mothers with 
eating disorders (bulimia). The baby reflects the electrolyte changes of 
the mother and sustains alkalosis because of the Cl− deficiency.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1120
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Chloride-­secreting diarrhea. This is a rare congenital syndrome 
characterized by a defect in small-­ and large-­bowel chloride absorption 
that leads to a chronic diarrhea with high chloride losses in the stool. 
The ongoing chloride depletion leads to a sustained metabolic alkalosis.
Diuretic therapy. Chronic use of loop and thiazide diuretics may 
cause a metabolic alkalosis. The alkalosis is sustained because of 
hypochloremia, hypokalemia, and volume contraction with resultant 
secondary hyperaldosteronism. The urinary Cl− may be high if the 
diuretics have been ingested recently. The metabolic derangements 
caused by loop diuretics are identical to those seen in Bartter syndrome.
Hypercapnia. Chronic hypercapnia, as seen in bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia or cystic fibrosis, leads to an elevated serum bicarbonate 
concentration from metabolic compensation. The increase in serum 
bicarbonate is balanced by a decrease in serum chloride. Affected patients 
have chloride depletion, which may be worsened by concomitant diuretic 
use. With resolution of the hypercapnia, the bicarbonate concentration 
remains high until the chloride depletion is corrected.
Seasonal hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. Occasionally reported 
in infants with cystic fibrosis during excessive heat waves, chloride loss 
in sweat together with dehydration produces this syndrome. It may 
rarely be seen in children without cystic fibrosis.
Urinary Chloride Level Higher Than 20 mEq/L with 
Hypertension
Pediatric patients with hypertension either have increased levels of 
aldosterone or act as if they do. Increased aldosterone “effects” cause 
renal retention of sodium, which results in elevated blood pressure. 
The disorders of mineralocorticoid excess are characterized by volume 
expansion and hypertension (see Table 59.5). The mineralocorticoid 
excess stimulates the renal excretion of H+ and K+, resulting in met­
abolic alkalosis and hypokalemia. The various causes can be differen­
tiated by evaluating the renin-­aldosterone axis. Treatment is aimed at 
removing or correcting the source of the mineralocorticoid excess.
Urinary Chloride Level Higher Than 20 mEq/L with Normal 
Blood Pressure
Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. These uncommon 
disorders result from defects in various ion transporters within the 
nephron. Bartter syndrome is a severe disorder that is characterized 
by urinary chloride wasting, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and 
increased serum levels of aldosterone and renin. Hypercalciuria is 
also common and leads to nephrocalcinosis in some patients. Affected 
patients present with a history of failure to thrive, polyuria, polydipsia, 
and a tendency for dehydration. In neonatal Bartter syndrome, 
there is usually a history of polyhydramnios and premature delivery. 
Gitelman syndrome, in contrast, is a milder disorder characterized 
by hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia caused 
by urinary magnesium wasting; calcium excretion is normal. The 
growth retardation is not as severe. Children with Gitelman syndrome, 
however, are more prone to febrile seizures and tetanic episodes.
The genetics of additional variants of Bartter and Gitelman syndromes 
have been identified, most of which have autosomal recessive inheritance, 
although there are some exceptions (Table 59.6). See Table 59.7 for the dis­
tinguishing features of Bartter and Gitelman syndrome variants.
Treatment of Metabolic Alkalosis
Treatment focuses on correcting the underlying disorder and depends 
on the pathophysiologic mechanisms of the alkalosis. Patients with 
a chloride-­responsive metabolic alkalosis (urine Cl− <15 mEq/L) 
respond to volume repletion; both sodium and potassium chloride are 
necessary. In rare cases, if alkalosis persists despite chloride supplemen­
tation, the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide can be used to 
increase urinary bicarbonate losses. In patients undergoing persistent 
gastric drainage, administration of either an H2 blocker or H+ pump 
inhibitor can be beneficial by decreasing the gastric H+ secretion.
Treatment of chloride-­resistant metabolic alkalosis with hyperten­
sion (urinary Cl− >20 mEq/L) mandates interference with the miner­
alocorticoid (or mineralocorticoid-­like substance) that is maintaining 
renal H+ losses. This can sometimes be accomplished pharmacologi­
cally (e.g., with spironolactone or with other distal potassium-­sparing 
diuretics such as amiloride).
RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
Respiratory acidosis results when there is an inappropriate increase in 
blood Pco2 that is secondary to impaired pulmonary ventilation. Respi­
ratory acidosis can result from either pulmonary disease, such as in 
severe bronchiolitis, or nonpulmonary disease, such as a narcotic over­
dose. In acute compensation, plasma bicarbonate increases by 1 for each 
10 mm Hg increase in the Pco2. In chronic respiratory acidosis, the kid­
neys increase acid secretion. Renal compensation starts in 12–24 hours 
and reaches maximum in 3–5 days. In chronic compensation, plasma 
bicarbonate increases by 3–5 for each 10 mm Hg increase in the Pco2.
TABLE 59.5  Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
Chloride Responsive (Urinary Chloride <15 mEq/L)
Gastric losses
Emesis
Nasogastric suction
Diuretics (loop or thiazide)
Chloride-­losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700)
Chloride-­deficient formula
Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700) (pseudo-­Bartter syndrome)
Seasonal (extreme heat)
Post-­hypercapnia
Chloride Resistant (Urinary Chloride >20 mEq/L)
High blood pressure
Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism (OMIM 103900)
Renovascular disease
Renin-­secreting tumor
17-­β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110)
11-­β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010)
Cushing syndrome
11-­β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030)
Licorice ingestion
Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200)
Normal blood pressure
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 607364/602522/241200/601678)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
EAST/SeSAME syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Base administration
EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; 
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance 
in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim); SeSAME, seizures, 
sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte 
imbalances.
Modified from Greenbaum LA. Electrolyte and acid-­base disorders. In 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:419.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1121
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Patients with a respiratory acidosis are often tachypneic as they are 
trying to correct the inadequate ventilation. The degree of hypercar­
bia drives the symptoms in a patient with respiratory acidosis. Patients 
with acute respiratory acidosis have more symptoms than patients with 
chronic respiratory acidosis. Hypoxia is usually seen in a patient with 
acute respiratory acidosis who is breathing room air. There may also be 
central nervous system manifestations of respiratory acidosis, which 
can include, but are not limited to, anxiety, dizziness, headache, con­
fusion, hallucinations, myoclonic jerks, seizures, psychosis, and coma. 
The management of respiratory acidosis is directed toward improving 
alveolar ventilation and treating the underlying disorder.
RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when there is an inappropriate decrease 
in Pco2 as a result of pulmonary hyperventilation. In a spontaneously 
breathing child, this can result from fever, sepsis, mild asthma, panic 
attack, or central nervous system disorders. In the intensive care unit, 
TABLE 59.6  Types of Bartter Syndrome, Gitelman Syndrome, and Related Conditions
Disorder
OMIM, Gene
Gene Product Inheritance
Features
BS Variants
BS I (ABS, HPES)
601678, SLC12A1
NKCC2
AR
Polyhydramnios, prematurity, hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis, 
nephrocalcinosis, with or without concentrating defect
BS II (ABS with transient 
hyperkalemia and acidosis, 
HPES)
241200, KCNJ1
ROMK1
AR
Polyhydramnios, prematurity, transient hyperkalemia and acidosis, 
then hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis, nephrocalcinosis, 
with or without concentrating defect
BS III (CBS)
607364, CLCNKB
CIC-­Kb
AR; many 
sporadic
Variable age at presentation with severity corresponding to type of 
gene variant; hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis
BS IVa and BS IVb (ABS or HPES 
with sensorineural deafness)
602522, BSND, 
CLCNKA, CLCNKB
Bartter CIC-­Ka 
and CIC-­Kb
AR
Polyhydramnios, prematurity, hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis, 
sensorineural deafness, with or without concentrating defect
BS V (transient ABS)
300971, MAGED2
MAGED2
XR
Severe polyhydramnios, hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis with 
symptoms resolving within the first few months of life
AD hypocalcemic hypercalciuria
601199, L12SP
CaSR
AD
Hypocalcemic hypocalciuria, hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis, 
suppressed PTH
GS Variants
GS
263800, SLC12A3
NCC
AR
Present in later childhood or adulthood with weakness, lethargy, 
carpopedal spasm, hypokalemic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, 
hypermagnesuria, and hypocalciuria
EAST syndrome (SeSAME)
612780, Kir4.1
KCNJ10
AR
Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, hypokalemic 
hypochloremic alkalosis
Other Variants
CLDN10 variants
617579, CLDN10
Claudin-­10
AR
Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with hypocalciuria but normal to 
elevated magnesium
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BS, Bartter syndrome; CaSR, calcium-­sensing receptor; CIC-­Ka, chloride channel-­Ka; CIC-­Kb, 
chloride channel-­Kb; GS, Gitelman syndrome; MAGED, melanoma-­associated antigen-­D2; NCC, thiazide-­sensitive NaCl co-transporter; NKCC2, 
furosemide-­sensitive Na-­K-­2Cl co-transporter; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man; PTH, parathyroid hormone, ROMK, renal outer medullary 
K channel; SeSAME, seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte unbalances; XR, X-­linked recessive.
From Fulchiero R, Seo-­Mayer P. Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019;66:121–134, Box 1.
TABLE 59.7  Features That Distinguish Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome Variants
Variant
Age of 
Onset
Serum K
Serum CI
Serum Mg
Serum Renin, 
Aldosterone
Urine Ca/Cr
Other Distinct 
Features
BS I
AN
Low
Low
Normal
High, high
High
—
BS II
AN
High, then low
Low
Normal
High, high
High
Transient hyperkalemia
BS III
N, C, A
Low
Very low
Normal
High, high
Low, normal, or high
—
BS IVa, IVb
AN
Low
Low
Normal
High, high
Normal or high
Sensorineural deafness
BS V
AN
Low
Low
Normal
High, high
—
Transient features
Hypocalcemic 
hypercalciuria
—
Low
Low
Normal
High, high
High
Family history, hypocalcemia, 
suppressed PTH
GS
C, A
Low
Low
Low
High, high
Low
—
EAST syndrome
—
Low
Low
Low
High, high
Low
Epilepsy, ataxia, 
sensorineural deafness
A, adult; AN, antenatal; BS, Bartter syndrome; C, child; Ca/Cr, spot calcium-­to-­creatinine ratio; GS, Gitelman syndrome; Mg, magnesium; N, neonate.
From Fulchiero R, Seo-­Mayer P. Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019;66:121–134, Box 3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1122
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
the most common cause is mechanical overventilation of an intubated 
child. A metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis is mediated 
by hydrogen ion release from nonbicarbonate buffers and occurs within 
minutes. In this acute compensation, plasma bicarbonate falls by 2 for 
each 10 mm Hg decrease in Pco2. In chronic respiratory alkalosis, the 
kidneys decrease H+ secretion, which produces a decrease in the serum 
HCO –
3  concentration. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alka­
losis develops gradually and takes 2–3 days. In chronic compensation, 
plasma bicarbonate falls by 4 for each 10 mm Hg decrease in the Pco2. 
Chronic respiratory alkalosis is the only acid–base disorder in which the 
pH may be completely normalized by the compensatory mechanisms.
Symptoms of acute respiratory alkalosis may be chest tightness, pal­
pitations, lightheadedness, circumoral numbness, or extremity pares­
thesias. Less commonly, tetany, seizures, muscle cramps, or syncope can 
be seen. The lightheadedness and syncope are felt to be a result of the 
decrease in cerebral blood flow that is caused by hypocapnia. The pares­
thesias, tetany, and seizures are thought to be related to the decrease in 
ionized calcium that occurs because alkalemia causes more calcium to 
bind to albumin. The treatment is management of the underlying process.
MIXED ACID–BASE DISORDERS
Mixed acid–base disorders occur when two or three primary events 
act to alter the acid–base state at the same time. The deviations in pH 
are more marked when two primary events block the compensation of 
each other, such as the combination of a metabolic acidosis and a respi­
ratory acidosis seen in a patient with shock and respiratory failure. In 
contrast, in the presence of two opposing primary events, the pH may 
be normal or only minimally abnormal, as can be seen with combined 
vomiting and diarrhea. A mixed acid–base disorder is commonly seen 
when neonates with respiratory acidosis caused by chronic lung disease 
also receive diuretics, which can cause a metabolic alkalosis.
The diagnosis of mixed acid–base disorder should be suspected in 
the following situations:
If the compensation for the primary event is absent or is out of the 
expected range.
If the deviation in anion gap and/or serum Cl− is out of proportion to 
the change in HCO –
3 .
If the anion gap is significantly increased in the presence of a near-­
normal pH.
POTASSIUM DISORDERS
Potassium is the major intracellular cation with a normal serum 
concentration of 3.5–5.5 mEq/L. The differential distribution of 
potassium between the intracellular (150 mEq/L) and extracellular 
compartments, sustained by the action of the Na+,K+-­ATPase pump, 
is the chief determinant of the resting membrane potential. Not sur­
prisingly, both hyperkalemia (serum K+ >5.5 mEq/L) and hypokale­
mia (serum K+ <3.5 mEq/L) have a profound effect on the excitability 
of the neuromuscular tissue, especially the cardiac tissue. As a result, 
fatal cardiac arrhythmias are possible sequelae of hypokalemia or 
hyperkalemia.
Almost all dietary potassium is absorbed. The kidney is the major 
organ responsible for K+ excretion, eliminating more than 90% of 
the daily K+ intake. However, after an acute ingestion of K+, the kid­
neys excrete only half of it over the first 4–6 hours; the remainder is 
transiently redistributed intracellularly before the kidneys eventually 
excrete it. This intracellular redistribution has a very important role in 
offsetting acute changes in serum K+, but it has a limited capacity to 
do so. Redistribution of a very small fraction (1–2%) of intracellular 
K+ into the ECF can easily increase serum K+ to a dangerous level. A 
number of factors affect the distribution of K+ between the intracellular 
space and the ECF (Table 59.8). The colonic excretion of K+ is of no sig­
nificance under normal conditions, but in patients with chronic renal 
failure, it becomes an important route of K+ elimination, when colonic 
excretion increases substantially.
Because the kidney is the major route of potassium elimination 
from the body, a disturbance in renal potassium handling can be the 
cause of excessive loss or retention.
In clinical practice, spironolactone, amiloride, and triamterene 
decrease urinary K+ excretion. Whereas spironolactone is an aldosterone 
antagonist, amiloride and triamterene block the Na+ conductance chan­
nels present in the principal cell luminal membrane. The antimicrobial 
trimethoprim prevents K+ secretion by the same mechanism as amiloride.
HYPOKALEMIA
Hypokalemia (Table 59.9 and Fig. 59.1) may result from (1) increased 
renal losses, (2) increased extrarenal losses, (3) redistribution, or (4) 
prolonged decreased intake of potassium. When interpreting cases of 
hypokalemia, the clinician should pay careful attention to blood pres­
sure and obtain laboratory data concerning acid–base status, electro­
lytes, osmolality of blood and urine, and the renin-­aldosterone axis.
Increased Renal Losses with Hypertension
Mineralocorticoid Excess
The presence of excess mineralocorticoid hormone, regardless of 
its source, results in stimulation of potassium secretion by the distal 
tubular cells of the nephron. Mineralocorticoid excess can result from 
primary hyperaldosteronism, rare forms of congenital adrenal hyper­
plasia (17α-­hydroxylase or 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency), syndrome of 
apparent mineralocorticoid excess, glucocorticoid remediable aldoste­
ronism, and Cushing syndrome. The hypokalemia in these conditions 
is associated with increased sodium chloride retention, causing hyper­
tension. The expansion of the extracellular volume eventually leads to 
the suppression of Na+-­retaining mechanisms, but the K+ losses con­
tinue unabated. Metabolic alkalosis develops as a result of enhanced 
proximal ammonium production secondary to potassium depletion.
Liddle Syndrome
Liddle syndrome is characterized by a primary increase in sodium reab­
sorption in the collecting tubule and associated with increased potas­
sium secretion. The sodium reabsorption is increased through activation 
of the amiloride-­sensitive renal sodium channel. Because serum aldo­
sterone levels are low, spironolactone is ineffective, but amiloride and 
triamterene, which block the sodium channel, decrease potassium losses 
and help ameliorate the hypokalemia and the hypertension.
TABLE 59.8  Factors Affecting Potassium 
Distribution Between Extracellular Fluid and 
Intracellular Fluid
Insulin
Excess causes hypokalemia
Deficiency causes hyperkalemia
Catecholamines
β-­agonists cause hypokalemia
β-­antagonists cause hyperkalemia
Acid–base status
Metabolic alkalosis causes hypokalemia
Metabolic acidosis (especially inorganic) causes 
hyperkalemia
Tissue injury
Causes hyperkalemia
From Chadha V, Alon US. Acid-­base and electrolyte disturbances. 
In: Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies 
in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2004:455.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1123
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Increased Renal Losses with Normal Blood Pressure
The hypokalemia associated with Bartter syndrome, Gitelman syn­
drome, RTA, DKA, and vomiting are discussed in the section on acid–
base disorders.
Hypomagnesemia of any cause can lead to K+ depletion, and cor­
rection of hypokalemia is not possible until magnesium balance is 
restored. These effects are believed to be secondary to magnesium’s 
effect on aldosterone secretion and K+ channels. Magnesium replace­
ment in this situation should be done with magnesium oxide, because 
the sulfate ion of magnesium sulfate can increase the urinary K+ losses.
The polyuric recovery phase of acute tubular necrosis and the post­
obstructive diuresis after relief of urinary tract obstruction are com­
monly encountered clinical conditions that may be associated with 
excess urine potassium losses. Penicillins can increase urinary K+ losses 
by increased delivery of sodium and nonabsorbable anions to the distal 
nephron. Amphotericin B enhances urinary K+ loss by increasing the 
tubular K+ permeability and also by causing type I RTA.
Increased Extrarenal Losses
Diarrhea is a very common cause of hypokalemia in pediatric practice. 
Profuse sweating is a much less frequent cause of hypokalemia (sea­
sonal pseudohypokalemia).
Redistribution
Alkalosis causes potassium to enter cells in exchange for H+. 
β-­Adrenergic agonists increase intracellular movement of potassium. 
Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis is a rare disorder charac­
terized by recurring transient episodes of net K+ transfer from ECF 
to intracellular fluid (ICF). The autosomal dominant form manifests 
between the ages of 10 and 19 years. The dominant finding is muscle 
weakness, which may advance to paralysis. Episodes typically occur 
after large carbohydrate-­rich meals, strenuous exercise, or insulin 
administration. Hyperthyroid states may also produce hypokalemic 
paralysis. Therapy is largely symptomatic; empirical treatment with 
acetazolamide has yielded some results.
EAST (epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy) 
syndrome, also known as SeSAME syndrome (seizures, sensorineu­
ral deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalances), 
is a rare disorder caused by a variant in the K(+) channel KCNJ10 
(Kir4.1), found in the basolateral membrane of the renal distal convo­
luted tubule. Inheritance is autosomal recessive and the loss-­of-­function 
variant seen in EAST/SeSAME syndrome gives patients a similar clin­
ical picture as Gitelman syndrome, with hypokalemic alkalosis, hypo­
magnesemia, and hypocalciuria. Urinary studies have demonstrated 
potassium, magnesium, and sodium wasting, and salt craving, enure­
sis, and polydipsia/polyuria have been reported in patients with EAST 
syndrome, consistent with renal salt wasting.
Consequences of Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia produces functional alterations in skeletal muscle, 
smooth muscle, and the heart. The cardiac conduction effects are the 
most serious consequence of hypokalemia. The characteristic ECG 
changes include flattening of the T wave with appearance of the U wave 
(Fig. 59.2). Skeletal muscle weakness usually starts in the limbs before 
involving the trunk and respiratory muscles. Paralytic ileus and gas­
tric dilatation reflect smooth muscle dysfunction. Rhabdomyolysis is 
a dramatic and serious complication of hypokalemia. Hypokalemia is 
particularly dangerous in patients taking digoxin.
In the kidney, potassium deficiency may result in vacuolar 
changes in the tubular epithelium. The renal concentrating capacity 
is decreased, causing polyuria. Prolonged and sustained hypokalemia 
leads to systemic alkalosis.
Treatment of Hypokalemia
The immediate objective of potassium replacement is to prevent 
life-­threatening cardiac conduction and muscle complications. The 
ultimate goal is to replenish total body potassium stores. There is no 
method of determining the potassium deficit, because there is no 
definite correlation between the plasma potassium concentration and 
body potassium stores. A decrease of 1 mEq/L in serum potassium 
concentration secondary to potassium loss generally corresponds 
to a loss of approximately 10–30% of body potassium. In conditions 
TABLE 59.9  Differential Diagnosis of 
Hypokalemia
INCREASED RENAL LOSSES (TTKG >6)
With Hypertension
Mineralocorticoid excess
Primary aldosteronism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
17-­α-Hydroxylase deficiency
11-­β-­Hydroxylase deficiency
Hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism
Glucocorticoid-­suppressible hyperaldosteronism
Exogenous mineralocorticoid
Cushing syndrome
Liddle syndrome
With Normal Blood Pressure
With Acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
With Alkalosis
Vomiting
Diuretics
Congenital chloride diarrhea
Bartter syndrome
Gitelman syndrome
Magnesium depletion
Normotensive hyperaldosteronism
With Normal Acid–Base
Recovery from acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
Drugs (penicillins, amphotericin B)
EXTRARENAL LOSSES (TTKG <2)
Diarrhea/GI fistulas
Laxative abuse
Profuse sweating
REDISTRIBUTION
Alkalosis
β-­Adrenergic agonists
Barium intoxication
Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis
TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient.
From Chadha V, Alon US. Acid-­base and electrolyte disturbances. 
In: Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies 
in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2004:456.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1124
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
with associated acidosis and/or hyperosmolality (e.g., RTA, DKA), the 
plasma potassium concentration may underestimate potassium stores, 
and correction of acidosis with bicarbonate in these conditions may 
rapidly lower the serum potassium concentration.
The safest route to administer potassium is by mouth, but in states 
of severe symptomatic hypokalemia or when there are gastrointestinal 
problems, potassium must be given intravenously. The usual concen­
tration of potassium in intravenous fluid solutions is up to 40 mEq/L. 
Higher concentrations of up to 60–80 mEq/L can be given in a central 
vein under continuous ECG monitoring. Dextrose should be avoided 
in the initial fluids because its administration with secondary increased 
insulin secretion may result in further lowering of the plasma potas­
sium concentration. The choice of potassium salt depends on the clin­
ical situation. Under most circumstances, when hypovolemia coexists, 
potassium chloride is appropriate. Potassium bicarbonate (or, more 
often, other salts such as citrate or acetate, which generate bicarbonate) 
Pseudohypokalemia
History and physical,
corresponding tests
Urine K: 24hr urine K or FEK
Extra-renal loss:
24hr uK <20 mmol/day or FEK <5%
Acid–base status
Acid–base status
TTKG
Metabolic 
alkalosis
Urine chloride
Blood pressure
Plasma aldosterone
and serum cortisol
High
<20
<3
>5
Normal aldosterone
and normal cortisol
Liddle’s syndrome (gain-of-function variant in
the cortical collecting tubule sodium channel)
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess syndrome
(reduced 11-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
activity due to gene variant)
Cushing syndrome
High aldosterone
Upper GI loss
Recent diuretic use
Posthypercapnic state
Steroid use
Normal aldosterone
and high cortisol
Renal loss:
24hr uK >20 mmol/day or FEK >5%
No further
work-up
Low intake
Yes
Transcellular
shift
Severe leukocytosis
Seasonal pseudohypokalemia
High endogenous
insulin/catecholamines
  • ACS
  • Hypoxia
  • Drug withdrawals
Osmotic diuresis
  • Hyperglycemia
  • Mannitol
Metabolic acidosis
  • RTA–I or II
  • DKA
  • Ureterosigmoidostomy
Metabolic acidosis
  • Lower GI loss, i.e.,
    diarrhea
Metabolic alkalosis
  • Pyloric stenosis
  • Congenital chloride
    losing diarrhea
  • Other causes of upper
    GI loss or diuretic use
Normal pH
  • Mixed processes
    above
  • Sweating
Primary aldosteronism
  • Adenoma
  • Hyperplasia
  • Glucocorticoid remedial
Secondary aldosteronism
  • Renovascular disease
  • Volume depletion
  • Renin secreting tumor
Normal pH
  • Post-obstructive nephropathy
  • Post-ATN diuresis
  • Magnesium depletion
Normotensive
  • Bartter syndrome or loop
    diuretic use
  • Gitelman syndrome or thiazide
    diurectic use
Exogenous insulin, β2-
adrenoreceptor agonist
Hypokalemia (serum K ≤3.5 mmol/L)
≥20
Fig. 59.1  The diagnostic approach to hypokalemia. ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ATN, acute tubular necro­
sis; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; FEK, fractional excretion of K; GI, gastrointestinal; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; 
TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient; uK, urine K. (Modified from Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, eds. Conn’s 
Current Therapy. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:340, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1125
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
can be given in the presence of coexistent metabolic acidosis. If there is 
an associated phosphate deficiency (as in DKA), potassium phosphate 
can be used. It is important to remember that correction of total body 
potassium deficits can take days to weeks.
HYPERKALEMIA
Moderate (6.1–7.0 mEq/L) to severe (>7.0 mEq/L) hyperkalemia, espe­
cially if it develops acutely, can lead to grave consequences and requires 
prompt treatment. Pseudohyperkalemia can occur as a result of the 
release of intracellular potassium (e.g., hemolysis caused by mechani­
cal trauma during venipuncture), and it can also be seen in conditions 
with marked leukocytosis and thrombocytosis. It can be avoided by 
minimizing trauma and hand clenching during venipuncture, by rap­
idly separating red blood cells, and by using plasma rather than serum 
for potassium measurements. An unexpected elevated potassium level 
should be immediately repeated.
Hyperkalemia can be caused by (1) reduced urinary potassium 
excretion, (2) increased potassium intake, (3) release of intracellular 
potassium, and/or (4) impaired cellular potassium uptake (Table 59.10 
and Fig. 59.3).
Reduced Urinary Potassium Excretion
Renal potassium excretion decreases when the GFR is decreased or 
when there is a defect in tubular potassium excretion resulting from 
lack of aldosterone, medications, or a primary defect in tubular potas­
sium excretion.
Renal Failure
Potassium excretion is decreased in both acute and chronic renal fail­
ure. Severe hyperkalemia occurs more commonly in acute renal failure. 
In contrast, in patients with chronic renal failure, hyperkalemia does 
not occur unless the GFR is lower than 10 mL/min or some other factor 
V2
V3
V4
Fig. 59.2  The ECG manifestations of hypokalemia. The serum potas­
sium concentration was 2.2 mEq/L. The ST segment is prolonged, pri­
marily because of a U wave following the T wave, and the T wave is 
flattened. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 
26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:727, Fig. 109.1.)
TABLE 59.10  Differential Diagnosis of 
Hyperkalemia
PSEUDOHYPERKALEMIA
Hemolysis
Thrombocytosis
Leukocytosis
REDUCED URINARY POTASSIUM EXCRETION (TTKG <5)
Renal Failure
Acute
Chronic
Hypoaldosteronism
Addison disease
Hereditary adrenal enzyme defects
21-­Hydroxylase deficiency
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
Pseudohypoaldosteronism (Gordon syndrome)
Drugs
ACE inhibitors
Potassium-­sparing diuretics
Spironolactone
Amiloride
Triamterene
Cyclosporine
Trimethoprim
Heparin
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
Primary Tubular Defects
Post–renal transplantation
Lupus nephritis
AIDS
RTA type IV (chloride shunt)
INCREASED INTAKE/TISSUE RELEASE (TTKG >10)
Intravenous/oral administration
Hemolysis (endogenous or transfused blood)
Rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis
REDISTRIBUTION
Acidosis
Insulin deficiency (diabetes)
Familial hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Digitalis toxicity
β-­Adrenergic blockade
Succinylcholine
ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; TTKG, 
transtubular potassium gradient.
From Chadha V, Alon US. Acid-­base and electrolyte disturbances. In: 
Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in 
Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:457.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1126
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
predisposing to hyperkalemia is present. In patients with chronic renal 
failure, potassium balance is maintained by increased K+ secretion per 
functioning nephron and also by enhanced excretion of K+ through the 
gastrointestinal tract.
Hypoaldosteronism
Low levels or absence of aldosterone (or aldosterone receptor defects) 
may result from a variety of conditions (Addison disease, congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia [deficiency of 21-­hydroxylase], and hyporenine­
mic hypoaldosteronism). In addition to hyperkalemia, hyponatremia 
and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis are the associated features in 
these disorders. The diagnosis can be confirmed by measurement of 
renin activity and aldosterone levels.
Drugs
Several drugs are known to be associated with hyperkalemia; they 
can either impair renin-­aldosterone secretion or action (angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, spironolactone, cyclosporine, or 
heparin) or impair renal tubular potassium secretion (amiloride, tri­
amterene, trimethoprim, or cyclosporine).
Pseudohyperkalemia
Severe leukocytosis
Severe thrombocytosis
Low endogenous
insulin/catecholamines
Acidosis
Hyperglycemia
Primary hypoaldosteronism
Secondary hypoaldosteronism
1. Renin deficiency/resistance
  • Diabetes mellitus
  • RTA-4
  • Multiple myeloma
  • Meds: β blocker; direct renin
    inhibitor; NSAIDs
2. Aldosterone deficiency/
    resistance
  • Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
  • Addison disease
  • RTA-4
  • Renal tubulointerstitial disease
  • Hereditary diseases: Gordon
    syndrome, pseudohypo-
    aldosteronism type 1
  • Medications: ACEI/ARB; heparin;
    spironolactone; eplerenone
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Medications:
  • Mannitol
  • β blockers
  • Succinylcholine
  • Somatostatin
  • Octreotide
  • Digitalis
Tissue breakdown/
cell lysis
  • Rhabdomyolysis
  • Massive hemolysis
  • Resolving hematoma
  • Trauma
  • Tumor lysis
1. Acute renal failure or
    advanced CKD
    (GFR <20 mL/min)*
2. Reduced renal tubular
    flow from low sodium
3. Reduced effective renal
    blood flow
Other medications:
1. Collecting tubule Na/K
    ATPase blockade
  • Cyclosporin
  • Tacrolimus
2. ENAC blockade
  • Amiloride
  • Triamterene
  • Trimethoprim
  • Pentamidine
History and physical,
corresponding tests
Reduced renal K excretion
Transcellular shift
High
K
load
Yes
No further
work-up
Hyperkalemia (serum K ≥5.5 mmol/L)
TTKG<5
Fig. 59.3  The diagnostic approach to hyperkalemia. *Hyperkalemia may occur with higher GFR if K load is 
excessive. ACEI, angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; CKD, chronic 
kidney disease; ENAC, epithelial sodium channel; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiin­
flammatory drugs; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (Modified from Keller­
man RD, Rakel DP, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:341, Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1127
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Primary Tubular Defects
In some patients, hyperkalemia occurs because of low urinary K+ 
excretion despite normal renin and aldosterone levels. The presence 
of a selective defect in K+ secretion has been described in subjects with 
renal transplant rejection and lupus nephritis.
Increased Potassium Intake/Tissue Release
Acute increases in potassium intake, usually through parenteral admin­
istration, may result in hyperkalemia. The hyperkalemia is typically 
transient because normal kidneys have a large capacity for excreting 
potassium. Sustained hyperkalemia is seen only when renal excretory 
mechanisms are impaired.
In tumor lysis syndrome and rhabdomyolysis, massive amounts of 
K+ are released from the intracellular compartment, but hyperkalemia 
does not usually occur unless acute renal failure supervenes. Similarly, 
trauma, intravascular hemolysis, transfusion of stored blood, and cata­
bolic states such as infection or high fever are associated with release of 
K+ from the cells; however, hyperkalemia is uncommon as long as renal 
function is normal and normal to high urine output is maintained with 
fluid therapy.
Redistribution
Acidosis and insulin deficiency result in egress of intracellular potas­
sium. β2-­Receptor blockers, digitalis (by inhibiting the Na+,K+-­ATPase 
pump), and succinylcholine (by inhibiting cellular repolarization) 
cause hyperkalemia by impairing cellular potassium uptake.
Consequences of Hyperkalemia
Overt clinical manifestations are uncommon with hyperkalemia, but 
cardiac arrhythmias are potentially life-­threatening. Generalized mus­
cular weakness and paralysis can occur. The characteristic ECG find­
ings seen with increasing [K+] are tall, peaked T waves; widening of the 
QRS complex; decreased amplitude of the P wave; and fusion of the 
QRS complex with the T wave, forming a sine wave (Fig. 59.4). This 
can be rapidly followed by atrioventricular dissociation and ventricular 
tachycardia or fibrillation. Cardiac arrest is more common with hyper­
kalemia than with hypokalemia.
Treatment of Hyperkalemia
The treatment of hyperkalemia depends on the magnitude of the 
hyperkalemia, the severity of ECG changes, and the anticipated future 
rise in [K+]. The specific therapy should always focus on the under­
lying cause. However, a plasma potassium concentration higher than 
7.0 mEq/L or marked ECG changes are potentially life-­threatening 
and necessitate immediate treatment. A normal ECG result should 
not lead to a more casual approach, because significant ECG changes 
can appear over a short period of time. All potassium intake (par­
enteral nutrition, medications with potassium salt) and medica­
tions that cause hyperkalemia, such as potassium-­sparing diuretics, 
angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors, and trimethoprim, should 
be discontinued. The treatment modalities usually belong to the fol­
lowing three categories: (1) antagonism of membrane excitability, 
(2) shifting of potassium into the intracellular compartment, and (3) 
elimination of excess potassium (Table 59.11).
Calcium protects the heart from fatal arrhythmias caused by 
hyperkalemia by normalizing the difference between the resting and 
threshold potentials. This protective effect is quite rapid but relatively 
short-­lived; therefore, other measures to reduce the concentration of 
serum potassium are necessary.
Potassium can be shifted from the extracellular to the intracellular 
compartment by administration of glucose and insulin, or β2-­adrenergic 
agonists, as detailed in Table 59.11. Although the intracellular shift of 
potassium can be accomplished rather quickly, this is only a tempo­
rary measure, and further steps should be taken to establish a negative 
potassium balance.
Loop or thiazide diuretics increase renal potassium excretion. In 
patients with aldosterone deficiency, fludrocortisone increases renal 
potassium excretion. Alkalinizing the urine through systemic base 
administration can further enhance urinary potassium losses.
Cation exchange resins (enteric) remove potassium from the body 
and are effective in acute situations, particularly when poor renal func­
tion is present. Dialysis is needed in patients with severe hyperkalemia, 
especially in the presence of advanced renal failure or when accom­
panied by a hypercatabolic state or severe tissue necrosis. For urgent 
potassium removal, hemodialysis is more effective than continuous 
hemodiafiltration or peritoneal dialysis.
A
B
C
Lead V3
Fig. 59.4  The effects of progressive hyperkalemia on the electrocardio­
gram. All of the illustrations are from lead V3. A, Serum potassium con­
centration ([K+]) = 6.8 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves together with 
normal sinus rhythm. B, Serum [K+] = 8.9 mEq/L; note the peaked T 
waves and absent P waves. C, Serum [K+] > 8.9 mEq/L; note the classic 
sine wave with absent P waves, marked prolongation of the QRS com­
plex, and peaked T waves. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­
Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:727, Fig. 109.2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1128
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
SODIUM DISORDERS
Sodium is the principal cation of the ECF compartment, and total body 
sodium content is the major determinant of ECF volume. A normal 
ECF volume is essential for maintaining an adequate circulating blood 
volume. The sodium concentration determines cell volume by direct­
ing water movement between the ECF compartment and the intra­
cellular compartment. An increase in ECF osmolality causes water to 
move out of cells, and a decrease in ECF osmolality causes water to 
move into cells. Sodium homeostasis is coupled with water homeosta­
sis; therefore, disorders of sodium homeostasis usually occur as a result 
of imbalances of both sodium and water rather than an isolated imbal­
ance of either sodium or water.
The kidneys are pivotal regulators of sodium and water balance. 
Sodium excretion, which is regulated by the renin-­angiotensin-­
aldosterone system and atrial natriuretic peptide, increases in response 
to an expanded intravascular volume, as may occur with a high sodium 
intake. In response to a decreased intravascular volume, the urine can 
be made virtually sodium free.
A detailed history of the underlying disease, food and fluid intake, 
and fluid losses in the form of stool, emesis, and urine should be 
obtained. The physical examination focuses on an evaluation of the 
patient’s volume status, including the nature and rate of peripheral 
pulses, blood pressure, fullness of the fontanel, level of consciousness, 
dryness of mucous membranes, coolness of extremities, and capil­
lary refill time. Urinary sodium concentration can provide valuable 
information regarding the child’s effective blood volume, but it can be 
misleading if the patient is receiving diuretics or has abnormal renal 
sodium handling. The clinical features associated with alterations in 
plasma osmolality are nonspecific. Osmolality is regulated by thirst and 
vasopressin production, which determines renal water excretion. A low 
serum osmolality may produce lethargy and confusion, whereas a high 
serum osmolality may lead to irritability, a high-­pitched cry, and a 
doughy skin texture. The determination of plasma osmolality requires 
a direct laboratory measurement or can be estimated from the follow­
ing formula:
	
Serum osmolality(mOsm) = 2 × Na +
mEq/L + [glucose]mg/dL/18
+ [urea]mg/dL/2.8
HYPONATREMIA
Hyponatremia is defined as a plasma sodium <135 mEq/L and is gen­
erally characterized as a disproportionate concentration of water to 
sodium. This may arise from either water retention or sodium losses. 
Hyponatremia should be differentiated from pseudohyponatremia 
and factitious hyponatremia. Pseudohyponatremia occurs in the 
presence of excessive amounts of plasma proteins and lipids, which 
decrease the percentage of plasma water and thus artificially lower 
the plasma sodium concentration. The measured plasma osmolality 
of these patients is normal, inasmuch as lipids and proteins do not 
contribute significantly to osmolality because of their large size. There­
fore, a gap between measured and calculated osmolalities can indicate 
pseudohyponatremia.
Factitious hyponatremia results from high plasma concentrations 
of impermeable solutes such as glucose or mannitol that cause move­
ment of water from the intracellular to the extracellular space. In con­
trast to pseudohyponatremia, the low plasma sodium concentration in 
these situations is a true value, and plasma osmolality is increased as 
a result of the presence of the extra solutes. The decrease in plasma 
sodium is approximately 1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL increase in 
the plasma glucose concentration.
In true hyponatremia, the plasma osmolality is low (<280 mOsm/
kg), and the pathophysiologic processes are caused by (1) loss of both 
plasma sodium and water (sodium losses exceeding water losses), (2) 
increase in plasma water (without edema), or (3) increase in both total 
body water and sodium (increase in water exceeding that of sodium; 
usually with edema). Estimating the status of the ECF volume (hypo­
volemia, euvolemia, or hypervolemia) is therefore useful in narrowing 
the differential diagnosis (see Figs. 59.1, 59.5, 59.6).
Hypovolemic Hyponatremia
Hypovolemia hyponatremia occurs when urinary and/or gastrointes­
tinal sodium losses exceed those of water; fluids are sequestered into 
third spaces such as the peritoneal cavity, subcutaneous tissue, or bowel 
lumen; or, uncommonly, sodium is lost in sweat for patients with cystic 
fibrosis or in excessively hot climatic zones. The most common cause 
of hypovolemic hyponatremia in children is gastroenteritis. Fistulas 
and various types of gastrointestinal drainage tubes can also lead to 
a similar clinical picture. The normally functioning kidneys respond 
by conserving sodium, and the urine sodium concentration is usually 
<20 mEq/L.
The kidneys can be the source of excessive sodium loss in prema­
ture infants (tubular immaturity), in patients receiving diuretics, and 
in those having an osmotic diuresis (DKA). The presence of increased 
urinary bicarbonate, as seen in certain patients with metabolic alka­
losis and RTA, leads to obligatory losses of sodium in the urine. The 
urinary sodium losses are increased during the recovery phase of 
acute tubular necrosis, after relief of urinary tract obstruction, and 
in certain renal diseases (salt-­wasting nephropathies) such as med­
ullary cystic disease, polycystic kidney disease, and tubulointerstitial 
diseases. All of these disorders are usually accompanied by hypoka­
lemia. The presence of hyperkalemia and normal renal function in 
patients with hypovolemic hyponatremia suggests mineralocorticoid 
deficiency or type IV RTA.
TABLE 59.11  Treatment of Hyperkalemia
Antagonism of Membrane Excitability
Calcium gluconate 10% (elemental calcium, 0.45 mEq/mL), 0.5–1.0 mL/kg 
body weight (maximum = 10 mL), injected intravenously and slowly over 
5–10 min, with continuous monitoring of heart rate)
Shift of Potassium into the Intracellular Compartment
 • Sodium bicarbonate, 1–2 mEq/kg body weight intravenously over 
10–20 min; usefulness is limited in patients with volume expansion
 • Glucose, 1 g/kg body weight, and insulin, 1 unit per every 4 g of glucose, 
intravenously over 20–30 min
 • β2-­Adrenergic agonists, such as albuterol, intravenously or by nebulizer or 
aerosol
Elimination of Excess Potassium
 • Loop/thiazide diuretics
 • Fludrocortisone (0.05–0.1 mg/day); should be avoided or given with great 
caution to hypertensive patients
 • Cation exchange resin, sodium polystyrene sulfonate, 1 g/kg body weight 
(maximum, 15 g/dose), administered orally or rectally in 20–30% sorbitol 
or 10% glucose, 1 g resin/4 mL (additional 70% sorbitol syrup may be 
given if constipation occurs)
 • Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, or hemodiafiltration
Modified from Hellerstein S, Alon US, Warady BA. Renal impairment. 
In: Ashcraft KW, Murphy JP, Sharp RJ, et al., eds. Pediatric Surgery. 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:47–57.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1129
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
• Thiazide diuretic therapy
• Cerebral salt wasting
• Mineralocorticoid deficiency
• Salt wasting nephropathy:
  • Medullary cystic disease
  • Chronic interstitial nephritis
  • Polycystic kidney disease
  • Analgesic nephropathy
  • Partial urinary tract
    obstruction
  • Chronic glomerulonephritis
• Bicarbonaturia (type 1 proximal
  RTA, metabolic alkalosis)
• Glucosuria (osmotic diuresis)
• Ketonuria (alcoholic
     ketoacidosis, diabetic
     ketoacidosis, starvation)
• SIADH
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Hypothyroidism
• Reset osmostat
• Drug induced
• Excessive water intake
• Low solute intake
• Exercise
• Cirrhosis
• Congestive heart failure
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Renal failure (acute
  and chronic)
Assess clinical volume status
Hypovolemic
Euvolemic
Hypervolemic
Extrarenal
Renal
• Gastrointestinal losses
• Cerebral salt wasting
• Sweat losses
• Third spacing losses
  (burns, pancreatitis, trauma,
  muscle, peritonitis)
Fig. 59.5  The differential diagnosis of hypo-osmolar hyponatremia. RTA, renal tubular acidosis; SIADH, syn­
drome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. (From Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:343, Fig. 1.)
Hypo-osmolar hyponatremia
serum Na+ <135 mEq/L and plasma
osmolality <275–280 mOsm/kg*
Hypovolemic
Euvolemic
Hypervolemic
Urine Osm <100 mOsm/kg*
Urine Na <10
FENa <1%
Extrarenal losses
SIADH
Congestive heart failure,
cirrhosis, nephrosis
Urine Na+ >20 mEq/L
Acute or chronic renal failure
Urine Osm <100 mOsm/kg*
Plasma uric acid <4 mg/dL
Urine Osm >100 mOsm/kg*
Urine Na+ >20 mEq/L
(no diuretic use)
Normal renal, adrenal,
and thyroid function
Urine Na+ <10
Urine Osm >300 mOsm/kg*
(in the absence of diuretics)
or
Urine Osm is 50% of plasma
Osm (on diuretics)
Primary polydipsia
Renal losses
Urine Na+ >20 mEq/L
FENa >1%
Fig. 59.6  Laboratory findings in hypo-osmolar hyponatremia. FENa, fractional excretion of sodium; Osm, 
osmoles; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. *Per kg water. (From Kellerman RD, Rakel 
DP, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:344, Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1130
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Some children with acute or chronic central nervous system injury 
(closed-­head trauma, neurosurgery, tumors, subarachnoid hemor­
rhage, or meningitis) present with excessive renal sodium losses and 
develop hypovolemic hyponatremia. The condition known as cere­
bral (renal) salt-­wasting syndrome is controversial and may possi­
bly occur because of secretion of atrial natriuretic hormone or other 
undetermined factors. Cerebral salt wasting is usually associated with 
hypovolemia but may be confused with the syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), which does not demonstrate 
volume depletion. In cerebral (renal) salt wasting, sodium balance 
(intake-­excretion) is negative. Adrenal insufficiency and renal tubular 
injury are important disorders in the differential diagnosis of cerebral 
salt wasting. Apart from managing the underlying condition, patients 
with cerebral salt-­wasting syndrome require replacement of urinary 
sodium and water losses.
In all patients with renal losses of sodium as a cause of hypovole­
mic hyponatremia, the urinary sodium concentration is usually >20 
mEq/L, despite the presence of hypovolemia.
Euvolemic Hyponatremia
The ECF volume status of patients in this group is usually normal; 
some persons have a slightly increased ECF volume, but they are not 
edematous. Owing to slight ECF volume expansion, urinary sodium 
concentration is usually >20 mEq/L.
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion 
(SIADH) is a common cause of euvolemic hyponatremia. Exogenous 
administration of DDAVP (synthetic analog of vasopressin) can produce 
a similar clinical picture. SIADH, which has multiple causes (e.g., central 
nervous system infections, trauma, hypoxia, and various malignancies), 
results from antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion despite the absence 
of increased plasma osmolality or volume depletion, the normal stimuli 
for ADH secretion. Rarely is SIADH due to a vasopressin-­independent 
mechanism such as vasopressin-­receptor sensitivity to vasopressin 
(Table 59.12). The diagnostic criteria are as follows:
	1.	 Hypo-osmolar hyponatremia
	2.	 Urine osmolality higher than serum osmolality
	3.	 Normal renal function
	4.	 Normal adrenal and thyroid function
	5.	 High urinary sodium concentration (this is not an absolute crite­
rion, inasmuch as urinary sodium concentrations may be low in 
patients who are severely sodium depleted)
	6.	 Absence of hypovolemia or edema
	7.	 Hypouricemia
In the absence of any obvious clinical signs, the incidental labora­
tory finding of hyponatremia is usually the first clue to the presence of 
SIADH.
Because SIADH is a problem of water retention and not of sodium 
depletion, the most appropriate treatment is water restriction. Attempts 
to correct the hyponatremia with sodium administration cause an 
increase in urinary sodium excretion and little change in the plasma 
sodium concentration. Nonetheless, sodium administration is needed 
if severe hyponatremia leads to neurologic symptoms.
Glucocorticoid and thyroid hormone deficiency can cause hypona­
tremia similar to that of SIADH. Adrenal insufficiency may also pro­
duce volume depletion and an Addisonian crisis. The hyponatremia 
resolves with appropriate hormonal replacement therapy.
Acute water intoxication is an uncommon cause of euvolemic 
hyponatremia in children receiving hypotonic intravenous fluids; it 
is likely to happen only if there is an associated impairment of free 
water excretion capability. Postoperative patients are at particularly 
increased risk because of high ADH secretion secondary to pain and 
emotional stress. As the free water excretion ability of infants is limited 
in comparison with that in older children, they are at increased risk 
of developing hyponatremia from excessive oral water intake. Infants 
younger than 6 months fed water without electrolytes may develop 
hyponatremia and associated symptoms such as lethargy, seizures, and 
hypothermia. Symptoms correct rapidly with water restriction.
TABLE 59.12  Causes of the Syndrome of 
Inappropriate ADH Secretion
Ectopic ADH Production from Tumors
Bronchogenic carcinoma
Bronchial carcinoid
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin disease
Thymoma
Pulmonary Disease
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Aspergillosis with cavitation
Lung abscess
Chronic chest infections
Positive pressure mechanical ventilation
Central Nervous System Disease
Brain tumor
Encephalitis
Meningitis
Brain abscess
Head injury
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Acute intermittent porphyria
Stress
Hydrocephalus
Drug Induced
Carbamazepine
Desmopressin
Oxytocin
Vincristine
Interferons
Nicotine
Cyclophosphamide
Morphine
Amitriptyline
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
3,4-­Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (Ecstasy)
Phenothiazines
Barbiturates
ACE inhibitors
Omeprazole
Tricyclic antidepressants
ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme; ADH, antidiuretic hormone.
Modified from Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 
26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:717, Table 108-­3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1131
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
Medications may also cause hyponatremia, through a variety of 
mechanisms, such as impairing urinary diluting capacity (i.e., thiazide 
and loop diuretics) or renal salt wasting (Bactrim). Other medications 
that can induce hyponatremia are angiotensin-­converting enzyme 
inhibitors, mannitol, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications 
(see Table 59.12).
Intoxication of traditional amphetamines and synthetic cathi­
nones (β-­ketone amphetamine analogs) such as “bath salts” can result 
in hyponatremia, which may cause profound central nervous system 
disturbances. Other electrolyte abnormalities may also be seen with 
amphetamine intoxication including hypokalemia, hyponatremia, 
hypermagnesemia, and elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis.
Hypervolemic Hyponatremia
In the absence of renal disease, patients with hypervolemic hyponatre­
mia have decreased effective circulating blood volume but with result­
ing sodium and water retention. Urine sodium concentration is low. 
The edema-­forming states such as heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephro­
sis are characterized by decreased effective blood volume (despite an 
increased ECF) that leads to stimulation of the renin-­angiotensin-­
aldosterone axis as well as ADH secretion. Although both sodium and 
water are retained, hyponatremia develops because of proportionately 
greater water retention. The urinary sodium is usually <10 mEq/L 
because of avid sodium reabsorption due to decreased effective blood 
volume and decreased renal perfusion.
Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Hyponatremia
Most patients with mild degrees of hyponatremia (plasma sodium lev­
els, 125–135 mEq/L) are asymptomatic. Once the serum sodium con­
centration falls below 120 mEq/L, serious sequelae, especially involving 
the central nervous system, may follow. Cerebral edema develops 
because the decrease in plasma osmolality causes water to move into 
the cells. Cerebral overhydration can manifest with varied symptoms, 
such as headache, vomiting, altered consciousness, seizures, and coma. 
The severity of symptoms is dependent on both the magnitude and 
rapidity of the fall in the plasma sodium concentration. Although 
seizures are common with acute hyponatremia, patients with chronic 
hyponatremia may manifest focal neurologic deficits and ataxia. The 
brain is protected during chronic hyponatremia by adaptive changes 
involving loss of intracellular osmolytes. However, the same protective 
changes can be responsible for the harmful effects seen when chronic 
hyponatremia is corrected too rapidly (see later discussion).
Patients with hypovolemic hyponatremia can develop shock at 
lesser degrees of body water depletion in comparison with patients 
with normal or increased serum sodium concentration, because of 
the associated fluid shift from the ECF to the ICF compartment. The 
decrease in the intravascular volume is a stimulus for ADH secretion, 
which serves to perpetuate the hyponatremia by limiting renal water 
excretion.
Treatment of Hyponatremia
The treatment of hyponatremia depends on its severity, its duration, 
and the ECF volume status. The primary goal should be to treat the 
underlying condition giving rise to hyponatremia (e.g., management 
of diarrhea, mineralocorticoid deficiency, nephrosis, or heart failure). 
However, management of hypovolemia often requires initiation of cor­
rective therapy before the underlying disease is controlled.
Patients with severe hypovolemia should promptly receive paren­
teral fluids to restore the circulating blood volume and normalize tis­
sue perfusion. Blood and urine specimens should ideally be obtained 
as soon as possible to assess serum electrolytes, BUN level, creatinine 
level, and urinary sodium excretion. Because correction of severe hypo­
volemia takes precedence over normalization of osmolality, isotonic solu­
tions can be safely administered before the blood chemistry results are 
available. Crystalloids are the preferred replacement fluids except if 
blood transfusion is required in cases of hemorrhagic shock. Isotonic 
crystalloids such as 0.9% saline (sodium level, 154 mEq/L) or lactated 
Ringer solution (sodium level, 130 mEq/L) are administered at a rate of 
10–20 mL/kg over a short period of time. Fluid boluses can be repeated 
as needed until clinical improvement has occurred. The correction of 
hypovolemia helps in reversing the pathophysiologic factors causing 
water retention, thus ameliorating the hyponatremia. In patients with 
known cardiac, renal, or pulmonary diseases, fluid should be admin­
istered with caution, and concomitant measurement of central venous 
pressure and respiratory function is desirable.
After correction of acute hypovolemia, the remaining fluid deficit 
should be corrected slowly over 24–48 hours; additional fluid should 
be given to accommodate ongoing losses.
Patients with significant symptoms attributable to severe hypona­
tremia should receive hypertonic (3%) saline. Central nervous system 
symptoms almost always lessen when the serum sodium concentration 
is increased by 10 mEq/L. It is recommended that the initial serum 
sodium correction not exceed 125 mEq/L with this treatment.
Patients with SIADH require water restriction. In this group of 
patients, it is difficult to raise the plasma sodium concentration even 
with hypertonic saline, unless the ECF volume is simultaneously 
reduced. Whereas water restriction is enough for patients with mild 
hyponatremia, patients with symptoms should receive intravenous 
furosemide followed by intravenous hypertonic saline. In chronic 
SIADH, demeclocycline and vaptans (vasopressin-­receptor antagonist) 
are effective because they diminish the renal response to ADH.
Patients with hypervolemic hyponatremia require salt and water 
restriction. Any effort to increase the serum sodium concentration 
by saline administration causes further ECF volume expansion and 
may worsen the patient’s condition. In cases of severe salt and water 
overload associated with renal failure, dialysis is the most effective 
therapy.
The management of patients with chronic hyponatremia is contro­
versial. These patients usually have very subtle symptoms because the 
brain has time to adapt to the disturbance with a decrease in the intra­
cellular osmolytes. Rapid correction of hyponatremia can lead to cel­
lular shrinkage and can cause an osmotic demyelination syndrome, 
particularly in the pons; patients with extensive lesions can have flaccid 
quadriplegia, dysphagia, and dysarthria.
HYPERNATREMIA
Hypernatremia is a plasma sodium level >145 mEq/L and usually 
occurs as a result of (1) loss of both body sodium and water (water 
losses exceeding those of sodium), (2) isolated loss of water, and 
rarely (3) increase in body sodium. The development of hyperna­
tremia is often prevented by thirst and renal concentrating mecha­
nisms. Thirst is so effective that even patients with complete diabetes 
insipidus (DI) avoid hypernatremia by spontaneously increasing fluid 
intake. Hypernatremia develops only when hypotonic fluid losses 
occur in combination with a disturbance in water intake, as a result of 
inadequate access (as in comatose, developmentally delayed, or very 
young patients), or as a result of a primary abnormality of the thirst 
mechanism (e.g., hypothalamic adipsic syndrome). Establishing the 
differential diagnosis of hypernatremia is aided by determining the 
patient’s ECF volume status (hypovolemia, euvolemia, or hypervole­
mia) (Fig. 59.7).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1132
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
Hypovolemic Hypernatremia
Disorders associated with losses of both sodium and water but with 
a relatively greater loss of water lead to hypovolemic hypernatremia. 
Many of the common causes (e.g., diarrhea, diuretic use) are similar to 
those that cause hypovolemic hyponatremia. Hypernatremia in these 
situations develops because of failure to ingest hypotonic fluids. Hyper­
natremic dehydration and failure to thrive often develop in neonates 
who nurse poorly, especially if the mother’s breast milk has not come 
in. If the losses are extrarenal (e.g., through diarrhea, vomiting, profuse 
sweating), the urinary sodium concentration is <10 mEq/L. The renal 
causes are usually associated with a urine sodium concentration >20 
mEq/L.
Euvolemic Hypernatremia
Pure water losses do not lead to volume contraction unless the water 
losses are large; these patients therefore appear euvolemic. In addi­
tion, hypernatremia develops only when the hypotonic losses are not 
accompanied by appropriate water intake. Although water loss can 
occur through the skin or the respiratory tract, the most important 
disorder in this group is DI.
Patients with DI have a very low urine osmolality. Central DI is 
caused by a failure to secrete ADH; nephrogenic DI is secondary to a 
renal resistance to ADH. Acquired forms of central and nephrogenic 
DI are more common than the hereditary forms.
Hereditary central DI can be either autosomal dominant or, less 
commonly, autosomal recessive. The autosomal recessive form occurs 
in association with diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness (Wol­
fram syndrome). The acquired causes of central DI include central 
nervous system trauma, infections, tumors, granulomatous infiltration, 
and vascular malformations.
Congenital nephrogenic DI is a rare X-­linked disorder affect­
ing mainly males, with variable penetrance in females. The acquired 
form of nephrogenic DI can be seen in association with chronic renal 
diseases (e.g., polycystic disease, medullary cystic disease, ureteral 
obstruction), electrolyte disorders (e.g., hypokalemia, hypercalcemia), 
drugs (e.g., lithium, demeclocycline, amphotericin, foscarnet), and 
sickle cell disease/trait.
Older children with DI have polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. 
The urine is hypo-­osmolar and remains so even when these children 
develop dehydration and consequently increased serum osmolality. 
During infancy, DI can manifest with recurrent episodes of unex­
plained dehydration and fever of unknown origin (FUO). Repeated 
episodes of hypernatremic dehydration can lead to permanent neuro­
logic sequelae.
Performing a fluid deprivation test and then determining the 
response to injectable vasopressin can help diagnose DI and differ­
entiate between the central and nephrogenic forms. Primary treat­
ment should focus on the underlying cause. Central DI is managed 
with hormonal replacement therapy with desmopressin (DDAVP). 
There is considerable individual variation in the required dosage, 
and it is important to allow patients to revert to mild polyuria 
before the next dose is given, to prevent excessive water accumula­
tion. An intravenous form of ADH can be used in sick and coma­
tose patients.
Therapy for nephrogenic DI should ensure a sufficient intake of 
water to replace the large urinary losses. Because obligatory urinary 
Hypernatremia
Hypovolemic
(Water losses > sodium losses)
Euvolemic
(Isolated water deficit)
Hypervolemic
(Excessive sodium intake)
Renal losses
 Diuretics
 Osmotic diuresis
 Postobstructive diuresis
 Renal dysplasia
Gastrointestinal
 Vomiting
 Diarrhea
 Drains/fistulas 
Dermal
 Sweating
 Burns
 Radiant warmer
Diabetes insipidus
 Central
 Nephrogenic
Adipsic / hypodipsic
Increased intake
 Improper formulation
 Bicarbonate administration
 Hypertonic dialysis
Hyperaldosteronism
Cushing syndrome
Extrarenal losses
Renal losses
Respiratory
Dermal
Extrarenal losses
UNa > 20 mEq/L
Diuretics and 
water replacement
UNa variable
Water replacement
UNa > 20 mEq/L
Iso- or hypotonic saline
UNa variable
UNa < 10 mEq/L
Fig. 59.7  Classification, diagnosis, and treatment of hypernatremic states. (Modified from Beri T, Schrier RW. 
Disorders of water metabolism. In: Schrier RW, ed. Renal and Electrolyte Disorders. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­
Raven; 1997.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1133
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
water losses increase with increasing solute load, restriction of sodium 
intake reduces the urine output. Administration of diuretics, such as 
thiazides and amiloride, keeps these patients in a mildly dehydrated 
state, which leads to increased water reabsorption in the more proxi­
mal segments of the nephron, thereby decreasing urine output. Non­
steroidal antiinflammatory drugs such as indomethacin also reduce 
polyuria and may be used in combination with diuretics. Careful atten­
tion should be paid to the fluid balance in these patients when they are 
sick and have poor oral fluid intake because they require large quanti­
ties of water replacement. Frequent monitoring of serum electrolytes is 
mandatory during these periods.
Medications such as amphotericin B, dexamethasone, lithium, 
ofloxacin, and foscarnet can result in hypernatremia by causing a 
nephrogenic DI, and electrolytes should be monitored in patients on 
these medications for prolonged time periods.
Adipsic/hypodipsic hypernatremia (essential/neurogenic hyper­
natremia, osmoreceptor dysfunction) characterizes a group of patients 
who have persistent hypernatremia, absence or attenuation of thirst, 
and in some partial DI. Adipsic hypernatremia may be idiopathic 
or associated with hypothalamic sarcoidosis, histiocytosis, tumors, 
hemorrhage, anterior communicating artery aneurysm, hydrocepha­
lus, trauma, or congenital malformations (holoprosencephaly). These 
patients require regimental intake of fluids; they may need supplemen­
tation with DDAVP.
Hypervolemic Hypernatremia
This is the least common type of hypernatremia. Most of the causes are 
iatrogenic (administration of improperly formulated oral rehydration 
solution, administration of intravenous fluids, excessive bicarbonate 
administration during resuscitative efforts, inadvertent dialysis against 
a high sodium concentration dialysate, salt poisoning, and seawater 
drowning).
Salt poisoning is often evident without signs of dehydration or 
weight loss (weight gain may occur); the fractional excretion of sodium 
is elevated, urine output is sustained, and an elevated sodium level in 
the gastric aspirate may be noted.
Other less common causes of hypernatremia include primary 
hyperaldosteronism and Cushing syndrome.
Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Hypernatremia
Hypernatremia causes intracellular dehydration by movement of 
water from the intracellular to the extracellular compartment. The 
consequences of intracellular dehydration are particularly marked in 
the brain and manifest with irritability, altered sensorium, lethargy, 
and hyperreflexia and eventually seizures, coma, and death. Brain 
hemorrhages can result from tearing of small blood vessels when the 
brain contracts as a result of intracellular dehydration. Hypernatre­
mia and dehydration may predispose to dural sinus thrombosis. 
During chronic hypernatremia, the brain cells adapt to the increased 
ECF osmolality by accumulating idiogenic osmoles (which are mostly 
amino acids, particularly taurine). They increase intracellular osmo­
lality, consequently restoring intracellular volume. This protective 
response has significant implications for therapy and the speed with 
which hypernatremia should be corrected.
Treatment of Hypernatremia
The treatment of hypernatremia is guided by its severity, its chronicity, 
and the ECF volume status of the patient.
It is important to realize that patients with hyperosmolality main­
tain the ECF space at the expense of the ICF compartment, and, there­
fore, the degree of sodium and fluid losses may be profound before 
clinical signs of hypovolemia develop. Large volumes of isotonic crys­
talloid may be necessary to replace the fluid deficit.
Once initial fluid resuscitation has been performed, the serum 
sodium concentration should be restored slowly over a minimum 
period of 48 hours. The total water deficit can be estimated as follows 
(FW, free water; NA, sodium):
	FW 
(child) = 0.6 × weight (kg) × ((current NA / 140) − 1)
 
Hypernatremia is corrected especially slowly when it is more severe 
and chronic. The rate of fall in plasma sodium concentration should be 
<1 mEq/L/hr. During the correction of hypernatremia, the idiogenic 
osmoles that brain cells produce to prevent cellular dehydration dis­
sipate slowly. If hypernatremia is corrected too rapidly, the increased 
intracellular osmolality from the idiogenic osmoles can lead to cere­
bral edema. In patients with salt poisoning, the first line of therapy is 
restriction of salt intake, followed by administration of hypotonic fluid; 
acute salt ingestion does not generate idiogenic osmols, permitting a 
more rapid treatment.
CALCIUM DISORDERS
Serum calcium concentration in the ECF is regulated by parathy­
roid hormone (PTH), which acts on the kidney and bones, and by 
1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D, which acts on the intestines and bones. 
About 50% of the calcium is in the ionized form, 40% is protein 
bound (mainly to albumin), and 10% is associated with anions, such 
as bicarbonate, citrate, sulfate, phosphate, and lactate. It is import­
ant to remember that serum albumin levels and pH affect calcium 
levels. There is a direct relationship between serum albumin con­
centration and total serum calcium. An alkaline pH will increase 
protein binding, leading to decreased ionized calcium levels. It is 
important to obtain an ionized calcium level when evaluating cal­
cium derangements.
Hypocalcemia
There are many causes of hypocalcemia, and measurements of PTH 
can help classify the etiology of hypocalcemia (Fig. 59.8). Hypocal­
cemia is defined as a total serum calcium level below 8.5 mg/dL and 
an ionized serum calcium level below 4.65 mg/dL. Patients with mild 
hypocalcemia are usually asymptomatic. With severe hypocalcemia, 
patients may present with paresthesias of the extremities, Chvostek 
sign, Trousseau sign, muscle cramps or spasm, laryngospasm, tetany, 
and seizures. Cardiac manifestations of hypocalcemia include a pro­
longed QT interval, which can progress to heart block. In a child pre­
senting with severe hypocalcemia, especially one with a past medical 
history significant for constipation, clinicians should be sure to take 
a thorough medication history, including whether they have received 
sodium phosphate enemas, as there are reports of patients present­
ing with marked hypocalcemia after receiving phosphate-­containing 
enemas.
Hypercalcemia
Similar to hypocalcemia, there are also many causes of hypercalce­
mia (Fig. 59.9). Hypercalcemia usually occurs through one of three 
mechanisms: increased bone resorption, increased gastrointestinal 
absorption of calcium, and decreased renal excretion. Hypercalcemia 
is defined as total serum calcium above 10.5 mg/dL and an ionized 
serum calcium above 5.25 mg/dL. Patients with mild hypercalcemia 
usually do not have symptoms. Patients with severe hypercalcemia may 
have neurologic manifestations ranging from drowsiness to coma.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1134
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
PTH
Hypoparathyroidism
Shock
Hypoalbuminemic
conditions
PTH
PTH normal
Alkalosis
Rapid correction
  of acidosis
Hypomagnesemia
  Familial
  Malabsorption
  Aminoglycosides
Vitamin D deficiency
  Deficient sunlight
  Nutritional/dietary deficiency
  Malabsorption
  Liver disease (biliary cirrhosis)
  Renal disease
  Anticonvulsants
Vitamin D–dependent
  rickets (Type I)
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Hyperphosphatemia
  Tumor-lysis syndrome
  Rhabdomyolysis
  Laxatives/enemas
Acute pancreatitis
Hungry bone syndrome
Drugs (colchicine, estrogen,
  calcitonin)
Large amounts of citrated blood
Vitamin D–dependent rickets
  (Type II)
Aplasia/hypoplasia
  (DiGeorge syndrome)
Familial
Surgical
Infiltrative lesions
  (hemosiderosis, Wilson
  disease)
Autoimmune
Idiopathic
Maternal hyperparathyroidism
  (during pregnancy)
PTH
1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D
25 (OH) vitamin D
Albumin
AST, ALT
BUN
Creatinine
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Alkaline phosphatase
Electrolytes
  (with bicarbonate)
Yes
No
Confirm with ionized calcium
HYPOCALCEMIA
Abnormal
Septic or ill appearing
Normal
Fig. 59.8  Causes of hypocalcemia. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; PTH, 
parathyroid hormone. (From Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Hypocalcemia. In: Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis 
S, Busey SL, et al., eds. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:335.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1135
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
RICKETS
Rickets is a disease caused by deficient mineralization of the osteoid matrix 
before closure of the epiphyseal plate that results in softening and weaken­
ing of bones in infants and children. In patients with rickets, the growth 
plate cartilage and osteoid continues to expand but mineralization is inad­
equate, and as a result, the growth plate thickens. The circumference of the 
growth plate and the metaphysis also increases, which expands bone width 
at the location of the growth plates and causes some of the classic clinical 
manifestations, such as widening of the wrists and ankles. There is also 
softening of the bones that can lead to bone deformities and causes them 
to bend easily, especially when subject to certain forces.
Rickets is usually caused by nutritional and less often malabsorp­
tive vitamin D deficiency. Risk factors include limited sun expo­
sure, ages 6–24 months, prematurity, solely breast-­fed infants, use of 
anticonvulsants, and darker skin pigmentation. Rickets is still a signifi­
cant problem in developing countries, likely due to nutritional vitamin 
D deficiency and inadequate calcium intake.
Clinical Manifestations
Most clinical features of rickets are due to skeletal changes (Figs. 59.10 
and 59.11). Craniotabes is a softening of the cranial bones, which can be 
appreciated by applying pressure at the occiput or over the parietal bones. 
Widening of the costochondral junctions produces a rachitic rosary, which 
can be detected on exam by moving one’s fingers along the costochondral 
junctions from rib to rib, named because it feels like the beads of a rosary. 
Increased circumference of the wrists and ankles is a result of growth plate 
widening. Patients with rickets may have an indentation of the lower ribs, 
known as a Harrison groove, which occurs from the pulling of the softened 
ribs by the diaphragm during inspiration. Softening of the ribs can impair 
Obtain
PTH
Phosphorus
HYPERCALCEMIA
Stigmata of
William syndrome
1,25 (OH)2
vitamin D
Increased
1,25 (OH)2
vitamin D
Normal
1,25 (OH)2
vitamin D
PTH
Undetectable
PTH
PTH
PTH normal
Medications
Jensen-type
metaphyseal
chondrodys-
plasia
Immobilization
Malignancy
Thyrotoxicosis
Dialysis
  osteomalacia
Hypophosphatemia
Ectopic production of
    vitamin D
  Tumors
  Sarcoid, other
    granulomatous
    diseases
Hypervitaminosis D
  latrogenic
  Excessive food
    fortification
  Food fads
Hypervitaminosis A
Thiazides
Milk-alkali syndrome
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Excessive intake
William
syndrome
Post renal
transplant
Malignancies
Sporadic (adenoma/
    hyperplasia)
Hereditary
  MEN I
  MEN II
  Hyperparathyroidism–
    jaw tumor syndrome
Subcutaneous fat
  necrosis
Familial hypocalciuric
  hypercalcemia
Hypophosphatemia
Idiopathic
  hypercalcemia
  of infancy
Lithium
Ectopic PTH
  production
Primary
hyperparathyroidism
Tertiary
hyperparathyroidism
Fig. 59.9  Causes of hypercalcemia. MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; PTH, parathyroid hormone. (From 
Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Hypocalcemia. In: Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al., eds. 
Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:337.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1136
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
air movement and predisposes patients to atelectasis and pneumonia. In 
addition to the skeletal manifestations, rickets can present with hypocalce­
mia, hypophosphatemia, and tetany (Table 59.13). It is important to note 
that most children are asymptomatic, and rickets is diagnosed through an 
incidental finding on physical or radiologic examination.
There is some variation in the clinical presentation of rickets 
based on the etiology. Changes in the lower extremities tend to be the 
Fig. 59.10  Vitamin D deficiency rickets. A 14-­month-­old child with 
growth failure and severe rickets who responded well to vitamin D 
therapy. The initial image (left) shows loss of definition of the zones of 
provisional calcification for the distal radial and ulnar metaphyses along 
with metaphyseal fraying and concavity (“cupping”) and physeal wid­
ening with an increased distance between the epiphysis and visualized 
portion of the metaphysis. Periosteal new bone also is present that is 
seen best along the metacarpals but also is present along the distal 
radius. With healing (right), the zone of provisional calcification is well 
mineralized and the other findings have resolved. (From Coley BD, ed. 
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2019:1397, Fig. 139.1.)
TABLE 59.13  Clinical Features of Rickets
General
Failure to thrive (malnutrition)
Listlessness
Protruding abdomen
Muscle weakness (especially proximal)
Hypocalcemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Fractures (pathologic, minimal trauma)
Increased intracranial pressure
Head
Craniotabes
Frontal bossing
Delayed fontanel closure (usually closed by 2 yr)
Delayed dentition
No incisors by age 10 mo
No molars by age 18 mo
Caries
Craniosynostosis
Chest
Rachitic rosary
Harrison groove
Respiratory infections and atelectasis*
Back
Scoliosis
Kyphosis
Lordosis
Extremities
Enlargement of wrists and anides
Valgus or varus deformities
Windswept deformity (valgus deformity of one leg with varus deformity of 
other leg)
Anterior bowing of tibia and femur
Coxa vara
Leg pain
Hypocalcemic Symptoms†
Tetany
Seizures
Stridor caused by laryngeal spasm
*These features are most frequently associated with the vitamin D defi­
ciency disorders.
†These symptoms develop only in children with disorders that produce 
hypocalcemia.
From Greenbaum LA. Vitamin D deficiency (rickets) and excess. In: 
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook 
of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:375, Table 64.3.
A
B
Fig. 59.11  Diaphyseal findings in a patient with severe vitamin D defi­
ciency rickets. Radiographs of the forearm during the active phase (A) 
show coarse demineralization and subperiosteal bone resorption, which 
are indicative of hyperparathyroidism as a result of rickets. Also note the 
severe rachitic findings in the metaphysis and poor mineralization of the 
distal radial epiphysis (arrow) with loss of the zones of provisional calci­
fication. With healing 3 months later (B), extensive periosteal new bone 
is seen (white arrows) with calcification of previously nonmineralized 
osteoid (black arrows) produced by periosteal osteoblasts. (From Coley 
BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2019:1398, Fig. 139.4)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1137
CHAPTER 59  Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disturbances
TABLE 59.15  Laboratory Findings in Various Disorders Causing Rickets
Disorder
Ca
Pi
PTH
25-­(OH)D
1,25-­(OH)2D
ALP
Urine Ca
Urine Pi
Vitamin D deficiency
N, ↓
↓
↑
↓
↓, N, ↑
↑
↓
↑
VDDR type 1A
N, ↓
↓
↑
N
↓
↑
↓
↑
VDDR type 1B
N, ↓
↓
↑
↓
N
↑
↓
↑
VDDR type 2A
N, ↓
↓
↑
N
↑↑
↑
↓
↑
VDDR type 2B
N, ↓
↓
↑
N
↑↑
↑
↓
↑
Chronic kidney disease
N, ↓
↑
↑
N
↓
↑
N, ↓
↓
Dietary Pi deficiency
N
↓
N, ↓
N
↑
↑
↑
↓
XLH*
N
↓
N, ↑
N
RD
↑
↓
↑
ADHR*
N
↓
N
N
RD
↑
↓
↑
HHRH
N
↓
N, ↓
N
↑
↑
↑
↑
ARHR type 1 or type 2*
N
↓
N
N
RD
↑
↓
↑
Tumor-­induced rickets†
N
↓
N
N
RD
↑
↓
↑
Fanconi syndrome
N
↓
N
N
RD or ↑
↑
↓ or ↑
↑
Dent disease
N
↓
N
N
N
↑
↑
↑
Dietary Ca deficiency
N, ↓
↓
↑
N
↑
↑
↓
↑
1,25-­(OH)2D, 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D; 25-­(OH)D, 25-­hydroxyvitamin D; ADHR, autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets; ALP, alkaline phos­
phatase; Ca, calcium; HHRH, hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria; N, normal; Pi, inorganic phosphorus; PTH, parathyroid hor­
mone; RD, relatively decreased (because it should be increased given the concurrent hypophosphatemia); VDDR, vitamin D–dependent rickets; XLH, 
X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets; ↓, decreased; ↑, increased; ↑↑, extremely increased.
*Elevated fibroblast growth factor-­23 (FGF-­23).
†FGF-­23 elevated in some patients.
From Greenbaum LA. Vitamin D deficiency (rickets) and excess. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:375, Table 64.4.
dominant feature in X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Symptoms 
secondary to hypocalcemia occur only in those forms of rickets associ­
ated with decreased serum calcium (Table 59.14).
Diagnosis of rickets is usually made by radiographic examination of 
the long bones. Laboratory values can support the diagnosis. Laboratory 
values may show decreased calcium and phosphorus, increased alkaline 
phosphatase, decreased 25-­(OH) vitamin D3 levels, increased 1,25-­(OH)2 
vitamin D levels, and increased PTH levels. The increased PTH is indica­
tive of the hormonal response that tries to maintain normal calcium (Table 
59.15). The appropriate treatment depends on the underlying etiology.
TABLE 59.14  Causes of Rickets
Vitamin D Disorders
Nutritional vitamin D deficiency
Congenital vitamin D deficiency
Secondary vitamin D deficiency
Malabsorption
Increased degradation
Decreased liver 25-­hydroxylase
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 1A and 1B
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 2A and 2B
Chronic kidney disease
Calcium Deficiency
Low intake
Diet
Premature infants (rickets of prematurity)
Malabsorption
Primary disease
Dietary inhibitors of calcium absorption
Phosphorus Deficiency
Inadequate intake
Premature infants (rickets of prematurity)
Aluminum-­containing antacids
Renal Losses
X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets*
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets*
Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets types 1 and 2*
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-­23
Tumor-­induced rickets*
McCune-­Albright syndrome*
Epidermal nevus syndrome*
Neurofibromatosis*
*Disorders secondary to fibroblast growth factor-­23.
From Greenbaum LA. Vitamin D deficiency (rickets) and excess. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:376, Table 64.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1138
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Acid–base and electrolyte disturbances have many causes that reflect 
abnormalities of regulation or compensation of these systems. For 
many acid–base or electrolyte disturbances, the underlying condition 
needs to be treated before consideration of the electrolyte or acid–base 
disturbance. This is true in all causes of shock, such as dehydration, 
adrenal crisis, severe trauma, or systemic hemorrhage. The circulating 
blood volume must be quickly reestablished; this is usually performed 
as part of the resuscitation phase of treating dehydration or shock. 
Thereafter, specific acid–base or, more often, electrolyte abnormalities 
can be attended to during the replacement phase to correct electrolyte 
deficits. In general, electrolyte disturbances must be corrected slowly. 
This is particularly true for sodium abnormalities. The major excep­
tions are hyperkalemia and acute hypercarbic respiratory acidosis, 
which must be treated immediately.
Each of the discussed acid–base and electrolyte disturbances is 
important, and hyperkalemia remains the one of most concern and the 
most dangerous.
Anuria or polyuria, hypotension or hypertension, weight loss, sei­
zures, coma, hypoglycemia, muscle cramps, tetany, hyperglycemia, 
apnea, and arrhythmias are additional concerning signs and symptoms. 
Moreover, the clinician must remain vigilant in identifying the primary 
reason or reasons for any of these acid–base or electrolyte disturbances.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1138.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Acid–Base Disorders
Adrogue HJ, Madias NE. Management of life-­threatening acid-­base disorders. 
N Engl J Med. 1998;338:26.
Akduman H, Eminoglu T, Okulu E, et al. A neonate presenting with Gracile 
syndrome and Bjornstad phenotype associated with BCS1L mutation. 
Genet Couns. 2016;27(4):509–512.
Berend K, de Vries APJ, Gans ROB. Physiological approach to assessment of 
acid-­base disturbances. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(15):1434–1445.
Bettinelli A, Bianchetti MG, Girardin E, et al. Use of calcium excretion values 
to distinguish two forms of primary renal tubular hypokalemic alkalosis: 
Bartter and Gitelman syndromes. J Pediatr. 1992;120:38.
Brewer ED. Disorders of acid-­base balance. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:429.
Costanzo LS. Acid-­base physiology. In: Costanzo LS, ed. Physiology. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2014:303–328.
Fall PJ. A stepwise approach to acid-­base disorders. Practical patient evaluation 
for metabolic acidosis and other conditions. Postgrad Med. 2000;107:249.
Fellman V, Rapola J, Pihko H, et al. Iron-­overload disease in infants involving 
fetal growth retardation, lactic acidosis, liver haemosiderosis, and 
aminoaciduria. Lancet. 1998;351(9101):490–493.
Ferri FF. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Ferri FF, ed. Ferri’s Clinical Advisor 2016. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:1071–1072.
Greenbaum LA. Electrolyte and acid-­base disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. 
Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:389–432.
McKusick VA. #603358 GRACILE syndrome. Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (OMIM). Retrieved from https://www.omim.org/entry/603358.
Palmer BF. Metabolic acidosis. In: Feehally J, Floege J, et al., eds. 
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2019:149–159.
Pereira PC, Miranda DM, Oliveira EA, et al. Molecular pathophysiology of 
renal tubular acidosis. Curr Genomics. 2009;10(1):51–59.
Rodríguez SJ. Renal tubular acidosis: the clinical entity. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2002;13:2160–2170.
Shapiro JI, Kaehny WD. Pathogenesis and management of metabolic acidosis 
and alkalosis. In: Schrier RW, ed. Renal and Electrolyte Disorders. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997.
Weber DR, Jospe N. Diabetes mellitus. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3019–3052.
Wolfsdorf J, Allgrove J, Craig ME, et al. Diabetic ketoacidosis. Pediatr Diabetes. 
2014;15(suppl 20):154–179.
Potassium Disorders
Alon US. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Finberg L, ed. Saunders Manual of 
Pediatric Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:694.
Carlisle EJF, Donnelly SM, Ethier JH, et al. Modulation of the secretion 
of potassium by accompanying anions in humans. Kidney Int. 
1991;39:1206.
Chacko M, Fordtran JS, Emmett M. Effect of mineralocorticoid activity on 
transtubular potassium gradient, urinary [K]/[Na] ratio, and fractional 
excretion of potassium. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;32:47.
Halperin ML, Kamel K. Potassium. Lancet. 1998;352:135.
Hellerstein S, Alon US, Warady BA. Renal impairment. In: Ashcraft KW, ed. 
Pediatric Surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000.
Kintu B, Brightwell A. Episodic seasonal pseudo-­Bartter syndrome in cystic 
fibrosis. Paedtr Respir Rev. 2014;155:19-­21.
Kniffin CL. #612780 Seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental 
retardation, and electrolyte imbalance; sesames. Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man (OMIM). Retrieved from https://www.omim.org/
entry/612780
Mandal AK. Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. Med Clin North Am. 
1997;81:611.
Perazella MA. Drug-­induced hyperkalemia: old culprits and new offenders. 
Am J Med. 2000;109:307.
Peterson LN, Levi M. Disorders of potassium metabolism. In: Schrier RW, 
ed. Renal and Electrolyte Disorders. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 
1997.
Rodriguez-­Soriano J, Ubetagoyena M, Vallo A. Transtubular potassium 
concentration gradient: a useful test to estimate renal aldosterone bio-­
activity in infants and children. Pediatr Nephrol. 1990;4:105.
Scholl UI, Choi M, Liu T, et al. Seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental 
retardation, and electrolyte imbalance (SeSAME syndrome) caused by 
mutations in KCNJ10. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2009;106:5842–5847.
Sung CC, Cheng CJ, Chiang WF, et al. Etiologic and therapeutic analysis in 
patients with hypokalemic nonperiodic paralysis. Amer J Med 
2015;128:289–296.
Wilson FH, Disse-­Nicodeme S, Choate KA, et al. Human hypertension caused 
by mutations in WNK kinases. Science. 2001;293:1107.
Sodium Disorders
Abrahm WT, Schrier RW. Renal sodium excretion, edematous disorders, 
and diuretic use. In: Schrier RW, ed. Renal and Electrolyte Disorders. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997.
Adebamiro A, Perazella MA. Recurrent acute kidney injury following bath 
salts intoxication. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;59:273–275.
Ball SG, Vaidja B, Baylis PH. Hypothalamic adipsic syndrome: diagnosis and 
management. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1997;47:405.
Berl T, Schrier RW. Disorders of water metabolism. In: Schrier RW, ed. Renal 
and Electrolyte Disorders. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997.
Berry PL, Belsha CW. Hyponatremia. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:351.
Blohm E, Goldberg A, Salerno A, et al. Recognition and management of 
pediatric salt toxicity. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2018;34(11):820–824.
Breault DT, Majzoub JA. Diabetes insipidus. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III 
JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:2887–2889.
Buckley MS, LeBlanc JM, Cawley MJ. Electrolyte disturbances associated with 
commonly prescribed medications in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 
Med. 2010;38:S253–S264.
Cadnapaphornchai MA, Schrier RW. Pathogenesis and management of 
hyponatremia. Am J Med. 2000;109:688.
Conley SB. Hypernatremia. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:365.
Djermane A, Elmaleh M, Simon D, et al. Central diabetes insipidus 
in infancy with or without hypothalamic adipsic hypernatremia 
syndrome: early identification and outcome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2016;101(2):635–643.
Ganong CA, Kappy MS. Cerebral salt wasting in children. The need for 
recognition and treatment. Am J Dis Child. 1993;147:167.
Hall RT, Simon S, Smith MT. Readmission of breastfed infants in the first 2 
weeks of life. J Perinatol. 2000;20:432.
Haycock GB. The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone. Pediatr Nephrol. 1995;9:375.
Jakobsson B, Berg U. Effect of hydrochlorothiazide and indomethacin treatment 
on renal function in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Acta Peadiatr. 1994;83:522.
Kolmodin L, Sekhon MS, Henderson WR, et al. Hypernaturemia in patients with 
severe traumatic brain injury: a systematic review. Ann Intensive Care. 2013;3:35.
Manganaro R, Mami C, Marrone T, et al. Incidence of dehydration and 
hypernatremia in exclusively breast-­fed infants. J Pediatr. 2001;139:673.
Prosser JM, Nelson LS. The toxicology of bath salts: a review of synthetic 
cathinones. J Med Toxicol. 2012;8:33.
Savasta S, Chiapedi S, Borali E, et al. Holoprosencephaly with neurogenic 
hypernatremia: a new case. Childs Nerv Syst. 2008;24:139–142.
Spiller HA, Ryan ML, Weston RG, et al. Clinical experience with and analytical 
confirmation of “bath salts” and “legal highs” (synthetic cathinones) in the 
United States. Clin Toxicol. 2011;49(6):499–505.
Trachtman H. Sodium and water homeostasis. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1995;6:1343.
Wallace D, Lichtarowicz-­Krynska E, Bockenhauer D. Non-­accidental salt 
poisoning. Arch Dis Child. 2017;102(2):119–122.
Weber DR, Jospe N. Diabetes mellitus. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, 
Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:3019–3052.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
1138.e2
Calcium Disorders
Craig JC, Hodson E, Martin HC. Phosphate enema poisoning in children. Med 
J Aust. 1994;160(6):347–351.
Ladenhauf HN, Stundner O, Spreitzhofer F, et al. Severe hyperphosphatemia 
after administration of sodium-­phosphate containing laxatives in 
children: case series and systematic review of literature. Pediatr Surg Int. 
2012;28(8):805–814.
Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Hypercalcemia. In: Pomeranz AJ, 
Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al., eds. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2016:334–338.
Thakker RV. The parathydroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. 
In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 25th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2016:1649–1661.
Rickets
Ferri FF. Rickets. In: Ferri FF, ed. Ferri’s Clinical Advisor 2016. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016:1086.e2–1086.e3.
Greenbaum LA. Vitamin D deficiency (rickets) and excess. In: Kliegman RM, 
St. Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:375–388.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
