512
The history is the most important tool for identifying a psychiatric dis­
order. The initial focus in conducting the history is to establish rapport 
and to ensure the child’s safety. Safety should always be assessed and 
should include risk of suicide, homicide, and abuse (physical, sexual, 
emotional, and neglect). The history should then focus on delineat­
ing the specific behaviors of concern, on identifying any stressors that 
may be precipitating the behavior (Table 31.1), and on recognizing 
any associated symptoms that may differentiate which disorder or dis­
orders are causing the behavior (Table 31.2). In addition to primary 
psychiatric diagnoses, the clinician should focus on possible medical 
causes of the behaviors in question, including medication side effects, 
substance misuse, and medical illnesses (Tables 31.3 and 31.4). Comor­
bidity is common in children with psychiatric illnesses, and as such, 
the clinician should consider whether a combination of medical and 
psychiatric diagnoses may be producing the patient’s symptoms.
Information should be obtained from multiple sources whenever 
possible. This can include any adults who have spent significant time 
with the child, such as parents, other family members, guardians, and 
teachers. The child should be interviewed separately so as to provide a 
better chance of obtaining their perspective of the presenting symptoms. 
The patient may also be more comfortable disclosing a history of abuse 
or destructive behaviors, such as substance misuse, self-­harm, or high-­
risk sexual activity, during an individual interview. Because some psy­
chiatric disorders demonstrate a strong genetic predisposition, a detailed 
psychiatric family history should be obtained. Psychiatric illness in fam­
ily members may be undiagnosed; the clinician should inquire about the 
presence of symptoms in addition to formal diagnoses in the family.
The following validated principles should guide history taking, par­
ticularly when discussing sensitive topics such as substance use, sexual 
abuse, and suicidal ideation or intent:
	1.	 Behavioral analysis: The clinician should break down complex 
patterns of behavior into discrete incidents and focus on concrete 
details chronologically. Doing so allows the clinician to objectively 
establish the sequence of behaviors behind sensitive events, par­
ticularly when the patient’s subjective responses to the events may 
influence recall or reporting.
	2.	 Shame attenuation: The clinician should assume a stance of uncon­
ditional positive regard so as to minimize the influence of guilt or 
shame while discussing taboo subjects.
	3.	 Gentle assumption: By framing questions based on the assumption 
that a behavior exists, the clinician may overcome patient hesitation 
to acknowledge the presence of that behavior (e.g., “How often do 
you have suicidal thoughts?”).
	4.	 Symptom amplification: By assuming a high frequency of the 
behavior and inquiring in a concrete manner (e.g., “How many days 
a week do you drink? 5–6?”), the clinician may make the patient feel 
more at ease by acknowledging the existence of a particular behavior, 
particularly if a patient is troubled by the frequency of the behavior.
	5.	 Denial of the specific: By asking specific questions, the clinician 
may elicit more accurate information by prompting recollection of 
particular behaviors that may otherwise be denied when asked in 
general terms. Asking the patient whether they have ever used mar­
ijuana may be more likely to elicit a positive response than asking 
the patient whether they have ever used illegal drugs.
	6.	 Normalization: By simply describing common patterns of symp­
toms or behaviors, the clinician may help the patient feel more at 
ease by endorsing the presence of similar patterns in their behaviors.
The history allows the clinician to define patterns of behavior that 
suggest a differential diagnosis. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5), contains descriptive diag­
nostic criteria based on the presence or absence of various symptoms 
and aids the clinician in assigning a specific diagnosis to these behav­
ior patterns and symptom clusters. Terms frequently used in the diag­
nosis of psychotic illnesses are noted in Table 31.5. The persistence, 
frequency, and severity of behaviors should be used to distinguish a 
behavior that is symptomatic from a behavior that is within normal 
limits. When a behavior does not meet a clinical threshold, it can be 
just as important for the provider to reassure a family and provide sup­
port during a difficult time of normal development. A classic example 
would be a 2 year old expressing their autonomy or a teenager strug­
gling to establish their individual identity.
CONDITIONS CHARACTERIZED BY ABNORMAL 
BEHAVIORS
Disruptive behaviors are broadly categorized by whether they affect the 
patient or others, then further classified by whether there is associated 
difficulty in regulating emotions or behaviors (see Table 31.2).
Behaviors That Primarily Affect the Patient
Attention-­Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
The cardinal features of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) are hyperactivity, distractibility, and impulsivity. Manifes­
tations of these symptoms must be present in more than one setting 
(school and home) and must interfere with functioning or develop­
ment. Prevalence increases with the child’s age and is approximately 
9–15% in school-­aged children. ADHD is more frequent in males than 
in females with a ratio of about 2:1 for the predominantly inattentive 
type and 4:1 for the predominantly hyperactive type. Females may be 
underdiagnosed as they are more likely to present with the inattention 
symptoms as compared to the hyperactivity symptoms that tend to be 
more disruptive and more likely to reach the threshold for seeking care. 
The DSM-­5 specifies that there must be a persistent pattern of inatten­
tion and/or hyperactivity–impulsivity with six or more symptoms in 
either category lasting at least 6 months. Adolescents 17 years of age or 
Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
Ryan Byrne, Garrett Elsner, and Ashley Beattie
31
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
513
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
older require only five symptoms; however, symptoms should be pres­
ent prior to 12 years of age.
Inattention
	1.	 Lack of attention to detail or inaccurate work
	2.	 Difficulty sustaining attention
	3.	 Failure to listen when spoken to directly
	4.	 Lack of follow-­through
	5.	 Disorganization
	6.	 Avoidance of activities requiring sustained attention
	7.	 Frequent loss of items
	8.	 Easy distraction by extraneous stimuli
	9.	 Forgetfulness
Hyperactivity/Impulsivity
	1.	 Frequent fidgeting or squirming
	2.	 Frequent need to walk around
	3.	 Restlessness or need to run around/climb
	4.	 Difficulty engaging in quiet activities
	5.	 Acting “on the go,” restlessness, or difficulty of caregivers to keep up 
with
	6.	 Talking excessively
	7.	 Frequently interrupting
	8.	 Difficulty waiting turn
	9.	 Intrusiveness
The chronicity of the hyperactivity in this disorder may be subtle. 
Although children with ADHD tend to move around more than other 
children, the hyperactivity may be of concern only in certain situations 
in which the child is expected to be quiet (e.g., in school or places of 
worship). Some children with ADHD can sit and be attentive in quiet 
and relaxed situations, whereas a noisy and active setting, such as an 
unstructured classroom, precipitates inappropriate behavior. When 
these children become older, they often become less overtly hyperac­
tive. An adolescent may mostly feel restless without acting upon that 
feeling in a disruptive manner. This restlessness may contribute signifi­
cantly to academic underachievement. Despite intentions for diligent 
studying, the restlessness may cause the affected teenager to feel the 
need to walk around, distracting from studying.
Impulsivity significantly contributes to morbidity. The impul­
sivity applies not only to actions but also to emotions. An impulsive 
child whose emotions change quickly is at risk for physically aggres­
sive behaviors, such as hitting or biting. In school-­aged children, the 
impulsive aggression is often manifested as explosive behavior. Because 
of their explosive behavior, inability to wait their turn in a game, and 
difficulty regulating emotions when interacting with teachers, these 
children have great difficulty with both peer and teacher relations. 
Impulsivity can also be potentially life threatening because the child 
may act before considering the consequences. Impulsivity may man­
ifest as risk-­taking behaviors in both children (e.g., running into the 
street after a ball without checking for traffic) and adolescents (high-­
risk sexual activity or substance misuse).
Hyperactivity and impulsivity in children are often readily apparent 
to adults; however, the manifestations of inattention and distractibil­
ity are often not as overt. In young children, inattentive behavior can 
consist of shifting from one activity to another and having difficulty 
finishing tasks. The parents may incorrectly consider these actions to 
represent lack of motivation. In adolescence, inattentive behavior may 
result in poor school performance. These children may forget to do 
homework or may need excessively long periods to complete assign­
ments because of their inability to focus on their work. They may be 
mislabeled as being lazy.
The challenge in diagnosing ADHD lies in defining when specific 
behaviors are abnormal, particularly when those behaviors may not be 
apparent in all situations or contexts. The clinician should not rely solely 
on observations obtained in the clinic setting, but should instead gather 
information from multiple sources, including parents, teachers, day­
care workers, and even a direct classroom observation from a trained 
health care professional. Being in the clinic can be overstimulating or 
TABLE 31.2  Disruptive Behavior Disorders
Symptom
Intermittent 
Explosive Disorder
Disruptive Mood 
Dysregulation Disorder
Oppositional 
Defiant Disorder
Conduct Disorder
Aggressive outbursts
+
+
+
+
Property destruction or physically assaultive
+
+
+
+
Persistently irritable
−
+
+/−
−
Purposefully defiant
−
−
+
+
Vindictive
−
−
+
+
Argues with authority
−
−
+
+
Stealing
−
−
−
+
Use of a weapon or fire setting
−
−
−
+
Run away from home/truancy
−
−
−
+
A “+” indicates symptoms are seen in the disorder. A “-” indicates symptoms are not seen in the disorder.
TABLE 31.3  The MIDAS Mnemonic for 
Screening for Medical Illness
M: Do you take any Medications?
I: Do you have any medical Illnesses?
D: Do you have a primary care Doctor?
A: Have you ever had any Allergies, reactions, or side effects?
S: Have you ever had any Surgery?
From Carlat DJ. The Psychiatric Interview. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippin­
cott Williams & Wilkins; 2011.
TABLE 31.1  Common Precipitants of 
Psychiatric Symptoms
Substance misuse
Stress
Death or illness of family or friend
Interpersonal conflict, including bullying
Rejection or abandonment
Significant change in routine
Homelessness
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
514
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
TABLE 31.4  Medical (Secondary) and Psychiatric (Primary) Causes of Psychosis and/or 
Depression
Category
Disorders
Psychiatric
Schizophrenia
Schizoaffective
Schizophreniform
Brief psychotic
Major depression
Bipolar
Postpartum
Head trauma
Traumatic brain injury
Subdural hematoma
Infectious
Viral infections/encephalitides (HIV infection/encephalop­
athy, herpes encephalitis, cytomegalovirus. Epstein-­Barr 
virus, COVID-­19)
Lyme disease
Cerebral malaria
Endocarditis
Neurosyphilis
Whipple disease
Inflammatory
Autoimmune encephalitis: NMDAR, limbic, others
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sjögren syndrome
Hashimoto encephalopathy (steroid-­responsive encephalop­
athy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis [SREAT])
Sydenham chorea
Sarcoidosis
Celiac disease
Neoplastic
Primary or secondary cerebral neoplasm
Paraneoplastic encephalitis: ovarian teratoma-­associated 
autoimmune encephalitis
Systemic neoplasm
Pheochromocytoma
Endocrine or 
acquired met­
abolic
Hepatic encephalopathy
Uremic encephalopathy
Hypo/hyperparathyroidism
Hypo/hyperthyroidism
Addison disease
Cushing disease
Vitamin deficiency: vitamin B12 , folate, niacin, vitamin C, 
thiamine
Gastric bypass–associated nutritional deficiencies
Hypoglycemia
Hyponatremia
Vascular
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Other vasculitis syndromes
Stroke
Degenerative
Idiopathic basal ganglia calcifications, Fahr disease
Neuroacanthocytosis
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA)
Tuberous sclerosis
Huntington disease
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration
Multisystem atrophy, striatonigral degeneration, olivopon­
tocerebellar atrophy
Category
Disorders
Demyelinating, 
dysmyelinating
Multiple sclerosis
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Inherited 
metabolic
Wilson disease
Posterior horn syndrome
Tay-­Sachs disease (adult onset)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
Acute intermittent porphyria
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-­
like episodes (MELAS)
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy 
(MNGIE)
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Homocystinuria
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency
Phenylketonuria
Syndromes
Williams
Prader-­Willi
Marfan
Fragile X
Deletion 22q11.2
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, 
hypoventilation, autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD)
Klinefelter
Epilepsy
Ictal
Interictal
Postictal
Postepilepsy surgery
Lafora progressive myoclonic epilepsy
Complex partial (temporal lobe)
Substance induced 
(medications)
Analgesics
Acyclovir
Androgens (anabolic steroids)
Antiarrhythmics
Anticonvulsants
Anticholinergics
Antihypertensives
Antineoplastic agents
β-­Blocking agents
Cefepime
Clarithromycin
Cyclosporine
Dextromethorphan
Dopamine agonists
Ketamine
Fluoroquinolones
Metronidazole
Sulfamethoxazole-­trimethoprim
Oral contraceptives
Sedatives/hypnotics
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (serotonin 
syndrome)
Steroids
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
515
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
anxiety provoking for the child. The classroom teacher represents an 
excellent resource for determining whether the patient’s level of activ­
ity and degree of impulsivity are abnormal. Standardized behavioral 
checklists (such as the Vanderbilt Rating Scale) filled out by the parents 
and teachers quantify the degree of abnormal behaviors with regard to 
an age-­specific reference population.
Before establishing a diagnosis of ADHD, the clinician must rule 
out other psychiatric and medical causes of the patient’s symptoms. 
With respect to psychiatric conditions, the differential diagnosis of 
ADHD includes learning disorders, oppositional behavior, mood dis­
orders, anxiety disorders, and substance abuse. Because of the high asso­
ciation of learning disorders with ADHD, the evaluation should include 
an assessment for learning problems.
With respect to medical conditions, the differential diagnosis of 
ADHD includes iron deficiency, lead toxicity, thyroid disorders, sei­
zures, hearing loss, and substance misuse. Screening for symptoms of 
sleep disturbances or sleep apnea is essential because chronically inef­
fective or inefficient sleep can produce symptoms of inattention and 
hyperactivity.
Tic Disorders
Tics are motor movements or vocalizations that are sudden, rapid, 
recurrent, nonrhythmic, and involuntary. Tics often become worse 
during stress but may improve during activities requiring moderate 
physical or mental activity. Tics need to be differentiated from other 
abnormal movements, such as chorea, athetosis, dystonia, myoclo­
nus, and hemiballismus (Chapter 40). These other movements may 
be associated with an underlying neurologic condition or may be 
medication induced. Tics are common with 5–24% of school-­aged 
children having a history of tics. Most do not require treatment and 
do not progress to a more serious tic disorder. Simple motor tics are 
defined as repetitive movements of single muscle groups. They may 
consist of eye blinking, neck jerking, or shoulder shrugging. Com­
plex motor tics are repetitive movements of several muscle groups 
in coordination, such as repetitive grooming behaviors, deep knee 
bends, or smelling of objects. Simple vocal tics are defined as non­
verbal noises, such as throat clearing or grunting sounds, whereas 
complex vocal tics are intelligible words. Complex vocal tics may 
rarely manifest as coprolalia, the repetitive, stereotyped vocalization 
of obscenities.
The DSM-­5 categorizes tic disorders as follows:
	1.	 Provisional tic disorder: motor and/or vocal tics lasting less than a 
year
	2.	 Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder: either motor or vocal tics 
lasting longer than a year
	3.	 Tourette disorder: both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics 
lasting longer than a year
The incidence of Tourette disorder is 4–5/10,000. In some families, 
this illness is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition, with 70% 
penetrance in females and near-­complete penetrance in males. Because 
of this difference in penetrance, Tourette disorder is 1.5–3 times more 
common in males than in females. The median age at presentation is 7 
years, though some children may present as early as 2 years. While cop­
rolalia is popularly thought to be a common feature of Tourette disorder, 
fewer than 10% of affected patients have this form of complex vocal tics.
The DSM-­5 criteria for Tourette disorder are as follows:
	1.	 Multiple motor and one or more vocal tics must be present, although 
not necessarily concurrently, lasting longer than a year with no tic-­
free intervals longer than 3 months
	2.	 Symptom onset before age 18 years
	3.	 No medical cause for the tics
Tics may lead to the patient being socially ostracized. Children with 
chronic tic disorders frequently have other psychologic conditions, 
such as ADHD or obsessive-­compulsive disorder (OCD), which may 
lead to further difficulties in peer interactions and frequent frustration 
of teachers and family members. Such stressors can worsen the tics, 
which can further compound the problem.
Behaviors That Affect Others
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
While the predominant characteristic of disruptive mood dysregula­
tion disorder (DMDD) is chronic, persistent, and severe irritability, it 
is often the behavioral issues that prompt presentation to a clinician. 
DMDD often manifests as irritable, depressed mood and temper tan­
trums with a low frustration tolerance. The DSM-­5 requires the follow­
ing for diagnosis:
	1.	 Severe recurrent temper outbursts that manifest with verbal or 
behavioral aggression out of proportion to the situation in intensity 
or duration
TABLE 31.4  Medical (Secondary) and Psychiatric (Primary) Causes of Psychosis and/or 
Depression—cont’d
Category
Disorders
Substance induced Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cocaine
LSD
Marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, Ecstasy)
Phencyclidine
Mescaline
Psilocybins (mushrooms)
Drug withdrawal 
syndromes
Alcohol
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Amphetamines
SSRIs
Category
Disorders
Toxins
Heavy metals: lead, mercury, arsenic
Carbon monoxide
Inhalants
Organophosphates
St. John’s Wort
Other
Normal-­pressure hydrocephalus
Ionizing radiation
Decompression sickness
Narcolepsy
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
516
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
	2.	 Behavior is inconsistent with developmental level
	3.	 Behavior occurs on average 3 or more times per week
	4.	 The mood between outbursts is persistently irritable or angry
	5.	 Symptoms present for 12 or more months
	6.	 Symptoms present in at least two settings
	7.	 Age of onset of symptoms must be before age 10 years, but diagnosis 
should not be made before age 6 years or after age 18 years
The overall prevalence of DMDD among children and adolescents 
is as high as 5%. Rates are higher in males and school-­aged children 
than in females and adolescents. DMDD can cause significant diffi­
culties with school performance and family/peer relationships. Many 
children with DMDD will also meet criteria for ADHD, mood disor­
ders, or anxiety disorders. The diagnosis of DMDD should be distin­
guished from bipolar disorder, which must have distinct episodes of 
mania or hypomania (Table 31.6). The age of the patient can also help 
differentiate DMDD and bipolar disorders because bipolar disorders 
rarely present prior to adolescence. Individuals who meet criteria for 
DMDD and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) should only be given 
the diagnosis of DMDD.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Intermittent explosive disorder (IED) is an impulse control disorder 
where the child will have significant recurrent behavioral outbursts 
that are seen as out of proportion to the situation. The outbursts can 
be violent but are not premeditated. The outbursts can cause signifi­
cant distress to both the patient and family. IED does not have the per­
sistently angry or irritable mood in between outbursts that is present in 
DMDD. The DSM-­5 requires the following for diagnosis:
	1.	 Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing failure to control 
aggressive impulses
	2.	 Verbal or physical aggression toward property, animals, or other 
individuals occurring on average twice weekly for 3 months or 
three behavioral outbursts involving destruction of property and/
or physical assault within a 12-­month period
TABLE 31.5  Psychiatric Terms
Abulia is the state of reduced impulse to act and think associated with indifference about consequences of action.
Affect is the examiner’s observation of the patient’s emotional state. Frequently used descriptive terms include the following:
Constricted affect is reduced range and intensity of expression.
Blunted affect is further reduced. Usually, there is little facial expression and a voice that is monotone and lacking normal prosody.
Flat describes severely blunted affect in which there is no affective expression.
Inappropriate affect is an incongruous expression of emotion or behavior relative to the content of a conversation or social norms.
Labile affect exhibits abrupt and sudden changes in both type and intensity of emotion.
Anxiety is the feeling of apprehension caused by anticipation of danger that may be internal or external.
Apathy is dulled emotional tone associated with detachment or indifference.
Comportment refers to self-­regulation of behavior through complex mental processes that include insight, judgment, self-­awareness, empathy, and social adapta­
tion.
Compulsion is the uncontrollable impulse to perform an act repetitively.
Confusion is the inability to maintain a coherent stream of thought owing to impaired attention and vigilance. Secondary deficits in language, memory, and visual 
spatial skills are common.
Delusion is a false, unshakable conviction or judgment that is out of keeping with reality and with socially shared beliefs of the individual’s background and culture. 
It cannot be corrected with reasoning.
Depression is a sustained psychopathologic feeling of sadness often accompanied by a variety of associated symptoms, particularly anxiety, agitation, feelings of 
worthlessness, suicidal ideation, abulia, psychomotor retardation, and various somatic symptoms and physiologic dysfunctions and complaints that cause signifi­
cant distress and impairment in social functioning.
Hallucination is a false sensory perception not associated with real external stimuli.
Mood is the emotional state experienced and described by the patient and observed by others.
Obsession is the pathologic persistence of an irresistible thought or feeling that cannot be eliminated from consciousness by logical effort. It is associated with 
anxiety and rumination.
Paranoia is a descriptive term designating either morbid-­dominant ideas or delusions of self-­reference concerning one or more of several themes, most commonly 
persecution, love, hate, envy, jealousy, honor, litigation, grandeur, and the supernatural.
Prosody is the melodic patterns of intonation in language that convey shades of meaning.
Psychosis is the inability or impaired ability to distinguish reality from hallucinations and/or delusions.
Russell sign is calluses on the knuckles or back of the hand due to repeated self-­induced vomiting over long periods of time.
Thought process and content. Common descriptive terms include the following:
Circumstantial thought follows a circuitous route to the answer. There may be many superfluous details, but the patient eventually reaches the answer.
Linear thought demonstrates goal-­directed associations and is easy to follow.
Loose associations are thoughts that have no logical or meaningful connection with ensuing thoughts.
Tangential thoughts are initially clearly linked to a current thought but fail to maintain goal-­directed associations; the patient never arrives at the desired point 
or goal.
Clang associations describe speech in which the sounds of words are similar but not the meanings. The words have no logical connection to each other.
Flight of ideas describes a rapid stream of thoughts that tend to be related to each other.
Magical thinking describes the belief that thoughts, words, or actions have power to influence events in ways other than through reality-­based mechanisms.
Thought blocking is characterized by abrupt interruptions in speech during conversation before an idea or thought is finished. After a pause, the individual 
indicates no recall of what was being said or what was going to be said.
From Perez DL, Murray ED, Price BH. Depression and psychosis in neurological practice. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, 
eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
517
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
	3.	 Aggression grossly out of proportion to trigger
	4.	 Outbursts are not premeditated
	5.	 Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent development 
level)
	6.	 The outbursts cause marked distress in the individual or impair­
ment in interpersonal functioning
The diagnosis of IED can be made in addition to ADHD, conduct 
disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or autism spectrum disorder. 
It cannot be made with a diagnosis of DMDD. It is important to rule 
out other potential causes for the outbursts including bipolar disorder, 
substance use disorders, and traumatic brain injury.
Substance Use Disorder
Substance use can lead to a wide range of disturbances in mood and 
behavior. The disturbance can occur during both the period of intox­
ication and the period of withdrawal. The hallmark of a substance use 
disorder is the continued use of a substance despite it causing ongoing 
negative cognitive, behavioral, and physiologic symptoms. The other 
hallmark of substance use disorder is the significance of the negative 
behaviors, such as verbal or physical aggression, defiance, lying, or 
stealing. Sometimes these behaviors will reach the point of violating 
the rights of family and friends.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
The characteristic feature of ODD is a persistent pattern of both defi­
ant behavior and an angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant 
behavior, or vindictiveness. Affected individuals exhibit at least four 
of the following behaviors in a consistent manner over a 6-­month 
period:
	1.	 Frequently losing temper
	2.	 Often arguing with authority figures
	3.	 Defying rules
	4.	 Deliberately annoying adults
	5.	 Blaming others for their actions
	6.	 Becoming easily annoyed by others
	7.	 Being angry
	8.	 Being vindictive
ODD should not be diagnosed if the patient meets the DSM-­5 cri­
teria for conduct disorder or if the symptoms occur in the context of 
a mood, an anxiety, or a psychotic disorder, in which children exhibit 
oppositional behavior as a reaction to their illness.
Prevalence ranges from 1% to 11%, depending on the population. 
In prepubertal children, it occurs more frequently in males; however, 
in adolescents, its incidence is equal in both sexes. Most children pres­
ent before 8 years of age. Affected preschool-­aged children sometimes 
exhibit increased motor activity, difficulty being comforted, and over­
reacting to situations. Affected school-­aged children have low self-­
esteem and a low tolerance for frustration. The disorder commonly 
occurs in families with a history of mood or psychotic disorders—par­
ticularly maternal depression—and with chronic disruptive behaviors, 
such as ADHD or conduct disorder.
Children with this disorder are at marked risk for other psychi­
atric disorders, such as ADHD. In addition, these patients may be at 
increased risk for conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder as 
adults, substance abuse, major depressive disorder, and suicide.
Conduct Disorder
A child has conduct disorder if they have repetitively violated the rights 
of others and of society. Children with this diagnosis have performed 
three or more of the following behaviors within the past year and with 
at least one occurring in the previous 6 months:
	1.	 Aggression toward people or animals, such as intimidation, initia­
tion of fights, use of weapons, cruelty to people, cruelty to animals, 
rape, confrontational theft, or mugging
	2.	 Destruction of property, such as arson or vandalism
	3.	 Deceitfulness or theft, such as breaking into houses or cars or steal­
ing items of nontrivial value
	4.	 Serious violation of rules, such as curfew violation, running away, 
or truancy before the age of 13 years (for running away to qualify as 
a symptom, it must occur twice, or once if it was lengthy, and must 
not be an attempt to escape sexual or physical abuse)
Conduct disorder is classified as childhood onset if symptoms 
occur before 10 years of age and adolescent onset if symptoms occur 
at or after 10 years of age. It may have the qualifier of “limited pro­
social emotions” such as lack of remorse or guilt, callous lack of 
empathy, unconcerned about performance, and shallow affect. It is 
further subdivided by severity of offense: mild (e.g., truancy), moder­
ate (e.g., vandalism, nonconfrontational theft), and severe (e.g., rape, 
TABLE 31.6  Diagnostic Features of Primary Psychiatric Disorders
The following conditions require clinically significant distress or impairment in social or occupational functioning:
 • Schizophrenia is a disorder that lasts for at least 6 mo and includes at least 1 mo of active symptoms (two or more of the following: delusions, hallucinations, 
disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, or negative symptoms).
 • Schizoaffective disorder is a disorder in which a mood episode and the active symptoms of schizophrenia occur together and were preceded or are followed by 
at least 2 wk of delusions or hallucinations without prominent mood symptoms.
 • Major depressive disorder is characterized by one or more major depressive episodes (at least 2 wk of depressed mood or loss of interest accompanied by 
at least four additional symptoms of depression). Additional symptoms of depression may include significant weight changes, sleep dysfunction, psychomotor 
agitation or retardation, fatigue or loss of energy, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, diminished concentration, and suicidal ideation or thoughts of death.
 • A manic episode is defined by an abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood persisting for at least 1 wk (or less if hospitalization is 
required). At least three of the following symptoms must be present if the mood is elevated or expansive (four symptoms are required if the mood is irritable): 
inflated self-­esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, flight of ideas, distractibility, increased goal-­directed activities or psychomotor 
agitation, and excessive involvement in pleasurable activities with a high potential for painful consequences. Psychotic features may be present.
 • Bipolar I disorder is characterized by the presence of both manic and major depressive episodes or manic episodes alone.
 • Bipolar II disorder is characterized by the presence of major depressive episodes alternating with episodes of hypomania.
 • Hypomania is characterized by an abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood persisting for at least 4 days. Other criteria required for 
diagnosis are identical to that of a manic episode except that the symptoms are not so severe as to cause marked impairment in social or occupational function­
ing, hospitalization is not required, and no psychotic symptoms are present.
From Perez DL, Murray ED, Price BH. Depression and psychosis in neurological practice. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, 
eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
518
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
confrontational theft). The prevalence of conduct disorder is higher in 
males than in females. Children initially present with lying, initiating 
fights, and truancy; as they get older, they progress to more violent acts. 
Males are more likely to exhibit acts of violence, such as fighting and 
stealing, than are females, who are more likely to exhibit truancy, run­
away behavior, and high-­risk sexual activity. Half of these children may 
develop antisocial personality disorder, which is a severe conduct 
disorder of adulthood that is usually associated with criminal activ­
ity. The earlier the onset of conduct disorder, the greater the risk of 
developing antisocial personality disorder as an adult. These children 
also have a high frequency of depression, suicidal ideation, personality 
disorders, anxiety disorders, ADHD, and substance abuse.
CONDITIONS CHARACTERIZED BY DISRUPTION IN 
MOOD
Mood disorders are divided into those characterized by a depressed 
mood and those characterized by extremes of mood lability. When 
assessing mood disturbances, it is essential to screen for symptoms 
suggestive of bipolar illness as these patients have a risk of becoming 
manic when treated with antidepressants (Fig. 31.1). The evaluation of 
any patient with a disruption in mood should include an assessment of 
the risk of suicide.
Conditions Characterized by Depressed Mood
Depressive disorders that may present in childhood include DMDD, 
major depressive disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, persistent 
depressive disorder (i.e., dysthymia), substance/medication-­induced 
depressive disorder, adjustment disorder with depressed mood, and 
depressive disorder related to another medical condition.
Major Depressive Disorder
Major depressive disorder is associated with serious risks of suicide, 
significant social isolation, and academic impairment (see Table 31.6). 
Presentations may be subtle. While children and adolescents can pres­
ent with classic sad or depressed mood, they may also present with irri­
tability. Patients may also present with somatic complaints, psychosis, 
or both. The psychotic symptoms are typically mood-­congruent audi­
tory hallucinations and delusions of guilt, medical illnesses, or deserv­
ing punishment. DSM-­5 criteria for major depressive disorder consist 
of at least a 2-­week period of a depressed mood—or irritability in some 
children—or loss of interest in pleasurable activities, resulting in sig­
nificant impairment. During this period, the patient has to have at least 
five of the following symptoms:
	1.	 Depressed mood or irritability in some children
	2.	 Loss of interest or pleasure
	3.	 Loss of appetite or overeating
	4.	 Insomnia or hypersomnia
	5.	 Fatigue or loss of energy
	6.	 Feelings of worthlessness or guilt
	7.	 Poor concentration or indecisiveness
	8.	 Suicidal ideation or thoughts of death
	9.	 Psychomotor agitation or retardation
These symptoms should not be secondary to bereavement, medical 
conditions, substance abuse, or bipolar disorders. Emotional reaction 
to adverse stressors is a normal part of life. The clinician must decide 
whether the reaction to the stressor is normal, an adjustment disorder, 
or major depression.
The occurrence of major depressive disorders in adolescence is as 
high as 5%, with a cumulative prevalence in adolescence of 12% in 
females and 7% in males. There is also a threefold increase in major 
depression in children who have a parent with depression. The dif­
ferential diagnosis of major depression encompasses various medical 
disorders, including neurologic disorders, endocrine disorders such as 
hypothyroidism or hyperparathyroidism, side effects from medications 
such as H2-­blockers or isotretinoin, and substance abuse or use (see 
Table 31.4). Numerous psychiatric conditions are comorbid with major 
depression. Among these are ODD, conduct disorder, ADHD, anxiety 
disorders, eating disorders, and substance abuse.
Major depressive disorder can manifest at any age; most patients 
present in early adulthood. Children usually present with somatic com­
plaints, social withdrawal, and irritability, whereas adolescents often 
present with psychomotor retardation, thoughts of guilt and worthless­
ness, and excessive sleep. Approximately 15% of children with major 
Are there symptoms of mania or hypomania
(abnormally elevated mood)?
Yes
No
No
Is there substance use?
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
Are there significant disruptive behaviors?
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD)
Was there a recent death?
Bereavement
Was there a precipitating event?
Adjustment Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder
Bipolar I Disorder
Bipolar II Disorder
Substance-Induced
  Mood Disorder
Cyclothymia
No
Yes
Yes
Are criteria for major depressive disorder met?
(At least 2 weeks of depressed mood or
irritability or loss of interest causing
significant impairment with at least 5
of the following: change in appetite,
change in sleep, fatigue or loss of energy,
feelings of worthlessness or guilt, poor
concentration, psychomotor symptoms,
thoughts of suicide)
Are criteria for mania met?
(Abnormally elevated mood of greater
than 1 week in duration, associated with
grandiosity, impulsivity, excessive
goal-directed activity, and decreased
need for sleep)
Fig. 31.1  Evaluation of mood disorders.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
519
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
depression eventually develop bipolar disorders. Fifty percent of chil­
dren with major depression have multiple episodes, frequently asso­
ciated with significant stressors. Approximately 25% of patients with 
certain chronic medical conditions such as cancer or diabetes develop 
a major depressive episode during the course of the illness. The main 
difficulty in diagnosing major depression is that the gravity of the 
depressive mood is often not always apparent to the parent and the cli­
nician. Children and adolescents suffering from depression often have 
a broader range of affect compared with adults, who often appear more 
sullen. Given that children and adolescents often present with irritabil­
ity or mean-­spiritedness, the parents and/or clinician may attribute this 
behavior to typical adolescent behavior. These children do not always 
appear sad and the clinician should have a high index of suspicion of 
major depression in any child who presents with sullenness and irrita­
bility. Guidelines for evaluating such a patient are as follows:
	1.	 Assess suicidal ideation and ensure the patient’s safety.
	2.	 Obtain collateral information from other sources to determine the 
child’s functioning and symptoms.
	3.	 Obtain a thorough family history for symptoms and formal diagno­
ses of mood disorders.
	4.	 Rule out bipolar disorders by assessing for symptoms of mania or 
hypomania.
	5.	 Investigate primary or comorbid conditions, such as substance 
abuse.
	6.	 Consider the role of life stressors in relationship to the symptoms.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Both physical and mood symptoms can occur prior to a female’s men­
strual cycle. When the symptoms are severe, they may constitute pre­
menstrual dysphoric disorder, the primary features of which are mood 
lability, irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety that appear recurrently 
during the premenstrual phase of a female’s cycle and then resolve 
around the onset of menses. Delusions or hallucinations have been 
described but are rare. The 12-­month prevalence is as high as 6% of 
menstruating women. Onset can be any time after menarche. Factors 
such as stress, a history of trauma, and seasonal changes can contrib­
ute. The DSM-­5 states that the following criteria must be met:
	1.	 In the majority of cycles, at least four of the following symptoms: 
marked affective lability (mood swings, increased sensitivity to 
rejection), irritability or anger, increased interpersonal conflicts, 
depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness or self-­deprecating 
thoughts, anxiety, or tension
	2.	 At least one of the following: decreased interest in activities, diffi­
culty concentrating, lack of energy, change in appetite, change in 
sleep, sense of being out of control, physical symptoms of breast 
tenderness, joint pain, bloating, or weight gain
	3.	 Symptoms present during the majority of cycles over the year prior
The severity of symptoms is similar to that in other psychiatric 
disorders, such as major depression or generalized anxiety disorder, 
though the duration of symptoms is shorter. Nonetheless, symptoms 
do need to be severe and cause marked impairment in functioning to 
satisfy diagnostic criteria. To confirm the diagnosis, daily prospective 
symptom ratings are required for at least two cycles.
Substance-­Induced Mood Disorders
Substance-­induced disorders are distinct from substance use disorders. 
Whereas the latter refer to the negative consequences of substance 
use over time, the substance-­induced disorders refer to the immedi­
ate effects of substance use—intoxication and withdrawal—and to 
the substance-­induced mental disorders, which include psychotic 
disorders, anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar and related 
disorders, obsessive-­compulsive and related disorders, sleep disorders, 
sexual dysfunction, delirium, and neurocognitive disorders. The hall­
mark of substance-­induced mental disorders is that the symptoms 
of the disorder are attributable to the ingestion or chronic use of the 
substance and were not present prior to substance use. While symp­
toms may abate as the pharmacologic activity of the substance abates, 
repeated use may lead to chronic changes in neurophysiology, and as 
such, behavioral effects may persist even when the substance is no lon­
ger used.
The substances specified in the DSM-­5 include alcohol, caffeine, 
cannabis (also synthetic cannabinoids), hallucinogens (including 
phencyclidine and others), inhalants, opioids, sedatives/hypnotics/
anxiolytics, stimulants, tobacco, and “other.” Defining the symptom 
complex associated with each individual substance is out of the pur­
view of this text; however, the possibility of substance use/abuse as a 
cause for behavioral and mood disruption is critical for all physicians 
to recognize. The patient interview should include time to speak with 
the patient individually, without a parent or other caregiver present, so 
as to establish rapport, to incorporate the techniques of normalizing 
and remaining nonjudgmental, and to encourage a patient to discuss 
their substance use.
Adjustment Disorder
Adjustment disorder is an excessive or maladaptive response to a 
stressor, and diagnosis is contingent upon the recognition of a particu­
lar stressor. Typical stressors for children and adolescents include sep­
arations, painful injuries, illness, hospitalization or surgery, parental 
divorce, change of residency, academic failure, and conflict with peers. 
The DSM-­5 criteria for adjustment disorder are as follows:
	1.	 The symptoms develop within 3 months of the stressor.
	2.	 Significant social and/or academic impairment results.
	3.	 The symptoms do not meet criteria for mood or anxiety disorder.
	4.	 The symptoms do not represent bereavement.
	5.	 The symptoms abate 6 months after termination of the stressor.
This disorder is further classified by the patient’s symptoms, such 
as depressed mood, anxiety, and/or conduct disorder. Affected 
patients may be at increased risk for suicide, particularly if social and/
or academic impairment are severe. If the stressor is an illness or its 
treatment, the morbidity of the medical condition may increase as a 
consequence of noncompliance. The differential diagnosis of adjust­
ment disorder is a mood or anxiety disorder, a disruptive behavior dis­
order, or post-­traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Conditions Characterized by Extremes of Mood Lability
The bipolar disorders include bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, 
and cyclothymic disorder. All are characterized by the presence of 
either mania or hypomania. Mania manifests acutely, leads to signif­
icant functional impairments, and is characterized by racing thoughts, 
distractibility, delusions of grandeur, and other disturbances in think­
ing. Problematic behaviors during a manic episode include recklessness 
(e.g., excessive participation in social activities, high-­risk sexual activ­
ity, spending sprees, extreme gambling), agitation, decreased sleep, and 
excessive talkativeness. A manic episode is defined as an abnormally 
elevated, euphoric, expansive, or irritable mood for at least 1 week 
unless treated. This mood disturbance is associated with at least three 
of the following symptoms or four if the mood is irritable:
	1.	 Grandiosity
	2.	 Decreased need for sleep
	3.	 Talkativeness
	4.	 Racing thoughts
	5.	 Distractibility
	6.	 Excessive goal-­directed activity or psychomotor agitation
	7.	 Reckless pursuit of pleasure
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
520
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
The symptoms of a hypomanic episode are the same, though are 
present for a shorter duration (i.e., 4 days or fewer), are not associated 
with psychotic symptoms of delusions or hallucinations, and are not 
severe enough to cause major social or academic dysfunction. Up to 
10% of patients with hypomania will eventually develop mania.
Bipolar I disorder is characterized by the presence of manic epi­
sodes. Patients may also have prior or subsequent episodes of hypo­
mania or major depression, though these are not required. Bipolar II 
disorder is characterized by the presence of at least one major depres­
sive episode and hypomania. Cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, cyclic 
illness of hypomania and depressive symptoms without episodes of 
major depression.
Comorbid psychiatric conditions include eating disorders, 
ADHD, conduct disorders, panic disorders, social phobias, adjust­
ment disorders, substance use disorders, and substance-­induced 
disorders. The lifetime prevalence of bipolar I disorder is as high 
as 1.6%, and that of bipolar II disorder is 0.5%. Approximately 15% 
of adolescents with recurrent major depression eventually develop 
bipolar illnesses.
The differential diagnosis of the bipolar disorders includes schizo­
phrenia and medical conditions that cause changes in mental sta­
tus, particularly thyroid disorders, Cushing disease, and multiple 
sclerosis (see Table 31.4). Substance-­induced mood disorders must 
also be considered, particularly those associated with cocaine, tricy­
clic antidepressants, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. The 
clinician should obtain a detailed family history as bipolar disorder 
frequently runs in families. Because the condition is often undiag­
nosed in parents, the questions should be directed toward the pres­
ence of the symptoms for bipolar disorders. The following principles 
should guide the evaluation of patients with symptoms of depression 
or mania:
	1.	 Recognize the symptoms of mania and hypomania.
	2.	 Remember that depressed patients often have bipolar disorders.
	3.	 Obtain a thorough family history to look for symptoms of mood 
disorders.
	4.	 Consider bipolar illnesses in patients with any disruptive disorder 
that does not respond to treatment.
	5.	 Assess for drug and/or alcohol use as substances may induce bipo­
lar disorder, and substance use is frequently a comorbid condition.
Borderline personality disorder is a chronic personality dis­
order characterized by intense mood lability, impulsivity, identity 
disturbances, and unstable relationships. The diagnosis may be 
challenging in adolescents whose appropriate psychologic devel­
opment includes the forging of identity and personality traits; 
however, since borderline personality disorder is associated with 
significant morbidity and potential mortality, it should be consid­
ered in the differential diagnosis of a patient presenting with signif­
icant mood or behavioral issues. Diagnosis requires five or more of 
the following:
	1.	 Significant efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment
	2.	 Unstable and intense relationships with extremes of idolization and 
devaluation
	3.	 Marked identity disturbances with unstable sense of self
	4.	 Significant impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-­
damaging: spending, sexual activity, substance abuse, reckless driv­
ing, or binge eating
	5.	 Recurrent suicidal or self-­mutilating behavior
	6.	 Intense dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety
	7.	 Chronic feelings of emptiness
	8.	 Inappropriate anger
	9.	 Transient, stress-­related paranoia or dissociation
Both genetic and psychosocial factors are believed to be causative. 
Risk factors for borderline personality disorder include a history of 
abuse, neglect, or early parental loss. The median population preva­
lence is approximately 6% in primary care settings and is as high as 
10% in outpatient mental health clinics. Females are more frequently 
diagnosed than males, at a ratio of 3:1.
Addressing Suicidal Thoughts and Attempts
Suicide is the second leading cause of death in adolescents, and 
assessing the risk of suicide is a critical component in the evalua­
tion of any child or teen. Although depression is an important risk 
factor for suicide, only half of adolescents who attempt suicide have 
clinically diagnosable depression. In those without depression, 
strong predictors of suicide are impulsivity and low frustration 
tolerance. The approach to evaluating suicidality is complicated 
and includes a stepwise process of probing first for latent thoughts 
of suicidality (Table 31.7), then for active suicidal intent. Key to 
this process is assessing whether the child is considering acting on 
thoughts of death or suicide. To assess risk, the interviewer should 
focus on the risk factors for completed suicide, which include the 
following:
	 1.	 Male gender
	 2.	 Adolescence
TABLE 31.7  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale–Screener
	1.	Have you wished you were dead or wished you could go to sleep and not wake up?
	2.	Have you actually had any thoughts about killing yourself?
If Yes to 2, answer questions 3, 4, 5, and 6. If No to 2, go directly to question 6.
	3.	Have you thought about how you might do this?
	4.	Have you had any intention of acting on these thoughts of killing yourself, as opposed to you having the thoughts but you definitely would not act on them?
	5.	Have you started to work out or worked out the details of how to kill yourself? Do you intend to carry out this plan?
	6.	Have you done anything, started to do anything, or prepared to do anything to end your life?
Response Protocol to Screening, based on last item answered YES.
Item 1 – Mental Health Referral at discharge
Item 2 – Mental Health Referral at discharge
Item 3 – Care Team Consultation (Psychiatric Nurse) and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 4 – Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 5 – Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 6 – If over a year ago, Mental Health Referral at discharge
If between 1 wk and 1 yr ago, Care Team Consultation (Psychiatric Nurse) and Patient Safety Monitor
If 1 wk ago or less, Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor
From Posner K. Columbia-­Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Screener/Recent–Self-­Report. http://www.cssrs.columbia.edu/scales_practice_cssrs.html.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
521
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
	 3.	 Formation of a conscious plan
	 4.	 Presence of available means (e.g., medications, firearms)
	 5.	 Depression
	 6.	 Hopelessness
	 7.	 Impulsivity
	 8.	 Low frustration tolerance
	 9.	 Use of intoxicants
	10.	 Sexual identity conflicts
	11.	 Recent death of family member or friend, or significant breakup
	12.	 Previous suicide attempts
Once a patient’s thoughts of suicide have escalated to suicide 
threats, plans, or attempts, this constitutes a medical emergency and 
the patient should be immediately referred to an experienced mental 
health professional or emergency department, and psychiatric hospi­
talization should strongly be considered.
CONDITIONS CHARACTERIZED BY WORRY, FEAR, 
AND PANIC
These conditions include diagnoses in the broad categories of anxi­
ety disorders, trauma-­ and stressor-­related disorders, and obsessive-­
compulsive disorder. In childhood, these diagnoses are often comorbid 
and may include portions of other related disorders. A child with PTSD 
may experience panic attacks or a child with social anxiety may also 
have some generalized worries.
Conditions Characterized by Worry
Worries are primarily internal ruminations about the potential to 
experience negative outcomes from typically benign, everyday events. 
While often accompanied by somatic symptoms, such as stomach 
upset and headache, the hallmark of these disorders is the persistence 
of worry across one or more areas of a child’s life. Conditions charac­
terized by worry are categorized by whether they are associated with 
unusual behaviors (Fig. 31.2).
Worry Without Unusual Behaviors
Generalized anxiety disorder is characterized by excessive worry 
and concern over many issues. Chronic generalized anxiety may lead 
to symptoms of depression or somatic complaints, including abdom­
inal pain, nausea, appetite loss, and headaches. DSM-­5 criteria are as 
follows:
	1.	 Excessive anxiety and worry about various issues for more than 6 
months
	2.	 Difficulty controlling the worry
	3.	 Anxiety and worry are associated with three of the following:
	
a.	 Restlessness
	
b.	 Being easily fatigued
	
c.	 Difficulty concentrating
	
d.	 Irritability
	
e.	 Muscle tension
	
f.	 Sleep disturbance
	4.	 Anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause significant distress or 
impairment
The lifetime prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder is approx­
imately 5%, with most cases initially presenting during childhood or 
adolescence. The disorder is chronic and worsens during periods of 
stress. Comorbid diagnoses include mood disorders, other anxiety dis­
orders, and substance use disorders.
Adjustment disorder with anxiety. The hallmark of adjustment 
disorders is an excessive or maladaptive response to a stressor that is 
out of proportion to that stressor. In adjustment disorder with anxiety, 
the maladaptive response manifests as excessive worry. It can occur in 
both children and adolescents. Stressors that children and adolescents 
may encounter include social separations, parental divorce, illness, 
injury, moving, academic failure, and peer conflict. The stressor should 
not represent a perceived threat to the life of oneself or a loved one, 
which would suggest PTSD. DSM-­5 diagnostic criteria are as follows:
	1.	 Symptoms develop within 3 months of the stressor
	2.	 Significant impairment results
	3.	 The symptoms do not meet criteria for an alternative anxiety disor­
der
	4.	 The symptoms do not represent bereavement
	5.	 The symptoms abate 6 months after termination of the stress
Worry with Unusual Behaviors
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by obsessive 
worries that are briefly relieved by compensatory compulsive behav­
iors. Obsessions are recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or 
images that the individual attempts to ignore or suppress. Common 
obsessions include fear of contamination or illness, guilt regarding sex­
ual thoughts, images of violent or horrific scenes, and urges to injure 
oneself or others. Compulsions are repetitive and excessive acts the 
What is the primary symptom?
Fear
Panic
Worry
No
No
Yes
Generalized Anxiety
    Disorder
Adjustment Disorder
    with Anxiety
Obsessive-Compulsive
    Disorder
PANS
Acute Stress Disorder
Post-traumatic Stress
    Disorder
Specific Phobias
Social Anxiety Disorder
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Selective Mutism
Yes
Are there unusual behaviors
with the worry?
Do fears arise from
trauma exposure?
Panic Disorder
Agoraphobia
Fig. 31.2  Evaluation of worry, fear, and panic. PANS, pediatric acute onset neuropsychiatric disorder.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
522
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
patient performs to reduce the anxiety elicited by obsessions. Compul­
sions may include actions, such as repetitive handwashing or check­
ing locks, or mental acts, such as repeating certain words or counting 
internally. Some patients need to perform a particular action a specific 
number of times to satisfy the compulsion. To meet criteria for OCD, 
the compulsive actions must take over an hour a day or interfere with 
the patient’s day-­to-­day life.
Lifetime prevalence of OCD is approximately 2.5%. While females 
are more frequently affected in general, males have a higher preva­
lence during childhood. Children generally present with vague anxiety 
symptoms or poor concentration before clear obsessions and compul­
sions are seen. In children, OCD is highly comorbid with tic disorders 
and ADHD. Other comorbidities include depression, anxiety disor­
ders, and eating disorders.
Pediatric Acute Onset Neuropsychiatric Disorder. Pediatric acute 
onset neuropsychiatric disorder (PANS) is the term proposed for a 
group of neuropsychiatric disorders (particularly OCD, tic disorder, 
and Tourette disorder) with an acute onset, triggered by an immune 
or infectious process. The most common subtypes are pediatric 
autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with Streptococcus 
pyogenes, for which a possible relationship with group A streptococcal 
(GAS) infections has been hypothesized. It has been proposed that 
this subset of patients with obsessive-­compulsive and tic disorders 
may produce autoimmune antibodies in response to a GAS infection 
that cross-­react with brain tissue similar to the autoimmune response 
believed to be responsible for the manifestations of Sydenham chorea. 
Until carefully designed and well-­controlled studies have established 
a causal relationship between neurobehavioral abnormalities and 
GAS infections, routine diagnostic laboratory testing for GAS and 
antistreptococcal antibodies, long-­term antistreptococcal prophylaxis, 
or immunoregulatory therapy (e.g., intravenous immunoglobulin, 
plasma exchange) to treat exacerbations of this disorder is not routinely 
recommended. The newer, broader diagnosis of PANS follows the 
suggestion that a broad spectrum of infectious agents may have the 
ability to trigger exacerbations in children with these neurobehavioral 
disorders.
Conditions Characterized by Fear
Fear is an intense emotion centered on a belief that something is dan­
gerous, emotionally harmful, or painful. Fears may be spontaneous or 
may arise from previous traumatic experiences. While all people expe­
rience fear as an emotion, in these disorders it causes significant func­
tional impairment.
Fears Arising Spontaneously
Specific phobias. The hallmark of a specific phobia is intense fear 
upon exposure to a particular stimulus or situation or, occasionally, 
upon thinking about or visualizing the stimulus. The fear is out of 
proportion to the actual danger. The fear response in children typically 
manifests as clinging, crying, having a tantrum, or “freezing.” Common 
specific phobias include animals, heights, enclosed places, exposure to 
blood, or venipuncture. Specific phobias peak in childhood and early 
adulthood. Diagnostic criteria of a specific phobia are as follows:
	1.	 Intense fear is caused by a particular stimulus.
	2.	 The object or situation almost always provokes immediate fear or 
anxiety.
	3.	 Stimuli are avoided or endured with great distress.
	4.	 The fear is out of proportion to the actual danger.
	5.	 The fear persists 6 months or longer.
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia). Social anxiety disorder is a 
specific phobia in which the stimulus is either a social or performance 
task. Diagnostic criteria include the following:
	1.	 Marked fear about one or more social situations
	2.	 Individual fears that they will act in a way that will be negatively 
evaluated
	3.	 Social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety
	4.	 Social situations are avoided
	5.	 Fear is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social 
situation
	6.	 Fear or anxiety persists 6 months or longer
Social phobia most often begins in adolescence and is one and a 
half times more frequent in females compared to males. Children with 
social anxiety often refuse group play, stay close to familiar adults, and 
appear excessively timid in unfamiliar situations. Children may report 
somatic complaints, such as headaches or stomachaches, which abate 
when the child is allowed to remain home and away from social situ­
ations, including school. School avoidance due to severe social anxi­
ety can be a significant problem for children and adolescents. Social 
phobia may be comorbid with panic disorder, other anxiety disorders, 
mood disorders, and substance abuse.
Separation anxiety disorder. The core fear in separation anxiety 
disorder is separation from a specific attachment figure or figures. Fear 
of separation is normal in infants and children aged 6–30 months but 
should be considered abnormal if increasing or not declining beyond 
this age range. Diagnosis requires the presence of symptoms for greater 
than 4 weeks. At least three of the following symptoms must be present:
	1.	 Distress with separation
	2.	 Worry about losing loved ones
	3.	 Worry about an event causing separation
	4.	 Refusal to go away from home
	5.	 Reluctance to be alone
	6.	 Refusal to fall asleep alone
	7.	 Repeated nightmares of separation
	8.	 Somatic complaints when separation occurs or is anticipated
The prevalence of separation anxiety disorder is as high as 5%, with 
onset typically in early childhood. Patients with separation anxiety 
disorder often display their worries as demands or behavioral out­
bursts, which may cause significant family conflict. Comorbid con­
ditions include major depressive disorder and panic disorder with 
agoraphobia.
Selective mutism. Patients with selective mutism have a persistent 
failure to speak in specific, but not all, situations. Children with 
selective mutism are often shy in public but controlling at home in 
order to maintain proximity to parents. Diagnostic criteria include the 
following:
	1.	 Consistent failure to speak in specific social situations
	2.	 Failure to speak interferes with achievement or social communica­
tion
	3.	 Duration of at least 1 month
	4.	 Failure to speak is not due to lack of knowledge of the spoken lan­
guage
	5.	 Disturbance is not better explained by a communication or other 
psychiatric disorder
The differential diagnosis includes communication disorders, 
autism spectrum disorders, and social anxiety disorder. Selective mut­
ism may be a more severe form of social anxiety disorder.
Fears Arising from Traumatic Events
A traumatic event is defined as an exposure to actual or threatened 
death, serious injury, or sexual violence. Responses to traumatic events 
include hyperarousal, avoidance of circumstances reminiscent of the 
event, or re-­experiencing the event via nightmares, intrusive thoughts 
of the event, or flashbacks. Acute stress disorder and PTSD are charac­
terized by severe and persistent trauma responses that lead to impaired 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
523
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
function. Symptoms are divided into four clusters: intrusion, avoidance, 
negative alteration in cognition and mood, and marked alterations in 
arousal and activity. Acute stress disorder is the persistence of at least 
9 of the 14 defined symptoms, regardless of symptom cluster desig­
nation, for 3 days to 1 month after exposure to a traumatic event. In 
contrast to acute stress disorder, PTSD must include symptoms from 
each of the separate symptom clusters. Exposure to the traumatic event 
includes directly experiencing the event, witnessing the event, learning 
the event occurred to a family member or close friend (caregiver for 
children under 6), or experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to 
details of a traumatic event.
	1.	 Intrusion symptoms
	
a.	 Distressing memories of the event
	
b.	 Dreams in which content or effect of the dream is related to the 
event (in children, does not need to be related to event)
	
c.	 Dissociative reactions in which the individual feels the event is 
recurring (flashbacks) (in children, may be re-enactment in play)
	
d.	 Psychologic distress at exposure to reminders of the event
	
e.	 Marked physiologic reactions to reminders of the event
	2.	 Avoidance
	
a.	 Avoidance or efforts to avoid distressing memories (children 
may avoid places or physical reminders)
	
b.	 Avoidance of external reminders (children may avoid people, 
conversations, or interpersonal relationships)
	3.	 Negative alterations in cognition and mood
	
a.	 Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic 
event (not a criterion for a child under 6 years of age)
	
b.	 Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs (not a criterion for a 
child under 6 years of age)
	
c.	 Persistent, distorted thoughts about cause or consequences of 
trauma (not a criterion for a child under 6 years of age)
	
d.	 Persistent negative emotional state (fear, guilt, sadness, shame)
	
e.	 Decreased interest in activities (constriction of play in children)
	
f.	 Feelings of detachment (socially withdrawn behavior in children)
	
g.	 Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (express 
positive emotions in children)
	4.	 Alterations in arousal
	
a.	 Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little provocation)
	
b.	 Reckless or self-­destructive behaviors (not a criterion in a child 
under 6 years of age)
	
c.	 Hypervigilance
	
d.	 Exaggerated startle response
	
e.	 Problems with concentration
	
f.	 Sleep disturbance
While as many as 30% of children will have some symptoms of 
acute stress disorder following a trauma, only 10% will meet diagnostic 
criteria. The significance of acute stress disorder in predicting eventual 
development of PTSD remains unclear.
Comorbid diagnoses include panic disorder, social phobia, sub­
stance abuse, OCD, somatic symptom disorder, and major depressive 
disorder. In addition to PTSD, childhood trauma and other significant 
stressors, together known as adverse childhood experiences, have 
been found to predispose children to future chronic medical and men­
tal health conditions. These medical conditions include ischemic heart 
disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, skeletal fracture, and liver disease.
Conditions Characterized by Panic
Panic Disorder
Panic attacks may be a component of many psychiatric disorders. 
While panic disorder is characterized by recurrent and unexpected 
panic attacks, the hallmark of panic disorder is persistent concern over 
having additional attacks, worry about the consequences of an attack, 
or a significant change in behavior related to the attacks. Panic attacks 
occur suddenly, peak within 10 minutes, often resolve without inter­
vention, and consist of at least four of the following symptoms:
	 1.	 Palpitations or tachycardia
	 2.	 Diaphoresis
	 3.	 Trembling or shaking
	 4.	 Shortness of breath or sensation of smothering
	 5.	 Feelings of choking
	 6.	 Chest pain
	 7.	 Nausea or abdominal discomfort
	 8.	 Dizziness or feeling faint
	 9.	 Chills or heat sensation
	10.	 Paresthesias
	11.	 Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization
	12.	 Fear of losing control or “going crazy”
	13.	 Fear of dying
The 1-­year prevalence rate of panic disorder is as high as 3.5%. The 
age of onset is bimodal, with the largest peak occurring in adolescence 
and a smaller one in the mid-­30s. Panic disorder in prepubertal chil­
dren is rare.
Patients with panic disorder have a high degree of comorbid condi­
tions. Over half of patients may have major depressive disorder. There 
is a high frequency of other anxiety disorders, such as social phobia, 
OCD, and generalized anxiety disorder. Patients with panic disorder 
are also at great risk for substance abuse, as a consequence of self-­
medicating. Panic attacks may be inappropriately diagnosed as cardiac, 
pulmonary, or neurologic emergencies.
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is characterized by intense anxiety over developing a 
panic attack or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms in a 
place from which the person cannot escape or in which help may not 
be available. Diagnosis requires that the anxiety manifest in at least two 
of the following situations:
	1.	 Riding public transportation
	2.	 Being in open spaces
	3.	 Being in enclosed spaces
	4.	 Standing in line or in a crowd
	5.	 Being outside of the home alone
The anxiety is present nearly every time an individual is exposed to 
the situation they fear and may also develop when the child knows that 
they may be placed in one of these situations. While agoraphobia does 
present in childhood, the peak of onset is late adolescence and early 
adulthood. It is seen in about 1.7% of adolescents. Females are affected 
twice as frequently as males. Agoraphobia is typically preceded by 
panic disorder, phobias, and separation anxiety disorder. Other comor­
bidities, such as depression and substance use disorder, often follow the 
presentation of agoraphobia.
CONDITIONS CHARACTERIZED BY MENTAL 
STATUS ABNORMALITIES
The evaluation of mental status changes (Fig. 31.3) involves first deter­
mining whether the abnormality is limited—such as hallucinations 
unaccompanied by changes in cognition or consciousness—or perva­
sive (see also Chapter 41). The abnormality should then be classified by 
whether it is episodic or persistent. Finally, the mental status change 
should be classified as either acute or chronic. An example of a limited, 
episodic, acute change in mental status is the development of hallu­
cinations secondary to acute anxiety. In contrast, autism represents a 
pervasive, persistent, and chronic alteration in mental status.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
524
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
Psychosis is an important consideration in any patient with mental 
status abnormalities. Psychosis has key features including delusions 
(fixed irrational implausible beliefs that may be persecutory, referen­
tial, grandiose, erotomanic, nihilistic), hallucinations, disorganized 
thinking/speech (loose associations, tangential, incoherent), abnor­
mal motor behavior/catatonia, and negative symptoms (diminished 
emotions, avolition, alogia, anhedonia, asociality). Psychosis, often 
associated with schizophrenia, has a much broader differential diag­
nosis (see Table 31.4), which must include drug use and the multiple 
causes of autoimmune encephalitis (Table 31.8). Clues or red flags for 
secondary causes of psychosis are noted in Table 31.9.
Catatonia is also often associated with schizophrenia and may be 
noted more often in patients with secondary causes of psychosis (see 
Table 31.9). Disorders associated with catatonia include autoimmune 
encephalitis (particularly N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor related), sys­
temic lupus erythematosus, viral encephalitis, autoimmune thyroid 
disorders, autism, and demyelinating diseases. Catatonia is character­
ized by the features in Table 31.10. The diagnosis is suggested by the 
presence of two or more of these symptoms lasting ≥1 hour. Catatonia 
may coexist with delirium.
Conditions Characterized by Hallucinations
Hallucinations—the apparent perception of something that does not 
exist in reality—may be an indication of a medical condition, poor 
visual or auditory function, the ingestion of a substance, or a psychi­
atric illness (see Fig. 31.3). The vast majority of hallucinations in pre­
adolescent children do not ultimately represent a serious psychiatric 
or medical illness. Hallucinations occur in as many as 5% of normal 
children.
The first step in evaluating hallucinations is to assess the patient’s 
mental status. Most children with hallucinations have an otherwise 
normal mental status. If the primary alteration in mental status is 
confusion, medical delirium should be considered (see Chapter 41). 
The presence of delusions—beliefs that are maintained despite being 
objectively contraindicated by reality—should prompt consideration 
of psychosis, schizophrenia, or mood disorders. Most hallucinations 
associated with delirium are visual, whereas those observed in psy­
choses are typically auditory. Auditory hallucinations may be per­
ceived as chatter or as a voice that chastises the child. Culture can 
often shape the content of hallucinations and whether the sensory 
experiences are considered worrisome or abnormal by the patient 
and family. Children with an otherwise normal mental status may 
hallucinate in the context of fantasy, grief, sleep, acute phobia, and 
fever.
Fantasy-­Based Hallucinations
To define a subjective perceptual experience as hallucinatory, the per­
son experiencing the phenomenon has to be able to distinguish imag­
ination from reality. As they develop, children gradually learn that 
imagination and reality are two separate entities. Children under 3 
years of age confuse reality with imagination. By 4 years of age, chil­
dren understand the concept of “pretend,” and by 7 years of age, they 
understand imagination but act as though the fantasy is still real. They 
may still describe having an imaginary friend. By 8 years of age, most 
children are reliably able to distinguish inner thoughts from voices. 
Some children are involved in more fantasy than are their peers and 
may engage in fantasy for entertainment or comfort. On occasion, they 
may get carried away by their fantasies and become quite fearful. Most 
of these children proceed to healthy psychologic adjustment. Children 
who have intellectual disability or other developmental delays may, 
appropriately, have imaginary friends or voices into adolescence.
Grief-­Induced Hallucinations
The grieving process following the death of a loved one may include 
visual hallucinations of the deceased. These hallucinations can also be 
auditory, in which the child hears the voice of the deceased speaking 
to the child. The child’s and the family’s reaction to these hallucina­
tions is dependent on their cultural and religious beliefs. Some families 
may perceive these events as a supernatural or a religious experience. 
Although these experiences may be frightening to some young chil­
dren, many find reassurance or comfort.
Hallucinations Associated with Sleep
Dreamlike hallucinations can occur during various stages of sleep. 
Some may be considered bizarre by the patient and may include par­
tial preservation of consciousness. Hypnagogic hallucinations occur 
during sleep onset and hypnopompic hallucinations occur during 
awakening. The overall prevalence of hypnagogic hallucinations is as 
high as 37%; that of hypnopompic hallucinations is as high as 12.5%. 
Patients with insomnia or excessive daytime sleepiness may be more 
likely to experience sleep-­related hallucinations. As many as 30% of 
patients with narcolepsy experience both hypnagogic and hypnopom­
pic hallucinations. These hallucinations can also occur as part of PTSD, 
in which case they often take the form of a flashback or re-­experiencing 
of the traumatic event. Night terrors may resemble hallucinations, 
though are a distinct entity of non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal. 
The DSM-­5 defines sleep terror disorder as recurrent episodes of night 
terrors. During episodes, the child appears to arouse from sleep and 
cries or screams inconsolably, may speak unintelligibly, and exhibits 
What is the primary symptom?
Hallucinations
No
No
Schizophrenia
No
Other cause of
   delayed development
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Yes
Delirium
Substance intoxication
   or withdrawal
Autoimmune encephalitis
Yes
Fantasy-based
   hallucinations
Grief
Sleep-associated
  hallucinations
Night terrors
Phobic hallucinations
Febrile hallucinations
Yes
Persistent delay in development
Are there repetitive patterns of behavior
and deficits in social communication?
Are there other mental
status changes?
Does mental status
fluctuate?
Fig. 31.3  Evaluation of abnormal mental status findings.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
525
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
TABLE 31.8  Antigenic Targets in Autoimmune Encephalitis with Associated Psychiatric 
Features
Commonly 
Targeted 
Antigens
Antigen Description 
or Epitope
Main Encephalopathy 
Syndrome and 
Psychiatric Features
Other Associated Neurologic 
Disorders
Main Psychiatric Features
NMDAR
Ligand-­gated ion channel
Encephalopathy (frequently 
extralimbic manifestation)
Post–herpes simplex encephalitis 
relapse with chorea; pediatric 
dyskinetic encephalitis lethargica; 
idiopathic epilepsy; immunotherapy-­
responsive dementia 
Anxiety, agitation, bizarre behavior, 
catatonia, delusional or paranoid 
thoughts, and visual or auditory hal­
lucinations; also movement disorder, 
seizures, autonomic instability 
LGI1
VGKC-­associated and 
AMPAR-­associated 
secreted molecule
Limbic encephalitis with or 
without faciobrachial dys­
tonic seizures; prominent 
hyponatremia
Morvan syndrome, neuromyotonia, 
epilepsy, REM sleep behavior disor­
der; rarely isolated movement disorder 
(parkinsonism, dystonia, chorea) 
Confusion, hallucinations, depression 
CASPR2
VGKC-­associated adhesion 
molecule
Morvan syndrome: periph­
eral nerve hyperexcitabil­
ity, autonomic instability, 
encephalopathy
Limbic encephalitis, neuromyotonia, 
epilepsy; rarely isolated movement 
disorder (chorea, myoclonus) 
Confusion, hallucinations, agitation, 
delusions 
AMPAR
Ligand-­gated ion channel
Limbic encephalitis
NA
Personality change, psychosis, apathy, 
agitation, confabulation 
GABAAR
Ligand-­gated ion channel
Limbic encephalitis with 
refractory seizures
Varied presentations 
Confusion, anxiety, affective changes 
(including depression), hallucinations, 
catatonia 
GABABR
Ligand-­gated ion channel
Limbic encephalitis with 
refractory status epilep­
ticus
Opsoclonus-­myoclonus; cerebellar 
ataxia; PERM 
Psychosis, agitation, catatonia 
Hu
Intracellular RNA-­binding 
protein
Limbic encephalitis or 
limbic encephalomyelitis 
occurring with small cell 
lung cancer
Painful sensory neuropathy; cerebellar 
ataxia 
Confusion, depression, less commonly 
hallucinations 
Ma2
Intracellular protein involved 
in mRNA processing or 
biogenesis
Limbic encephalitis occurring 
with testicular germ cell 
tumors; REM sleep disorder 
is common; frequent short-­
term memory problems
Visual dysfunction, gait disturbance, 
hypokinesia 
Confusion and anxiety, including obses­
sions and compulsions 
D2R
Metabotropic receptor
So-­called basal ganglia 
encephalitis with prominent 
movement disorder (i.e., 
dystonia, parkinsonism, 
chorea, tics)
Sydenham chorea, PANDAS 
Agitation, depression, psychosis, 
emotional lability 
DPPX
Auxiliary subunit of Kv4.2 
potassium channels
Limbic encephalitis with 
enteropathy
PERM 
Amnesia, delirium, psychosis, depres­
sion
MGluR5
Metabotropic glutamate 
receptor
So-­called Ophelia syndrome: 
limbic encephalitis in 
association with Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis with­
out lymphoma, or nonparaneoplastic 
limbic encephalitis; immunotherapy-­
responsive prosopagnosia 
Depression, anxiety, delusions, visual 
and auditory hallucinations, personal­
ity change, anterograde amnesia 
GFAP
Intracellular (cytosolic) glial 
intermediate filament 
protein
Corticosteroid-­responsive 
meningoencephalitis or 
encephalitis, with or with­
out myelitis; presents with 
subacute onset of memory 
loss and confusion 
NA
Occurred in 29% in one study but not 
described in detail; psychosis and 
behavioral changes reported 
AK5, adenylate kinase 5; AMPAR, α-­amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazolepropionic acid receptor; CASPR2, contactin-­associated protein-­like 2; D2R, 
dopamine receptor D2; DPPX, dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­like protein-­6; GABAAR, γ-­aminobutyric acid type A receptor; GABABR, γ-­aminobutyric acid type 
B receptor; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; LGI1, leucine-­rich glioma-­inactivated 1; MGluR5, metabotropic glutamate receptor 5; NA, not applica­
ble; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor; PANDAS, pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections; 
PERM, progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus; REM, rapid eye movement; VGKC, voltage-­gated potassium channel.
Modified from Pollak TA, Lennox BR, Muller S, et al. Autoimmune psychosis: an international consensus on an approach to the diagnosis and man­
agement of psychosis of suspected autoimmune origin. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(1):93–108.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
526
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
intense fear and autonomic arousal (e.g., tachycardia, sweating). On 
awakening, the child has no memory of the event. Episodes of night 
terrors last from 1 to 10 minutes. Night terrors occur during stage 
4 sleep and not during rapid eye movement sleep and tend to occur 
in the first half of the night. Over 30% of 18-­month-­old toddlers will 
experience a night terror, with the prevalence decreasing to 2.2% by 
adulthood. Seizures, especially of the temporal and frontal lobes, can 
produce fear and complex behavior patterns resembling night terrors, 
and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of night terrors.
Phobic Hallucinations
Acute phobic hallucinations occur in preschool-­aged children and 
consist of episodes of hallucinations coupled with terror. These hal­
lucinations last from 10 to 60 minutes and may occur any time of 
the day but mostly at night. During episodes, the child may become 
very frightened, state that bugs are crawling over them and attempt to 
remove them, cry, or hide. Because of the acute change in mental status, 
this condition must be differentiated from the medical and psychotic 
causes of hallucinations, such as delirium. The cause of acute phobic 
hallucinations is unknown. Phobic hallucinations are most frequently 
seen in children with a personal or family history of anxiety. Symptoms 
usually last 1–3 days and diminish over 1–2 weeks.
Febrile Hallucinations
Preschool-­aged children may hallucinate during high fevers. The hallu­
cinations are temporary and are not associated with future psychiatric 
disorders. The phenomenon may represent a mild form of delirium 
and typically requires only reassurance for management, as well as 
evaluation for the source of fever. Persistent hallucinations, impaired 
consciousness, and changes in cognition, such as not recognizing par­
ents or difficulty completing previously accomplished tasks, suggest 
frank delirium and require further evaluation.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a disorder of chronic, persistent psychosis (loss of 
reality testing) that often presents in adolescence or young adulthood. 
Symptoms are divided into four domains: positive symptoms, negative 
symptoms, cognitive symptoms, and mood symptoms. Positive symp­
toms consist of psychotic symptoms (such as hallucinations), delusions 
(fixed false beliefs), and disorganized speech and behavior (loose asso­
ciations). Negative symptoms consist of social withdrawal, flattening 
of affect, alogia (i.e., speaking in brief sentences), abulia, apathy, and 
avolition (i.e., lack of desire to do anything) (see Table 31.5). The flat 
affect may consist of a reduction in body language, lack of eye contact, 
and emotional unresponsiveness (see Table 31.5). Cognitive symp­
toms are characterized by deficits in executive function and an inability 
to appreciate and react appropriately to social cues. Mood symptoms 
often consist of depression though may also consist of context-­
inappropriate cheerfulness or sadness. The symptoms may fluctuate 
over time, and as such, schizophrenia is divided into two phases: pro­
dromal and active. Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia specify two or 
more of the following characteristic symptoms:
	1.	 Delusions
	2.	 Hallucinations
	3.	 Disorganized speech
	4.	 Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
	5.	 Negative symptoms, such as flat affect
At least one symptom must be delusions, hallucinations, or dis­
organized speech and the symptoms must appear in the context of 
significant social and educational dysfunction. There must also be 
continuous indications of the disturbance for at least 6 months, with 
at least 1 month of active-­phase symptoms. Medical causes and mood 
disorders need to be excluded (see Table 31.4). Orientation and mem­
ory are usually intact in schizophrenia.
During the prodromal phase, the patient exhibits progressive 
negative symptoms; these include social withdrawal, flattened affect, 
or eccentric behaviors. During this period, the patient may also have 
unusual beliefs that are not of the magnitude of true delusions or hallu­
cinations. The patient may have magical thinking or may perceive that 
someone is talking to them, but no words are hallucinated.
During the active phase of schizophrenia, the patient has at least 
two characteristic symptoms for more than 1 month, unless the 
TABLE 31.9  Red Flags and Features 
Suggesting Secondary Etiologies of Psychosis
Atypical Features
 • Normal prior to event
 • Very early (≤13 yr) age of onset
 • Acute or subacute onset (days, ≤1 mo)
 • Catatonia
 • Dyskinesias
 • Isolated misidentification delusion (Capgras syndrome)
 • Depressed level of consciousness
 • Cognitive and recent memory decline
 • Poor orientation
 • Intractability despite adequate therapy
 • Rapidly progressive and/or fluctuating (polymorphic) symptoms
 • Multimodel hallucinations: visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory
History
 • Infectious prodrome
 • New or worsening headache
 • Paresthesias
 • Past, current substance misuse
 • Recent onset incontinence
 • Anorexia/weight loss
 • Risk factors for cerebrovascular disease or central nervous system infec­
tions
 • Malignancy
 • Immunocompromised status
 • Head trauma
 • Seizures
 • Hepatobiliary disorders
 • Systemic lupus erythematosus/other autoimmune diseases
 • Biological relatives with similar medical complaints
Physical Examination
 • Autonomic hyperactivity: tachycardia, hypertension, mydriasis, sleep 
disturbance
 • Incoordination, or gait difficulty
 • Toxidrome
 • Abnormal neurologic exam: upper and lower motor neuron focal findings
 • Movement disorder
Diagnostic Abnormalities
 • Abnormal electroencephalogram (extreme delta brush, diffuse slowing)
 • Abnormal cerebrospinal fluid (pleocytosis: greater than five lymphocytes)
 • Positive urine toxicology
 • Screening laboratory tests including N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor and 
other antibodies
 • Abnormal neuroimaging studies (unilateral or bilateral hippocampal/
medial temporal lobe hyperdensities: limbic encephalitis)
 • Hyponatremia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
527
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
symptoms have been shortened by treatment. The most common delu­
sions in this disorder are persecutory (e.g., the patient is being spied 
on) and referential (e.g., external events or comments are directed 
toward the patient). Other less common delusions may be somatic 
(e.g., internal organs are replaced by others), religious, or grandiose in 
nature. Hallucinations are most commonly auditory but may emanate 
from any sensory modality.
The disorganized speech may be incomprehensible, and the 
patient may be unable to organize a logical conversation. The behavior 
problems consist of inappropriate dress, disheveled appearance, unpro­
voked aggression, and catatonia, decreased responsiveness to the envi­
ronment (see Table 31.10). If symptoms have not been present for 6 
months, the provisional diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is 
applied. Approximately 65% of patients with schizophreniform disor­
der have symptoms that last longer than 6 months and are reclassified 
as having schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia is exceedingly rare and is often a misdiagnosis 
prior to 13 years of age. If diagnosed prior to this age, it is labeled as 
childhood-­onset or very early-­onset schizophrenia. Furthermore, 
onset prior to age 13 requires a careful evaluation to look for atypical fea­
tures and to exclude medical causes of psychosis, especially drug ingestion 
and autoimmune encephalitis (see Tables 31.8 and 31.9). Prevalence is 
approximately 2.5/100,000 in children under 13 years of age and 0.5% 
in adolescents. The differential diagnosis of schizophrenia consists of 
other causes of psychosis (especially autoimmune encephalitis), delir­
ium, dementia, mood disorder, pervasive developmental disorders, 
and substance ingestion (see Tables 31.4 and 31.9). The prognosis of 
schizophrenia is guarded, with significant morbidity and mortality. The 
risk of suicide is high early in the illness. The disorder is chronic and is 
associated with exacerbations and remissions. Even with optimal ther­
apy, patients with schizophrenia may have significant social deficits, 
poor initiative, and abnormal thought processes.
Conditions Characterized by Fluctuating Mental 
Status
Delirium
Delirium is characterized by deficits in cognition and consciousness 
that develop over a short time (see Chapter 41). Diagnostic criteria 
include the following:
	1.	 Disturbance in awareness and attention (i.e., reduced ability to 
direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention)
	2.	 Change in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation, language 
disturbance, perceptual disturbance) that is not better accounted 
for by a pre-­existing, established, or evolving dementia
	3.	 Disturbance develops over a short period of time and tends to fluc­
tuate over time
	4.	 There is evidence of a medical, substance-­induced, or toxin-­induced 
cause
Children with delirium may misinterpret auditory or visual stimuli 
or may have actual hallucinations. The hallucinations of delirium are 
different from those seen in psychosis in that they are more often visual 
and acute in onset, whereas those resulting from psychoses are usually 
auditory and are subacute or chronic.
Besides altered sensorium, patients often have decreased sleep or 
reversal of the sleep/wake cycle and may exhibit psychomotor agitation 
or retardation. Delirium is indicative of global cerebral dysfunction. 
Because causes of delirium are potentially life threatening, an expedi­
ent and comprehensive medical evaluation is needed.
Substance Intoxication
Intoxication is defined as clinically significant behavioral or psycho­
logic changes following the use of a substance (Table 31.11). The most 
common signs of intoxication are changes in perception, wakeful­
ness, attention, thinking, judgment, coordination, and interpersonal 
TABLE 31.10  Catatonia
Excitement: Extreme hyperactivity; constant motor unrest, which is apparently nonpurposeful
Immobility/stupor: Extreme hypoactivity, immobility; minimally responsive to stimuli
Mutism: Verbally unresponsive or minimally responsive
Staring: Fixed gaze, little or no visual scanning of environment, decreased blinking
Posturing/catalepsy: Maintains posture(s), including mundane (e.g., sitting or standing for hours without reacting)
Grimacing: Maintenance of odd facial expressions
Echopraxia/echolalia: Mimics of examiner’s movements/speech
Stereotypy: Repetitive, non-­goal-­directed motor activity (e.g., finger-­play; repeatedly touching, patting, or rubbing self)
Mannerisms: Odd, purposeful movements (hopping or walking tiptoe, saluting passersby, exaggerated caricatures of mundane movements)
Verbigeration: Repetition of phrases or sentences
Rigidity: Maintenance of a rigid posture despite efforts to be moved
Negativism: Apparently motiveless resistance to instructions or to attempts to move/examine the patient; contrary behavior does the opposite of the instruction
Waxy flexibility: During reposturing of the patient, offers initial resistance before allowing themselves to be repositioned (similar to that of bending a warm candle)
Withdrawal: Refusal to eat, drink, or make eye contact
Impulsivity: Suddenly engaging in inappropriate behavior (e.g., runs down the hallway, starts screaming, or takes off clothes) without provocation; afterward, cannot 
explain
Automatic obedience: Exaggerated cooperation with examiner’s request, or repeated movements that are requested once
Passive obedience (mitgehen): Raising arm in response to light pressure of finger, despite instructions to the contrary
Negativism (gegenhalten): Resistance to passive movement that is proportional to strength of the stimulus; response seems automatic rather than willful
Ambitendency: Appears stuck in indecisive, hesitant motor movements
Grasp reflex: Striking the patient’s open palm with two extended fingers of the examiner’s hand results in automatic closure of the patient’s hand
Perseveration: Repeatedly returns to the same topic or persists with the same movements
Combativeness: Belligerence or aggression, usually in an undirected manner, without explanation
Autonomic abnormality: Abnormality of body temperature (fever), blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, inappropriate sweating
From Dhossche DM, Wachtel LE. Catatonia is hidden in plain sight among different pediatric disorders: a review article. Pediatr Neurol. 
2010;43:307–315.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
528
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
behavior. Physical findings suggest particular classes of medications 
and cluster into recognizable patterns of signs and symptoms termed 
toxidromes (Table 31.12). If the suspected cause of altered mental sta­
tus in a patient is substance intoxication, urine and blood toxicology 
testing should be performed.
Patients who present with substance intoxication should be evalu­
ated for whether the ingestion represented an attempt at self-­harm or 
suicide. Some substance intoxications will require medical hospitaliza­
tion, if severe. Patients being treated for psychiatric illnesses may be 
at risk of two particular toxidromes related to their medical therapy, 
serotonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Serotonin Syndrome
The triad of cognitive-­behavioral changes, autonomic instability, and 
neuromuscular signs and symptoms are characteristic of the central 
serotonin syndrome. Patients frequently manifest behavior alterations 
that include confusion, disorientation, agitation, and irritability. Coma, 
anxiety, seizures, hallucinations, and hypomania are less common.
Central serotonin syndrome results from excessive central ner­
vous system serotonin activity from dietary supplements or the use 
of substances that modify central nervous system serotonin levels. 
Most commonly, these agents are selective serotonin reuptake inhib­
itors or other substances that inhibit serotonin reuptake, includ­
ing tricyclic antidepressants, meperidine, dextromethorphan, and 
TABLE 31.11  Potential Behavioral and 
Cognitive Manifestations of Substance Abuse
Depression
Panic attacks
Anxiety
Hallucinations
Delusions
Paranoia
Mania
Depersonalization
Disinhibition
Impulsivity
Cognitive deficits:
Attention
Calculation
Executive tasks
Memory
Fatigue
Sedation
From Perez DL, Murray ED, Price BH. Depression and psychosis in 
neurological practice. In: Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy 
SL, eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2015.
TABLE 31.12  Clinically Relevant Toxidromes
Toxidrome
Clinical Findings
Example Agents
Cholinergic
Diarrhea, fecal incontinence, enuresis, miosis, tachycardia followed by bra­
dycardia, lacrimation, sialorrhea, sweating, muscle fasciculations followed 
by weakness and/or paralysis, altered mental status
Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides
Amanita muscaria
Nicotine
Anticholinergic
Agitated delirium, flushing, decreased sweating, tachycardia, mydriasis, 
urinary retention, decreased peristalsis, hyperthermia
Atropine
Benztropine
Scopolamine
Diphenhydramine
Sympathomimetic
Mydriasis, hyperthermia, seizures, hyperactivity, hypertension, tachycardia, 
diaphoresis, delusions, piloerection
Cocaine
Methamphetamine
MDMA
Sympatholytic
Miosis, hypotension, bradycardia or reflex tachycardia, CNS depression
Clonidine
Methyldopa
Oxymetazoline
Opioid
Miosis, CNS depression, respiratory depression or apnea, may have hypo­
tension
Heroin
Morphine
Fentanyl
Oxycodone
Serotonin syndrome
Mental status changes, autonomic hyperactivity, neuromuscular abnormali­
ties, akathisia, tremor, clonus, muscle hypertonicity, hyperthermia
Sertraline
Fluoxetine
Citalopram
Linezolid
Trazodone
Meperidine
Tramadol
Neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome
Fever, “lead pipe” muscular rigidity, altered mental status, autonomic 
dysfunction (in setting of recent treatment with neuroleptics)
Haloperidol
Chlorpromazine
Promethazine
Prochlorperazine
Ziprasidone
Quetiapine
CNS, central nervous system; MDMA, methylenedioxymethamphetamine.
From Skolnik AB, Wilcox SR. General toxicology and toxidromes. In: Critical Care Secrets. 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2013:545–551.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
529
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). Other substances, 
such as amphetamines, cocaine, and levodopa, increase synaptic 
serotonin release, while others, such as lithium and lysergic acid 
diethylamide, are serotonin agonists. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
inhibit serotonin degradation.
Autonomic features of serotonin syndrome include hyperther­
mia, diaphoresis, and tachycardia. Hypertension, mydriasis, and 
tachypnea are less common. Neuromuscular features include myoc­
lonus, hyperreflexia, tremor, restlessness, hyperactivity, and ataxia. 
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is included in the differential 
diagnosis and is distinguished by neurologic exam since neurolep­
tic malignant syndrome presents with hyporeflexia and lead-­pipe 
muscular rigidity (Chapter 38).
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
The hallmark of neuroleptic malignant syndrome is severe general­
ized rigidity, fever, and altered mental status consisting of delirium or 
stupor. Other findings include diaphoresis, significant creatine kinase 
elevation, autonomic instability, urinary incontinence, tachypnea, and 
pallor. While rare, as many as 0.02% of individuals treated with anti­
psychotics are affected and fatality rates are as high as 20% if the condi­
tion is not recognized and managed appropriately. Differentiation from 
serotonin syndrome is based on medication review, and the presence of 
significant rigidity, which serotonin syndrome lacks.
CONDITIONS CHARACTERIZED BY PHYSICAL 
FINDINGS OR COMPLAINTS
Parents may present to the primary care provider with unexplained 
physical complaints on behalf of the child. These complaints may be 
inconsistent with the results of the medical evaluation and may fail 
to respond to any medical therapy. These unexplained physical com­
plaints may be the manner in which a patient copes with a stressor. 
The patient may not be aware of the stressor, nor may the patient 
realize that these symptoms emanate from their effort to cope with 
the problem. The clinician should empathize with the patient, vali­
date the presence of the symptoms, then state which potentially seri­
ous medical conditions are reasonably felt to be unlikely based on 
the patient’s history, examination, and diagnostic evaluation. The cli­
nician should highlight the notion that stress can produce or worsen 
symptoms and should recommend that the possibility of stress be 
evaluated while the clinician continues to monitor the patient for 
other medical illnesses. Key to the evaluation is determining whether 
the symptoms are more concerning primarily to the parent or to the 
child.
Conditions Characterized by Parental Concerns 
(Table 31.13)
Parental Worry
Parents may worry excessively about their child’s health because of a 
preceding life-­threatening event or illness, because of mistrust of the 
medical profession, or as an expression of their own fear of having a 
serious condition themselves. These parents do not invent the child’s 
symptoms but instead experience an exaggerated worry about symp­
toms. The evaluation of a parent’s excessive concern over the child’s 
health may be further subdivided into specific concerns versus general 
medical worries.
Specific medical concerns are often related to prior life-­threatening 
events or illnesses, or previous negative experiences with the health 
care system. Reassurance after an appropriate and thorough medical 
evaluation may reduce parental anxiety. When the parent reveals the 
past incident that led to distrust of the reassurances of doctors, the cli­
nician may be able to reduce the parent’s worry through open discus­
sion on the differences between past and current events.
If the parents report that they worry about everything, the clinician 
should determine whether this is a recent development or a chronic 
concern. Parents with an acute onset of general medical worries about 
their children may suffer from a recent stressor or may have anxiety, 
depression, or OCD. Reassurance alone may be insufficient under these 
circumstances and the parents’ generalized worries may not improve 
until their own symptoms improve. In such a case, providing parents 
with resources for their own mental health treatment may be needed.
Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (Formerly 
Munchausen Syndrome by Proxy) (see also Chapter 30)
This disorder is a condition in which the patient either feigns or pro­
duces symptoms or physical findings in their child to fulfill an under­
lying need to assume the caregiver role for a sick child. There is no 
external reward for these symptoms, in contrast to malingering, in 
which the symptoms result in either economic gain or avoidance of 
responsibilities.
Red flags include unexplained and prolonged illnesses, incongru­
ous symptoms and signs, ineffective medical treatments, and prior epi­
sodes of sudden infant death syndrome. The offending caregiver may 
not seem worried about the child’s medical condition. Some caregiv­
ers may form an unusually close relationship with the medical staff; 
however, there are many exceptions, in which the caregiver is instead 
neglectful, disruptive, and argumentative.
When this entity is suspected, the first step in evaluation is to ensure 
the child’s safety, which may require hospitalization on a medical ward. 
TABLE 31.13  Diagnostic Features of Malingering and Factitious Disorders
Malingering
Factitious Disorder (Previously 
Known as Munchausen)
Factitious Disorder Imposed on 
Another
Primary gain
+/− (primary goal with malingering is 
external reward rather than sick role)
Goal is to receive medical care/interventions
Parent produces symptoms in child to receive 
medical care/obtain sick role for child
Secondary gain
+
Economic gain or avoidance of respon­
sibilities
−
−
Age of onset
More common in adults
More common in adults; can start in adolescence/
childhood
Adults in a caretaker role
Things to look 
out for
Misuse of resources/fraudulent 
behaviors
Avoidance of unnecessary procedures/treatments, 
especially more invasive procedures; monitor for 
signs of “doctor shopping”
Concerns for child maltreatment and abuse; 
safety concerns for children and families
A “+” indicates symptoms are seen in the disorder. A “-” indicates symptoms are not seen in the disorder.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
530
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
With safety assured, the next step is to develop a definitive investigative 
plan with a multidisciplinary team consisting of mental health profes­
sionals, physicians, social services, child abuse specialists, and the legal 
system. This plan will be most successful when combined with thor­
ough and timely documentation of findings and concerns.
Conditions Characterized by the Patient’s Physical 
Complaints
Psychologic and social stressors may result in the development of 
physical symptoms. These symptoms seem real to the child and cause a 
great deal of distress. Extreme manifestations of these concerns include 
the somatic symptom disorders (Table 31.14).
Illness Anxiety Disorder (Hypochondriasis)
In illness anxiety disorder, the child either fears that they have a serious 
illness or focuses on minor discomforts with a worry that they may 
have a life-­threatening illness. The hallmark is not the physical symp­
tom itself but the anxiety over what the symptom represents. Illness 
anxiety disorder is often associated with other anxiety and depressive 
disorders; consequently, these patients may appear sad, irritable, or 
fatigued and should be screened for suicidal ideation or intent, as well 
as evidence of other comorbid psychiatric disorders.
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Somatic symptom disorder requires the presence of a physical symp­
tom that is distressing. That symptom must then lead to one of the 
following three behaviors:
	1.	 Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of 
one’s symptoms
	2.	 Persistently high level of anxiety about health or the symptom
	3.	 Excessive time and energy devoted to the health concern
In addition, the patient must have at least one symptom for 6 months. 
This is separate from illness anxiety disorder as the patient’s complaints 
are focused on the symptom, not anxiety about developing a life-­
threatening illness. It is important to note that, in contrast to conversion 
disorder, the symptom does not have to be medically unexplainable.
Associated comorbid conditions are major depressive disorder, 
panic disorder, substance abuse, borderline personality disorder, and 
antisocial personality disorder. This is a chronic condition that rarely 
remits. The psychiatric differential diagnosis is extensive and includes 
major depression, schizophrenia with somatic delusions, panic disor­
ders (in which symptoms occur only during an attack), generalized 
anxiety disorder, and factitious disorder.
Factitious Disorder
Factitious disorder consists of a patient inducing symptoms or signs to 
assume the role of being sick and to receive care. There is no secondary 
gain, such as escaping responsibilities or receiving money, as is found 
with malingering. The onset of this disorder usually occurs in early 
adulthood; it can also occur in childhood. Patients are at risk for sub­
stance use disorders (secondary to using agents to induce symptoms) 
as well as for complications from associated diagnostic evaluations and 
unnecessary surgical procedures. On confrontation, they may either 
change their symptoms or try to seek medical care elsewhere.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom 
Disorder)
The diagnosis of conversion disorder is based on the presence of one or 
more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function. Symp­
toms may take the form of weakness, paresthesias, vision changes, or 
paroxysmal episodes of erratic movements that may be mistaken for 
seizure activity. The history, physical examination, and neurologic 
diagnostic evaluation, including the use of long-­term video electro­
encephalogram monitoring in the case of paroxysmal movements, 
demonstrate incompatibility between the symptom and any medical 
condition. Unlike somatic symptom disorder, in which patients have 
excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors associated with the volun­
tary motor or sensory function, conversion disorder is an unconscious 
phenomenon.
Onset is usually in late adolescence or early adulthood. A typical 
episode is acute, follows a recent stressor, and is of relatively short 
duration, typically <4 weeks. The symptoms may solve a psychologic 
conflict. For example, complaints of blindness may prevent a patient 
from being witness to traumatic events in their environment. Common 
childhood stressors associated with conversion disorders are grief, bul­
lying, and abuse. Major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders are 
associated with conversion disorders.
Conditions Characterized by Changes in Eating
The disorders combined under eating disorders (Table 31.15) are most 
often thought of as leading to weight loss. However, these disorders 
may be better conceptualized by their pattern of eating than weight 
changes that may result.
Conditions Characterized by Decreased Eating
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder in which the patient restricts 
caloric intake due to a significant fear of gaining weight and distorted 
body image. There are two subtypes, restricting type and binge-­
eating/purging type. Diagnostic criteria are as follows:
	1.	 Restriction of energy intake leading to a significantly low body 
weight
	2.	 Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat
TABLE 31.14  Diagnostic Features of Conditions Characterized by Patient’s Physical Complaints
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Conversion Disorder
Presenting com­
plaint
Primary concern is the development of 
a serious illness—does not require 
specific symptoms
Primary concern is a specific symptom; generally 
presents with a more specific physical complaint
Presents with new-­onset neurologic or 
physical symptom; patient may or may not 
be concerned about this new symptom
Medical 
correlation to 
complaint
Generally present with more vague com­
plaints than a specific symptom; not 
usually explained by medical work-­up
Patient can have a medical explanation for their 
symptom; however, the worry about the seri­
ousness of the symptom is disproportionate or 
excessive
Physical and neurologic findings do not 
correlate with patient’s presentation
Course of disease
Often associated with other anxiety 
disorders; can be chronic
Chronic; rarely remits
Generally acute onset; can recur with same 
or different presenting symptom(s)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
531
CHAPTER 31  Emotional and Behavioral Symptoms
	3.	 Distorted perception of body size, undue influence of body weight 
or shape on self-­evaluation, or lack of recognition of severity of low 
body weight
Patients with anorexia nervosa will often go to great lengths to hide 
their intent and symptoms, oftentimes by wearing baggy clothes, by 
explaining that excessive and vigorous exercise is required for sports par­
ticipation, by rationalizing food restriction as health consciousness, by 
complaining that allergies ruin the taste and smell of food, or by conceal­
ing purging behaviors, such as induced vomiting or diarrhea. Because 
of frequent concealment, the detection of these behaviors is challenging.
The prevalence of anorexia nervosa is as high as 1%; almost 90% 
of cases occur in females. Although this condition is associated with 
higher socioeconomic status, it can occur in persons from a variety of 
socioeconomic backgrounds and in all ethnic groups.
Besides weight loss, patients with anorexia nervosa may develop 
symptoms of depression or may withdraw socially secondary to the 
physiology of starvation. Actual loss of appetite is rare, though patients 
with anorexia have been found to have higher levels of leptin, which 
suppresses appetite. Patients with anorexia may develop obsessive-­
compulsive behavior regarding food, such as collecting recipes or 
hoarding food. These patients may also have inflexible thinking or feel 
the need to control their environment.
Anorexia nervosa may affect every organ system, and presenting 
symptoms and signs are secondary to malnutrition and purging. The 
symptoms of malnutrition are fatigue, depression, and amenorrhea. 
The physical findings of malnutrition are bradycardia, hypothermia, 
hypotension, emaciation, hair loss, yellow skin, and lanugo. If the 
patient controls caloric intake through purging via vomiting, findings 
may include hypertrophic salivary glands, dental erosions secondary 
to gastric acid irritation, and abrasions or calluses on the dorsum of 
the hand secondary to manual induction of vomiting (Russell sign). 
The metabolic abnormalities related to starvation and purging con­
sist of leukopenia, anemia, hyperamylasemia from parotid gland 
irritation, vomiting-­related metabolic alkalosis or laxative-­associated 
metabolic acidosis, thyroid abnormalities, hypomagnesemia, hypo­
calcemia, hypozincemia, and electrolyte abnormalities resulting from 
diuretic abuse and dehydration. These patients also have regression of 
the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis, which results in low estrogen 
levels in girls and low testosterone levels in boys.
In evaluating an adolescent with unexplained weight loss, the exam­
iner must rule out the medical causes of cachexia such as malignancy, 
malabsorption (celiac disease), or inflammatory bowel disease. Inter­
view data that support a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa are a restrictive 
dietary history, distorted perception of body shape, and rationalization 
of the causative behaviors. Once the medical causes for weight loss 
have been ruled out, the examiner must consider the psychiatric dif­
ferential diagnosis for anorexia nervosa and its associated comorbid 
conditions. These conditions are major depressive disorder, the abuse 
of stimulants, OCD, social phobia, body dysmorphic disorder, and 
bulimia nervosa. If the patient has symptoms of depression that fail to 
resolve with the correction of malnutrition, the clinician should also 
consider the diagnosis of major depressive disorder.
Anorexia nervosa is associated with both life-­threatening psycho­
logic conditions (i.e., suicide) and medical conditions (e.g., electrolyte 
abnormalities, cardiac failure, starvation). The lifelong rate of mortality 
secondary to anorexia nervosa in patients who require hospitalization 
is more than 10%. Some of the possible medical complications are oste­
oporosis resulting from hypocalcemia with low serum estrogen levels, 
cardiomyopathy, anemia, sepsis resulting from malnutrition-­induced 
immunodeficiency, arrhythmias resulting from electrolyte abnormal­
ities, and superior mesenteric artery syndrome. Superior mesenteric 
artery syndrome, which is characterized by postprandial vomiting and 
pain secondary to intermittent gastric outlet obstruction, is more com­
mon in anorexia nervosa as profound weight loss is believed to result 
in the loss of the intraabdominal fat pad between the duodenum and 
superior mesenteric artery.
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
The hallmark of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) is 
avoidance or restriction of food intake in infancy or early childhood 
that is not related to a disturbance in the way in which one’s body 
weight or shape is experienced. The restriction in eating must be asso­
ciated with one or more of the following:
	1.	 Significant weight loss
	2.	 Significant nutritional deficiency
	3.	 Dependence on enteral feeding tubes or supplements
	4.	 Marked interference with psychosocial functioning
Two common reasons that patients develop ARFID are an aver­
sion to the sensory characteristics of food and a conditioned negative 
response to eating. Examples of sensory aversions include extreme 
sensitivity to appearance, color, smell, texture, or taste of food. It is 
separate from “picky eating” in that the restriction leads to one of the 
aforementioned outcomes. A conditioned negative response to eat­
ing could result from an episode of choking, trauma to or traumatic 
investigations of the throat or upper gastrointestinal tract, or repeated 
vomiting. Risk factors for ARFID include anxiety disorders, autism 
spectrum disorder, OCD, ADHD, familial anxiety, gastroesophageal 
reflux disease, vomiting, and other gastrointestinal conditions.
Conditions Characterized by Binge Eating
Bulimia Nervosa
Diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa are as follows:
	1.	 Recurrent episodes of binge eating (eating more than what most 
individuals would eat in a discrete period and a sense of lack of 
control over eating)
	2.	 Recurrent inappropriate purging (compensatory behaviors for 
controlling weight gain, such as induced vomiting, laxative misuse, 
diuretic misuse, prolonged fasting, or excessive exercise)
	3.	 Binge eating and compensatory measures occur at least once a week 
for 3 months
	4.	 Self-­evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight
	5.	 Does not occur within anorexia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is twice as common as anorexia nervosa and has a 
later onset, typically in late adolescence. Unlike anorexia nervosa, there 
is not significant food restriction or low body weight. Like anorexia 
nervosa, it is more common in females (90%) and can occur in any 
socioeconomic background. Almost 90% of patients control their 
weight gain by purging. Other methods for controlling weight are 
excessive exercise and fasting before binge eating.
Comorbid psychologic conditions are common in bulimia nervosa 
and include mood disorders, personality disorders, anxiety disorders, 
and substance use. Approximately 30% of patients who use medica­
tions to control weight also have substance use disorders, typically of 
alcohol or stimulants. In contrast to anorexia nervosa, significant med­
ical complications occur less commonly in bulimia nervosa. If pres­
ent, comorbid medical conditions of bulimia nervosa are associated 
with vomiting or medication abuse. These conditions are esophagitis 
and gastritis, cardiomyopathy (particularly if syrup of ipecac is used 
to induce vomiting), hypokalemia and nephrolithiasis from diuretic 
abuse, metabolic alkalosis from vomiting and metabolic acidosis from 
laxative abuse, and increased amylase levels.
Concealment of symptoms coupled with the lack of cachexia makes 
bulimia nervosa difficult to detect. Some patients may present to the 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
532
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
clinician because of a parent’s detection of binge eating and purging. 
Physical findings that suggest recurrent vomiting are dental erosion, 
parotid hypertrophy, callus abrasions on the dorsum of the hand 
known as Russell sign, and pharyngeal irritation.
Binge-­Eating Disorder
Binge-­eating disorder consists of recurrent binge-­eating episodes 
without compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain. Patients with 
binge-­eating disorder may be of normal weight or overweight. DSM-­5 
criteria are as follows:
	1.	 Recurrent episodes of binge eating (eating more than what most 
individuals would eat in a discrete period and a sense of lack of 
control over eating)
	2.	 Binge-­eating episodes are associated with three of the following:
	
a.	 Eating much more rapidly than normal
	
b.	 Eating until feeling uncomfortably full
	
c.	 Eating large amounts of food when not hungry
	
d.	 Eating alone because of embarrassment by how much one is eat­
ing
	
e.	 Feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty afterward
	3.	 Marked distress regarding binge eating is present
	4.	 Binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week for 3 months
Binge-­eating disorder is distinct from obesity as most individuals 
with obesity do not engage in recurrent binge-­eating episodes. At this 
time, there are limited data regarding the prevalence of binge-­eating 
disorder in youths. In adults, it is roughly twice as common in females.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Suicide is the second leading cause of death in adolescents. Identify­
ing suicidal ideation and intent is crucial in the evaluation of patients 
presenting with changes in mood or behavior. Changes in mood or 
behavior carry a significant burden for patients, their family members, 
and society as a whole. Many psychiatric illnesses have comorbid psy­
chiatric and medical conditions that require thoughtful and deliberate 
assessment, and many psychiatric symptoms may be secondary to an 
underlying medical condition. Red flags include risk-­taking behavior, 
violence, poor school performance, poor attention to personal appear­
ance and hygiene, deteriorating social interaction, reduced appetite, 
weight loss, reduced or excessive sleeping, delusions, and hallucina­
tions (see Table 31.9).
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 31.15  Diagnostic Guidelines for Eating Disorders
Anorexia Nervosa, 
Restricting Type
Anorexia Nervosa, 
Binge/Purge Type
Bulimia Nervosa
Binge-­Eating 
Disorder
BMI/weight
Underweight
Mild: BMI ≥17 kg/m2
Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2
Severe: 15–15.99 kg/m2
Extreme: BMI <15 kg/m2
Underweight
Mild: BMI ≥17 kg/m2
Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2
Severe: 15–15.99 kg/m2
Extreme: BMI <15 kg/m2
May be normal weight or overweight
May be normal weight or 
overweight/obese
Restricting behaviors
+
+
−
−
Purging behaviors 
(including excessive 
exercise, use of 
laxatives, vomiting)
−
+
Must have recurrent binge-­eating or 
purging behaviors in the last 3 mo
+
Must occur at least one time per 
week for 3 mo
−
Episodes of binge 
eating
−
+
Must have recurrent binge-­eating or 
purging behaviors in the last 3 mo
+
Must occur at least one time per 
week for 3 mo
+
Must occur at least one 
time per week for 3 mo
Potential medical 
complications
Hypotension, bradycardia, hypo­
thermia, fatigue, dizziness, 
leukopenia, anemia, thyroid 
abnormalities, amenorrhea, 
electrolyte abnormalities 
(hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, 
hypophosphatemia, hypoglyce­
mia, etc.)
Hypotension, bradycardia, hypother­
mia, fatigue, dizziness, leukopenia, 
anemia, thyroid abnormalities, 
amenorrhea, electrolyte abnor­
malities (can have abnormalities 
consistent with malnutrition and/or 
purging behaviors)
Esophagitis, gastritis, cardiomyopa­
thy (especially w/ use of ipecac), 
electrolyte abnormalities including 
hypokalemia and nephrolithiasis 
from diuretic abuse, metabolic 
alkalosis from vomiting, metabolic 
acidosis from laxative abuse, and 
increased amylase levels.
Obesity, metabolic abnor­
malities
Notable physical 
findings
Signs of malnutrition: emacia­
tion, hair loss, yellow skin, and 
lanugo
Signs of malnutrition: emaciation, 
hair loss, yellow skin, and lanugo
If engaging in recurrent vomiting can 
also have dental erosion, parotid 
hypertrophy, Russell sign, and 
pharyngeal irritation
Suggestive of recurrent vomiting: dental 
erosion, parotid hypertrophy, Russell 
sign, and pharyngeal irritation
BMI, body mass index.
A “+” indicates symptoms are seen in the disorder. A “-” indicates symptoms are not seen in the disorder.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
532.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Men­
tal Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 
2013.
Dulcan MK. Dulcan’s Textbook of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2nd ed. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2015.
Dulcan MK, Ballard RR, Jha P, et al. Concise Guide to Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 
2017.
Martin A, Bloch MH, Volkmar FR. Lewis’s Child and Adolescent Psychiatry: 
A Comprehensive Textbook. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2017.
History Taking
Carlat D. The Psychiatric Interview: A Practical Guide. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.
Disruptive Behaviors
Dulcan M. Practice parameters for assessment and treatment of children and 
adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:894–921.
Murphy TK, Lewin AB, Storch EA, et al. Practice parameters for assessment 
and treatment of children and adolescents with tic disorders. J Am Acad 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013;52:1341–1359.
Steiner H. Practice parameters for the assessment and treatment of children 
and adolescents with conduct disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
1997;36:1482–1485.
Mood Disorders
Birmaher B, Brent D, AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. Practice param­
eter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with de­
pressive disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:1503–1526.
Gunderson JG. Reducing suicidal risk in borderline personality disorder. J Am 
Med Assoc. 2015;314:2.
March J, Silva S, Petrycki S, et al. Fluoxetine, cognitive-­behavioral therapy, 
and their combination for adolescents with depression: Treatment for 
Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) randomized controlled trial. J 
Am Med Assoc. 2004;292:807–820.
McClellan J, Kowatch R, Findling RL. Practice parameter for the assessment 
and treatment of children and adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am Acad 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:107–125.
Posner K. Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Screener/Recent – Self-­
Report. http://www.cssrs.columbia.edu/scales_practice_cssrs.html.
Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale: initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite 
studies with adolescents and adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:1266–1277.
Anxiety
Bryant RA. Acute stress disorder as a predictor of posttraumatic stress disor­
der: a systematic review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;2:233–239.
Cohen JA, Mannarino AP. Trauma-­focused cognitive behavioural therapy for 
children and parents. J Child Adolesc Ment Health. 2008;4:158–162.
Cohen JA. The Work Group on Quality Issues, AACAP Work Group on Qual­
ity Issues. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children 
and adolescents with posttraumatic stress disorder. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:414–430.
Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse 
and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in 
adults: the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) study. Am J Prev Med. 
1998;4:245–258.
Geller DA, March J. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment 
of children and adolescents with obsessive-­compulsive disorder. Focus. 
2012;3:360–373.
Murphy TK, Gerardi DM, Leckman JF. Pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric 
syndrome. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2014;3:353–374.
Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) Team. Cognitive-­behavior thera­
py, sertraline, and their combination for children and adolescents with 
obsessive-­compulsive disorder: the pediatric OCD treatment study (POTS) 
randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc. 2004;292:1969–1976.
Shulman ST, Reuter CH. Group A streptococcus. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme 
III JW, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 21e. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2020:1440–1450.
Walkup JT, Albano AM, Piacentini J, et al. Cognitive behavioral thera­
py, sertraline, or a combination in childhood anxiety. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359:2753–2766.
Altered Mental Status
Amouri J, Andrews PS, Heckers S, et al. A case of concurrent delirium and 
catatonia in a woman with coronavirus disease 2019. Psychomatics. 2020:15 
(in press).
Ballageer T, Malla A, Manchanda R, et al. Is adolescent-­onset first-­episode 
psychosis different from adult onset? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2005;44:782–789.
Barbagallo M, Vitaliti G, Pavone P, et al. Pediatric autoimmune encephalitis. J 
Pediatr Neurosci. 2017;12(2):130–134.
Beach SR, Praschan NC, Hogan C, et al. Delirium in COVID-­19: a case series 
and exploration of potential mechanisms for central nervous system 
involvement. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 202;65:47–­53.
Biederman J, Petty C, Faraone SV, et al. Phenomenology of childhood psycho­
sis. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2004;192:607–614.
Boeing L, Murray V, Pelosi A, et al. Adolescent-­onset psychosis: prevalence, 
needs and service provision. Br J Psych. 2007;190:18–26.
Butler M, Pollak TA, Rooney AG, et al. Neuropsychiatric complications of 
COVID-­19. BMJ. 2020;371:m3871.
Cellucci T, Van Mater H, Graus F, et al. Clinical approach to the diagnosis of 
autoimmune encephalitis in the pediatric patient. Neurol Neuroimmunol 
Neuroinflamm. 2020;7:e633.
Gochman P, Miller R, Rapoport JL. Childhood-­onset schizophrenia: the chal­
lenge of diagnosis. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13:321–322.
Hatherill S, Flisher AJ. Delirium in children and adolescents: a systematic 
review of the literature. J Psychosom Res. 2010;68:337–344.
Keshavan MS, Kaneko Y. Secondary psychoses: an update. World Psychiatry. 
2013;12:4–15.
Lee SK, Lee ST. The laboratory diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis. J Epilep­
sy Res. 2016;6:45–52.
McClellan J, Werry J. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment 
of children and adolescents with schizophrenia. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry. 2001;40:4S–23S.
McKee J, Brahm N. Medical mimics: differential diagnostic considerations for 
psychiatric symptoms. Ment Health Clin. 2016;6(6):289–296.
Mormando C, Francis A. Catatonia revived: a unique syndrome updated. Int 
Rev Psychiatry. 2020;32(5–­6):403–411.
Pao M, Lohman C, Gracey D, et al. Visual, tactile, and phobic hallucinations: 
recognition and management in the emergency department. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2004;20:30–34.
Restrepo-­Martinez M, Ramierez-­Bermudez J, Bayliss L, et al. Delirious mania 
as a frequent and recognizable neuropsychiatric syndrome in patients with 
anti-­NMDAR encephalitis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2020;64:50–55.
Rogers JP, Pollak TA, Blackman G, et al. Catatonia and the immune system: a 
review. Lancet Psych. 2019;6:620–630.
Siegel MS, Smith WE. Psychiatric features in children with genetic syndromes: 
toward functional phenotypes. Child Adolesc Psychiatric Clin N Am. 
2010;19:229–261.
Simons A, Eyskens F, Glazemakers I, et al. Can psychiatric childhood disor­
ders be due to inborn errors of metabolism? Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2017;26:143–154.
Synderman D, Rovner BW. Mental status examination in primary care: a 
review. Am Fam Physician. 2009;80(8):809–814.
Teeple RC, Caplan JP, Stern TA. Visual hallucinations: differential 
diagnosis and treatment. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 
2009;11(1):26–32.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
532.e2
Walther S, Stegmayer K, Wilson JE, Heckers S. Structure and neural mecha­
nisms of catatonia. Lancet Psychiatry. 2019;6(7):610–619.
Wilson JE, Carlson R, Duggan MC, et al. Delirium and catatonia in critically 
ill patients: the DeCat prospective cohort investigations. Crit Care Med. 
2017;45(11):1837–1844.
Physical Symptoms
Ford CV. Factitious disorders and malingering. In: Current Diagnosis and 
Treatment – Psychiatry. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2008:411–418.
Ford CV. Somatoform disorders. In: Current Diagnosis and Treatment – Psychi­
atry. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2008:395–410.
Kohn MR, Madden S, Clarke SD. Refeeding in anorexia nervosa: increased 
safety and efficiency through understanding the pathophysiology of pro­
tein calorie malnutrition. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011;23:390–394.
Shaw RJ, Spratt EG, Bernard RS, et al. Somatoform disorders. In: Shaw RJ, De­
Maso DR, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Psychosomatic Medicine. Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2010.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
