222
Acute abdominal pain is usually a self-­limiting, benign condition that 
is commonly caused by gastroenteritis, constipation, or a viral illness. 
The challenge is to identify children who require immediate evaluation 
for potentially life-­threatening conditions. Chronic abdominal pain is 
also a common complaint in pediatric practices, as it makes up 2–4% 
of pediatric visits. At least 20% of children seek attention for chronic 
abdominal pain by the age of 15 years. Up to 28% of children complain 
of abdominal pain at least once per week and only 2% seek medical 
attention. The primary care physician, pediatrician, emergency physi­
cian, and surgeon must be able to distinguish serious and potentially 
life-­threatening diseases from more benign problems (Table 13.1). 
Abdominal pain may be a single acute event (Tables 13.2 and 13.3), 
a recurring acute problem (as in abdominal migraine), or a chronic 
problem (Table 13.4). The differential diagnosis is lengthy, differs from 
that in adults, and varies by age group. Although some disorders occur 
throughout childhood (constipation, gastroenteritis, lower lobe pneu­
monia, urinary tract infections), others are more common in a specific 
age group (see Table 13.2).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ABDOMINAL PAIN
Abdominal pain results from stimulation of nociceptive receptors and 
afferent sympathetic stretch receptors. The pain is classified as visceral 
or parietal (somatic).
Visceral Pain
Visceral pain receptors are located on the serosa surface, in the mes­
entery, within intestinal muscle, and within mucosa of hollow organs. 
Pain is initiated when receptors are stimulated by excessive contrac­
tion, stretching, tension, or ischemia of the walls of hollow viscera, 
the capsule of a solid organ (liver, spleen, kidney), or the mesentery. 
Increased contraction of the smooth muscle of hollow viscera may be 
caused by infection, toxins (bacterial or chemical agents), ulceration, 
inflammation, or ischemia. Increased hepatic capsule tension may be 
secondary to passive congestion (heart failure, pericarditis) or inflam­
mation (hepatitis).
Afferent fibers involved in processing visceral pain are unmyelin­
ated C-­fibers that enter the spinal cord bilaterally, resulting in dull, 
poorly localized pain. Visceral pain is often of gradual onset, and 
although localization may be imprecise, some general rules may be 
helpful (Fig. 13.1).
Parietal Pain
Parietal pain arises from direct noxious (usually inflammation) stimu­
lation of the contiguous parietal peritoneum (e.g., right lower quadrant 
at the McBurney point, appendicitis) or the diaphragm (splenic rup­
ture, subdiaphragmatic abscess). Parietal pain is transmitted through 
A-­delta fibers to specific dorsal root ganglia and thus is usually sharp 
and more intense. It can usually be exacerbated by movement or cough, 
is accompanied by tenderness over the site of irritation, and lateralizes 
to one of four quadrants. Because of the relative localization of the nox­
ious stimulation to the underlying peritoneum and the more anatom­
ically specific and unilateral innervation (peripheral-­nonautonomic 
nerves) of the peritoneum, it is usually easier to identify the precise 
anatomic location that is producing parietal pain (Fig. 13.2).
ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN
The clinician evaluating the child with abdominal pain of acute onset 
must decide quickly whether the child has a “surgical abdomen” (a 
serious medical problem necessitating treatment and admission to 
the hospital) or a process that can be managed on an outpatient basis. 
Even though surgical diagnoses are fewer than 10% of all causes of 
abdominal pain in children, they can be life threatening if untreated. 
Approximately 55% of children evaluated for acute abdominal pain 
have a specific medical diagnosis; in another 45%, the cause is never 
defined.
History
Obtaining an accurate history is critical for making an accurate diagno­
sis but is dependent both on the ability and willingness of the child to 
communicate and on the skill of the parent or guardian as an observer. 
The person providing an infant’s care is the best source of information 
about the current illness; the examining physician should try to elicit 
as much information from the child as possible. Some children give a 
good account of their illness when they are simply asked to describe 
it; most children must be asked open-­ended, nonleading questions. To 
determine the presence of anorexia, the physician must ask questions 
about food intake, the time the food was eaten, and how that behav­
ior compares to the child’s normal intake. The answers are often quite 
different from the responses to the more general questions “Are you 
hungry?” and “Have you eaten today?”
During the history taking, the child should remain in the parent’s 
arms, at play, or comfortably seated beside the parent, as appropriate 
for the child’s age. While the history is obtained, there is no particular 
reason that the child should be undressed. The clinician must resist the 
urge to speed things up by examining the child while taking the history. 
On occasion, when seeing a seriously ill child, the physician may need 
to abbreviate the diagnostic process, but taking shortcuts may lead to 
inaccurate conclusions.
Essential Components of the History
Time of onset of pain. Pain of fewer than 6 hours’ duration is 
accompanied by nonspecific findings, and observation is often 
needed to determine the nature of the illness. Pain lasting from 
6 to 48 hours is more apt to have a cause that warrants medical 
Abdominal Pain
Adrian Miranda
13
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
223
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
TABLE 13.1  Distinguishing Features of Abdominal Pain in Children
Disease
Onset
Location
Referral
Quality
Comments
Functional: irritable bowel 
syndrome
Recurrent
Periumbilical
None
Dull, crampy, inter­
mittent; duration is 
variable
Caused by disorder of brain-­gut 
interaction; diarrhea/constipation are 
symptoms
Gastroenteritis
Acute or gradual
Periumbilical, rectal 
tenesmus
None
Crampy, dull, intermit­
tent
Emesis, fever, watery diarrhea or dysen­
tery (mucus and blood)
Esophageal reflux
Recurrent, after 
meals, bedtime
Substernal
Chest
Burning
Sour taste in mouth, Sandifer syndrome
Duodenal ulcer
Recurrent, before 
meals, at night
Epigastric
Back
Severe burning, 
gnawing
Relieved by food, milk, antacids; family 
history
Pancreatitis
Acute
Epigastric/hypogastric
Back
Constant, sharp, boring
Nausea, emesis, marked tenderness
Intestinal obstruction
Acute or gradual
Periumbilical–lower 
abdomen
Back
Alternating cramping 
(colic) and painless 
periods
Distention, obstipation, bilious emesis, 
increased bowel sounds
Appendicitis
Acute or gradual 
(1–2 days)
Initially periumbilical or 
epigastric; later localized 
to the right lower quadrant
Back or pelvis if 
retrocecal
Sharp, steady
Nausea, emesis, local tenderness with/
without fever; patient is motionless
Meckel diverticulitis 
(mimics appendicitis)
Recurrent or 
constant
Generalized diffuse with 
perforation: periumbilical–
lower abdomen
None
Sharp
Hematochezia: painless unless intussus­
ception, diverticulitis, or perforation
Inflammatory bowel 
disease
Recurrent
Depends on site of involve­
ment
Dull cramping, 
tenesmus
Weight loss, with/without diarrhea or 
hematochezia
Intussusception
Acute
Periumbilical–lower 
abdomen
None
Cramping, with painless 
periods
Guarded position with knees pulled up, 
“currant jelly” stools
Disaccharidase deficiency 
(lactase or sucrase)
Recurrent with 
ingestion of 
dairy or sugar
Lower abdomen
None
Cramping
Distention, gaseousness, diarrhea
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Recurrent
Generalized or epigastric
None
Dull or cramping
With or without dysphagia; history of 
atopy
Celiac disease
Recurrent
Generalized
None
Dull
Constipation, poor weight gain
Anterior cutaneous nerve 
entrapment (ACNE)
Acute
Right lower abdominal wall
Sharp pain, reproducible 
with light palpation
Nausea; condition more common in 
athletes
Abdominal migraine
Acute
Generalized
None
Dull or cramping
Pain causes child to wake up in middle 
of night; history of similar episodes in 
the past that resolved abruptly
Urolithiasis
Acute, sudden
Back
Groin
Severe colicky pain
Hematuria; calcification on KUB x-­ray 
study, CT scan
Pyelonephritis
Acute, sudden
Back
None
Dull to sharp
Fever, costochondral tenderness, 
dysuria, pyuria, urinary frequency
Cholecystitis/cholelithi­
asis
Acute
Right upper quadrant
Right shoulder, 
scapula
Severe colicky pain
Hemolysis with/without jaundice
KUB, kidney, ureter, and bladder.
Data from Andreoli TE, Carpenter CJ, Plum F, et al. Cecil Essentials of Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:326; Behrman R, Kliegman R. 
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:396.
TABLE 13.2  Causes of Acute Abdominal Pain by Age Group
Neonate
Necrotizing enterocolitis*
Obstruction*
Malrotation with volvulus*
Idiopathic or drug (indomethacin, steroid)–induced intestinal perforation
Infant (<2 yr)
Intussusception*
Incarcerated hernia*
Urinary tract infection*
Infant (<2 yr)—cont’d
Gastroenteritis* †
Intestinal obstruction
Malrotation with volvulus
Trauma (e.g., abuse)
Pneumonitis (lower lobe)
Hirschsprung disease
Aerophagia
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
224
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 13.3  Sudden Acute Excruciating 
Abdominal Pain (Within Minutes)
Intestinal Perforation
Luminal Occlusion
Peptic ulcer disease
Appendicitis
Diverticula
Urolithiasis
Cholelithiasis
Strangulated hernia
Vascular Occlusion
Intraabdominal Hemorrhage
Midgut volvulus
Emboli
Endocarditis
Strangulated hernia
Ovarian torsion
Testicular torsion
Ectopic pregnancy
Ruptured aortic aneurysm
Ruptured spleen
TABLE 13.4  Causes of Chronic and 
Recurrent Abdominal Pain by Age Group*
Infant (<2 yr)
Child (2–11 yr)
Adolescent (12–19 yr)
Colic†
Inguinal hernia
Malabsorption‡
Milk allergy
Hirschsprung disease
Cystic fibrosis
Rotational defects
Malformations
Esophagitis
Constipation†
Functional pain†
Celiac disease
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Giardiasis†
Peptic ulcer disease
Toxins (lead)
Pancreatitis
Parasites
Tumors/masses
Diskitis/osteomyelitis
Abdominal migraine
Diabetes mellitus
Volvulus
Intraabdominal abscess§
Choledochal cyst
Irritable bowel syndrome†
Psychogenic factors†
Dysmenorrhea†
Mittelschmerz†
Abdominal wall pain
Peptic ulcer disease
Gallbladder disease
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Ovarian cysts
Diabetes mellitus
Inflammatory bowel disease
Malignancy
Giardiasis
Serositis (e.g., SLE, familial 
Mediterranean fever)
Intraabdominal abscess§
Hereditary angioedema
*See also Table 13.6.
†Most common diagnoses.
‡Includes lactose and sorbitol (and other fruit juice polyalcohol) intolerance.
§Hepatic, pancreatic, subphrenic, psoas, perinephric, renal, pelvic.
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
intervention, although delays in presentation and diagnosis in 
children are not unusual. Timing of the progression of symptoms 
must be detailed.
Location of pain. The location of the pain at its onset and any 
change in location are very important (Table 13.5; see also Table 13.1). 
Most intraperitoneal visceral pain is a response to the stimulation of 
stretch fibers in the bowel wall and is mediated through the spinal 
nerves. This pain is sensed as a deep, aching periumbilical pain. Pain 
caused by inflammation of the parietal peritoneum (acute appendicitis) 
is localized to the area of the inflamed organ or is diffuse if the 
Child (2–11 yr)
Appendicitis*
Gastroenteritis* †
Trauma*
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Abdominal migraine
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Hepatitis
Peptic ulcer disease
Sickle cell anemia: vasoocclusive crisis
Pancreatitis
Pneumonia (lower lobe)
Abdominal tumors
Pyelonephritis/cystitis
Testicular torsion
Torsed cryptorchid testis
Incarcerated hernia
Typhlitis
Pharyngitis/tonsillitis
Meckel diverticulitis
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome
Mesenteric adenitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
DKA
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Idiopathic*
Adolescent (12–19 yr)
Appendicitis*
Pelvic inflammatory disease*
Trauma*
Anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome
Tubo-ovarian abscess
Perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome)
Labor (pregnancy)
Hepatitis
Pancreatitis (any cause)
Ectopic pregnancy
Crohn disease
Ovarian cyst/mittelschmerz*
Sickle cell crisis
Peptic ulcer disease
Omental torsion
Psoas abscess or hemorrhage
Mesenteric adenitis
Urinary tract infection
Muscle strain (exercise, coughing)
DKA
Testicular torsion
Idiopathic*
*Most commonly seen problem.
†Gastroenteritis indicates intestinal infection with viral, bacterial, protozoal, or parasitic agents. Giardiasis and cryptosporidiosis are particularly com­
mon and may produce acute or chronic pain.
DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis.
TABLE 13.2  Causes of Acute Abdominal Pain by Age Group—cont’d
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
225
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
1
2
3
1
2
3
Fig. 13.1  “Visceral” abdominal pain: deep, dull, diffuse. The three general localizations of midline “visceral” 
abdominal pain are epigastric (1), periumbilical (2), and hypogastric (3). 1, Epigastric pain usually suggests 
disease of the thorax, stomach, duodenum, pancreas, liver, or gallbladder. 2, Periumbilical pain usually implies 
disease of the small intestine, cecum, or both. 3, Hypogastric pain usually implicates the large intestine, pelvic 
organs, or urinary system. (From Reilly BM. Abdominal pain. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:702.)
1. Pleurisy
2. Subdiaphragmatic
abscess
3. (Peri) hepatitis
4. Cholecystitis
5. Perforated duodenal
ulcer
1. Appendicitis
2. Acute Crohn’s disease
3. Ectopic pregnancy,
tuboovarian abscess, or 
ovarian torsion/ 
hemorrhage
4. Pelvic inflammatory 
disease
5. Cecal diverticulitis
6. Colon cancer 
(perforation)
1. Sigmoid diverticulitis
2. Pelvic inflammatory disease
3. Ectopic pregnancy,
tuboovarian abscess, or 
ovarian torsion/hemorrhage
4. Perforated sigmoid 
carcinoma
5. Perforated gastric ulcer
6. Incarcerated inguinal hernia
7. Leaking aortic aneurysm
1. Pleurisy
2. Splenic rupture or infarct
3. Pancreatitis
4. Diverticulitis
5. Ectopic pregnancy,
tuboovarian hemorrhage, 
abscess, or rupture
6. Appendicitis
7. Ectopic pregnancy,
tuboovarian hemorrhage,
abscess, or rupture
8. Perforated colon
(cancer or diverticulum)
6. Appendicitis
7. Perforated colon
(carcinoma)
7. Acute pancreatitis 
and/or pseudocyst
8. Perforated duodenal
ulcer
9. Acute cholecystits
10. Incarcerated inguinal 
hernia
11. Meckel’s diverticulitis
12. Leaking aortic 
aneurysm
A
B
C
D
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
8
8
9
10
11
12
Fig. 13.2  Common and uncommon conditions that may cause “parietal” 
pain and localized peritonitis in the various quadrants of the abdomen. A, 
Right upper quadrant. B, Left upper quadrant. C, Right lower quadrant. D, 
Left lower quadrant. (From Reilly BM. Abdominal pain. In: Practical Strate­
gies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:703.)
TABLE 13.5  Localization of Abdominal 
Pain: Referred or Radiated
REFERRED
Extraabdominal Lesion Pain 
Referred to Abdomen
Intraabdominal 
Extraperitoneal Origin
Thorax
Spine
Hips
Pelvis
Pancreas
Kidney
Ureters
Great vessels
Pelvic organs
Retroperitoneal space
RADIATED
Origin Is Primary Site with Simultaneously Perceived Pain 
in a Secondary Site
Cholecystitis radiates to subscapular area
Splenic injury radiates to shoulder
Ureteral colic (stones) radiates to testis, upper leg, or groin
Pancreatitis radiates to back
inflammation is extensive and involves more of the peritoneal cavity. 
Pain resulting from obstruction of an organ is localized to the area 
of that organ and radiates to the commonly innervated region (e.g., 
stones in the ureter cause intense flank pain with radiation into the 
groin). Pain that is migratory or fleeting in location is rarely suggestive 
of a problem requiring operative intervention. Of note, many young 
children may point to the umbilicus to localize their pain although the 
pain may be elsewhere in the abdomen.
Character of pain. The character of the pain is often difficult for 
the child to describe. Some older children may be able to differentiate 
cramping, aching, and burning sensations, but most children do not 
do this well. Children can relate whether the pain comes and goes or 
is continuous and unrelenting. The character of the pain is usually 
unknown in the toddler and infant, although the parent can determine 
whether the discomfort is constant, cramping, or intermittent. If the 
child intermittently draws the legs up in a flexed position and cries, the 
clinician can assume that intermittent pain is present.
Child’s activity level. The effect of the pain on the child’s activities 
is an important indicator of the severity of the underlying disease, 
although it is important to note that children with chronic functional 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
226
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
abdominal pain may wake up from sleep and may miss favorite 
activities due to pain and functional disability. Asking whether 
motion worsens the pain helps differentiate peritoneal irritation or 
musculoskeletal diseases from more nonspecific problems. The child 
with acute appendicitis lies motionless, whereas the child with a renal 
stone, gallstone, gastroenteritis, or pancreatitis may toss and turn and 
writhe in discomfort. Localized, superficial, tender trigger points in 
the abdominal wall may suggest abdominal wall (muscle, cutaneous) 
pain. The localized pain results from entrapment of cutaneous terminal 
branches of intercostal nerves (7th–12th) penetrating the rectus 
abdominis muscle and can easily be missed without the proper history 
or exam.
Gastrointestinal symptoms. The 
presence 
or 
absence 
of 
gastrointestinal symptoms may differentiate intestinal problems (acute 
appendicitis, gastroenteritis, acute cholecystitis) from those arising 
from other intraabdominal organs (urinary tract infection, ovarian 
disease, abdominal wall pain).
Anorexia and nausea are difficult symptoms for a small child to 
describe. Often, if simply asked whether they are hungry, a child will 
respond in the affirmative. Questions about recent food intake, normal 
eating habits, the last normal meal, and the current desirability of a 
favorite food often provide more accurate information about the pres­
ence or absence of anorexia and nausea than do direct questions about 
appetite or nausea.
Vomiting associated with acute pain is usually related to intesti­
nal disease, such as ileus, gastroenteritis, or acute problems of the 
gastrointestinal tract that warrant surgery (see Chapter 15). However, 
vomiting may occur as a response to severe nonintestinal pain such 
as in testicular torsion; this vomiting is usually not recurring and is 
not a prominent feature. Vomiting that occurs with acute pain in the 
middle of the night can also be associated with abdominal migraine or 
cyclic vomiting syndrome, particularly if the history suggests similar 
episodes in the past that resolved spontaneously. Oftentimes, the child 
has been misdiagnosed with multiple bouts of acute gastroenteritis 
that occurred over the course of several weeks or months. Vomiting 
may also be a sign of increased intracranial pressure, which may or 
may not be accompanied by associated headache or vital sign changes 
(bradycardia, hypertension, irregular respirations), a bulging fontanel, 
an altered level of consciousness, or neurologic findings (third or sixth 
cranial nerve palsies). Care should be taken to determine whether the 
pain occurs before or after the onset of the vomiting. With acute surgi­
cal lesions (those caused by intestinal obstruction, acute appendicitis, 
acute cholecystitis), the pain usually occurs before or during the vom­
iting. If the vomiting occurred before the onset of pain, the clinician 
should suspect gastroenteritis or another nonspecific problem. The 
appearance of the vomited material is also important. Feculent or dark-­
green material suggests intestinal obstruction. Dark brown or frankly 
bloody material indicates gastritis, prolapse gastropathy, or peptic ulcer 
disease as the source of pain.
Diarrhea occurs commonly in intestinal diseases of viral, parasitic, 
or bacterial origin (see Chapter 14). The stool volume is large, and def­
ecation is usually preceded by cramping pain that is alleviated by the 
passage of the diarrheal stool. Diarrhea may also occur in the presence 
of acute appendicitis or other pelvic infections (such as those result­
ing from pelvic inflammatory disease, tubo-­ovarian abscess); in these 
cases, diarrhea is caused by inflammation and irritation of an area of the 
colon adjacent to an inflammatory mass. The diarrhea in this instance is 
of small volume and is frequent. It is important to obtain an estimate of 
the volume and consistency of stool. Diarrhea may also occur in lesions 
that cause partial obstruction of the bowel, such as strictures, adhe­
sions, and Hirschsprung disease. In this situation, the patient also has 
some degree of abdominal distention. Constipation alone can cause 
acute abdominal pain and may also indicate other gastrointestinal dys­
function. Some constipated children present with a picture very similar 
to that seen in acute appendicitis but have a large amount of stool filling 
the entire colon. It is therefore important to obtain a good history of 
not only bowel movement frequency but also consistency (see Chap­
ter 19). The history and exam are sufficient to make the diagnosis of 
constipation, and imaging is usually not necessary. Once the diagnosis 
is made, appropriate treatment should start with a proper clean-­out 
followed by maintenance therapy. The clinician should not be fooled by 
the symptom of tenesmus, where the patient has a feeling of constantly 
needing to pass stools despite having an empty colon. Tenesmus can be 
seen in the setting of proctocolitis or inflammatory bowel disease and 
is often misinterpreted by the patient as constipation.
Associated symptoms. The presence of headache, sore throat, and 
other generalized aches and pains moves the examiner away from 
a diagnosis of an acute problem warranting surgery and strongly 
suggests a viral flulike illness. Asking the child to point to the area 
of worst pain sometimes results in the child pointing to the head or 
throat. The examiner must be careful to remember the whole child 
and not to focus on the abdomen just because that is the area of the 
presenting complaint. Many systemic diseases directly or indirectly 
produce abdominal pain and must be considered in the differential 
diagnosis (Table 13.6).
Family history and personal medical history. Viral gastroenteritis, 
other viral syndromes, and food poisoning may affect the patient’s family 
or schoolmates; it is important to ask about other family members, 
classmates, or playmates who have recently had similar symptoms. 
Certain systemic and inherited diseases, such as sickle cell anemia, 
diabetes mellitus, celiac disease, spherocytosis, familial Mediterranean 
fever, and porphyria, are associated with episodes of abdominal pain. 
A strong family history of migraine headaches in a child with several 
previous episodes of intense abdominal pain that have resolved, who 
presents with a new “attack,” suggests the possibility of abdominal 
migraine. The family must be asked about familial diseases and any 
previous episodes of pain in the child. Previous intraabdominal 
operations may result in adhesions that can cause pain, intestinal 
obstruction, or both. A history of previous intraabdominal surgeries 
suggests the possibility of bowel obstruction. Some specific medical 
illnesses result in identifiable or predictable causes of abdominal pain 
(Table 13.7).
Physical Examination
The physical examination begins when the clinician enters the room 
and observes the child’s activity and demeanor while obtaining the his­
tory. Does the child appear ill? Is the patient lethargic, rolling about in 
discomfort, alert but lying very still, or bouncing all over the room? 
Each of these activities conveys a message. The listless, lethargic child 
may be in shock, dehydrated, and very ill. The child who is crying out 
loudly and generally dominating the scene probably does not have a 
problem that warrants surgery and may have mild pain that is self-­
resolving. The child who seems only mildly ill but moves with great 
care, if at all, is assumed to have an inflammatory process until it is 
proven otherwise.
Physical examination techniques and findings are age depen­
dent. Younger children may have difficulty cooperating because of 
fear or discomfort. Younger children may be more cooperative if 
kept on their parent’s lap. Older children should be asked to get onto 
the examination table with as little assistance as possible. If the child 
does this easily, the probability of an acute intraabdominal inflam­
matory process is quite low. Outer bulky clothing should be removed 
to allow good exposure of the abdomen without the child having to 
feel vulnerable.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 13.7  Current or Past Aspects of Medical History That May Suggest Cause of Abdominal 
Pain
Historical Factor
Cause of Pain
Cystic fibrosis
Pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, meconium ileus equivalent, appendicitis, intussusception, biliary or urinary stones
Sickle cell anemia
Vasoocclusive crisis, cholelithiasis, hepatitis, hemolytic crisis, renal infarction, splenic sequestration
Diabetes mellitus
Pancreatitis, gastric neuropathy
Cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome
Primary bacterial peritonitis
SLE, other autoimmune disorders
Vasculitis, pancreatitis, serositis, infarction
Corticosteroids
Gastric ulceration, pancreatitis
NSAID
Ileal perforation, gastric ulceration, renal-­papillary necrosis
HIV
Gastroenteritis, hepatitis, pancreatitis, esophagitis, lymphoma
Mononucleosis
Hepatitis, splenic rupture
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Mucosal hemorrhage, intussusception
Crohn disease
Small bowel stricture, intraabdominal or psoas abscess
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Colitis
Upper respiratory tract infection
Pneumonia, mesenteric adenitis
Pneumonia
Mesenteric adenitis
Prior surgery
Abscess, adhesions, obstruction, stricture, pancreatitis, ectopic pregnancy
Inborn errors of metabolism, hypertriglyceri­
demia, hypercalcemia
Pancreatitis
Drugs (valproic acid)
Pancreatitis
Adolescent
Ovarian torsion, sexually transmitted infection, ectopic pregnancy
NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
TABLE 13.6  Systemic Causes of Acute Abdominal Pain
Metabolic, Hematologic
Acute porphyria
Hereditary angioedema
Sickle cell crisis
Hemolytic transfusion reaction
Leukemia
Acute hemolytic states
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Addison disease
Uremia
Electrolyte disturbances
Hyperparathyroidism-­hypercalcemia (urolithiasis, pancreatitis)
Hypertriglyceridemia (pancreatitis)
Fabry disease
Musculoskeletal
Arthritis
Spondylodiskitis
Thoracic nerve root dysfunction
Trauma/child abuse
Hernia
Psoas abscess or hemorrhage
Neurologic
Abdominal epilepsy
Abdominal migraine
Brain tumor
Multiple sclerosis
Radiculopathy
Neuropathy
Herpes zoster
Dysautonomia (Riley-­Day syndrome)
Drugs, Toxins
Heavy metal poisoning
Lead
Arsenic
Mercury
Mushroom ingestion
Narcotic withdrawal
Black widow spider bite
Infectious, Inflammatory
Acute rheumatic fever
Infectious mononucleosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Measles
Mumps
Pneumonia (lower lobe)
Pericarditis
Pharyngitis
Epididymitis/orchitis
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Inflammatory bowel disease
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Endocarditis
Anaphylaxis
Familial Mediterranean fever and other genetic fever syndromes
Other
Pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolism
Disorder of the brain-­gut interaction
Aerophagia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
228
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
The examination must be performed in a relaxed, friendly manner 
with attention fully focused on the child. An accurate examination 
depends on the child’s trust and cooperation. A conversation with the 
child about family, friends, pets, school, sports, music, or other specific 
interests of that child diverts attention (distraction) from the examina­
tion and increases cooperation. The examiner should never surprise 
the child and should never lie. The first surprise or untruth, such as 
the statement “This won’t hurt,” destroys any trust that has developed.
Vital signs are important as low-­grade fever (<38.3°C) is seen in 
early appendicitis but is also common in many other diseases. The 
absence of fever does not exclude the diagnosis of acute appendicitis 
or other problems necessitating surgical intervention. Tachycardia may 
reflect anxiety or may be caused by dehydration, shock, fever, or pain. 
Tachypnea suggests a metabolic acidosis (shock, diabetes mellitus, or 
toxic ingestion), an intrapulmonary process, sepsis, or fever. Blood 
pressure may demonstrate a widened pulse pressure as seen in sepsis. 
The vital signs must be viewed in context but may be the first clue to a 
serious illness.
Examination of the head, neck, chest, and extremities may precede 
the abdominal examination. In children too young to describe the 
location of the pain, a careful examination of the ears is important, but 
can be performed at the end of the examination. Streptococcal pharyn­
gitis or mononucleosis is sometimes accompanied by severe abdominal 
pain. Affected children will present with fever, appear ill, and have ten­
der cervical adenopathy and an obvious tonsillitis, pharyngitis, or both.
Decreased breath sounds and/or rales in a lower-­lung lobe may 
indicate pneumonia. Children with lower lobe bacterial pneumonia 
may present with severe abdominal pain, high fever, tachypnea, cough, 
and, on occasion, vomiting. This presentation could mimic that of a 
child with peritonitis; however, the abdominal findings are not consis­
tent with the diagnosis of an acute intraabdominal process, and exam­
ination of the lungs should demonstrate the pneumonia.
The abdominal examination should be performed systematically 
and with the child as comfortable as possible. Before the examiner 
actually touches the child’s abdomen, they should observe it, looking 
for distention, inguinal masses, peristaltic waves, and scars from old 
injuries or surgical incisions. Inguinal and femoral hernias are often 
overlooked but a common cause of abdominal pain. Next, the child 
should be asked to indicate with one finger the point of greatest pain. 
The point may be a vague circle in the area of the umbilicus, but if the 
child specifies a defined spot, the examiner should avoid that area until 
the remainder of the abdomen has been palpated.
Gentleness is essential to successful palpation of the abdomen. The 
examiner must warm both hands and the stethoscope before touch­
ing the patient. The stethoscope is an excellent tool for palpation of 
the abdomen. Auscultation of the chest can simply be extended to the 
abdomen, with the examiner assuring the child that the stethoscope 
did not hurt on the chest. The initial examination of the abdomen with 
the stethoscope should be just for listening, with no pressure exerted, 
so that no discomfort results.
Bowel sounds are usually nonspecific in most children with abdom­
inal pain; however, in certain processes, they are helpful. High-­pitched 
tinkling sounds or rushes are usually associated with an obstructive pro­
cess. Bowel sounds in gastroenteritis are ordinarily very active and loud 
but may be normal. Acute appendicitis is accompanied by normal sounds 
in the early stages, but bowel sounds disappear with diffuse peritonitis.
Watching the child’s reaction to the auscultation may be a valuable 
clue to areas of true tenderness. As the examiner continues to listen 
over the entire anterior abdomen, the pressure on the head of the 
stethoscope increases until the examiner is, in fact, palpating with the 
stethoscope. This often is a much more reliable method of eliciting true 
tenderness and guarding than is the palpating hand.
Palpation is begun as far away from the area of pain identified by 
the child as possible. The examiner’s hand should be softly placed flat 
(in parallel) on the child’s abdomen. Directing fingers into the abdo­
men (perpendicular) as a method of palpation is unnecessary and 
often frightening. The clinician should watch the child’s face, not the 
abdomen, during the palpation. Some children are extremely stoic, and 
only the slightest grimace betrays the discomfort they are experienc­
ing. Attention is paid during palpation to the presence of masses. The 
examiner should focus on finding the location of pain and the pres­
ence or absence of guarding or rebound tenderness. Guarding refers to 
the voluntary or involuntary (often referred to as rigidity) contraction 
of the abdominal musculature. Fear of pain, rather than actual pain 
elicited by palpation, is the most common cause for voluntary guard­
ing, while involuntary guarding results from reflexive spasms of the 
abdominal musculature in the setting of peritoneal irritation. A rigid 
or boardlike abdomen is the result of involuntary guarding and cannot 
be overcome by distraction. Voluntary guarding usually starts before 
the palpation starts and can be overcome by asking the child to take 
deep breaths, flexing the knees and hips, or by using other distractions 
appropriate to the child’s age and temperament. When encountering 
tenderness, the examiner should palpate only deeply enough to elicit 
the complaint of pain and some guarding. There is no need to bring on 
unnecessary pain by deep palpation.
Rebound pain is an indicator of peritoneal irritation and is elicited 
during examination of the anterior abdominal wall. It occurs when an 
inflamed focus within the abdomen is compressed and the pressure is 
then quickly released, resulting in sudden and sometimes severe pain. 
The standard method to elicit rebound pain is to palpate deeply, then 
suddenly remove the palpating hand. Although this sign aids in the 
determination of the presence of an intraperitoneal inflammatory pro­
cess, it is not necessary to cause extra discomfort or stress, particularly in 
younger children; it is not recommended. Peritoneal irritation can also 
be detected by maneuvers such as asking the child to jump or cough or 
tapping the feet while observing for facial signs of discomfort.
Other areas of inflammation can be detected by maneuvers that 
move muscles adjacent to the inflammation. A positive Carnett test 
occurs when pain is unchanged or increased when the supine patient 
tenses the abdominal wall by lifting the head and shoulders off the 
examining table. Carnett sign is a sensitive tool to discriminate abdom­
inal wall pain from visceral pain. The psoas sign occurs when elevation 
and flexion of the leg against the pressure of the examiner’s hand (or 
passive extension of the leg toward the back) causes pain. An inflam­
matory mass, such as an inflamed appendix, a psoas abscess, or a per­
inephric abscess, in contact with the psoas muscle is the cause of this 
pain. Likewise, the obturator sign is pain with flexion of the thigh at 
right angles to the trunk and external rotation of the same leg while the 
patient is in the supine position. This sign results from contact of an 
inflammatory mass with the obturator muscle (Fig. 13.3).
The flanks and back must be inspected and palpated. Percussion 
at the costovertebral angle elicits pain in the presence of renal or 
perinephric inflammation. Vertebral body and disk disease may be 
detected by palpitation of the spine. The perineum and genitalia must 
be inspected and palpated as necessary. External examination of the 
genitalia in prepubertal girls is adequate. If a more thorough exam­
ination or an intravaginal examination is needed in prepubertal girls, 
it should generally be performed with the patient under anesthesia. In 
postpubertal girls, a pelvic examination may be valuable, regardless of 
the patient’s sexual activity history.
The need for a rectal examination is controversial. If a diagno­
sis is already obvious, the rectal examination may be deferred. If an 
imaging study or colonoscopy is planned, a rectal examination may be 
unnecessary. If constipation is suspected as the cause for pain, rectal 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
229
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
examination should be performed but should be the last part of the 
physical examination and should be performed only once. The child 
should be relaxed and should be given an honest explanation of the 
procedure. The examiner should use plenty of lubricant and should 
perform the rectal examination very gently. If the child strongly resists, 
it is pointless to perform a forceful examination. This is when the rectal 
examination may truly be deferred. Lateralizing pain, masses, and the 
presence and character of stool in the rectum are assessed. The stool 
should always be tested for blood except in children with gastrostomy 
or nasogastric tubes since it will invariably be positive and can be 
misleading.
Clues to an organic and at times more serious cause of abdominal 
pain are noted in Table 13.8. Furthermore, peritoneal signs, which sug­
gest a “surgical abdomen,” most often caused by peritonitis are noted 
in Table 13.9. In addition, the presence of shock suggests other serious 
diseases (see Table 13.9).
Laboratory Evaluation
After a careful history is obtained and thorough physical examination 
is performed, the diagnosis or a short list of possible diagnoses should 
be apparent. Laboratory data are supportive in confirming or ruling 
out suspected disease.
Complete Blood Cell Count
The hemoglobin and hematocrit levels can reveal anemia caused by 
acute or chronic blood loss (as with ulcers, inflammatory bowel disease, 
Meckel diverticula) or the anemia of chronic disease (as with systemic 
lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel disease). The white blood 
cell count indicates the possibility of infection or blood dyscrasias. In 
uncomplicated acute appendicitis, the white blood cell count ranges 
from normal values to as high as 16,000. A very high white blood cell 
count (>18,000/mm3) indicates intestinal gangrene, perforation, peri­
tonitis, or abscess formation, but this count may also be high in acute 
bacterial gastroenteritis, streptococcal diseases, pyelonephritis, pelvic 
inflammatory disease, hemolytic uremic syndrome, and pneumonia.
The differential cell count may also be helpful. In studies of children 
with acute appendicitis, 95% had neutrophilia, but only half had leuko­
cytosis in the first 24 hours. If the child’s history and physical examina­
tion findings are highly suggestive of appendicitis, a normal or mildly 
elevated white blood cell count should not dissuade the clinician from 
that diagnosis. However, a striking lymphocytosis may suggest gastro­
enteritis or a systemic illness. Overreliance on the CBC alone can cause 
delay in reaching the correct diagnosis.
Urinalysis
The UA is an important and useful laboratory test in the evaluation of 
abdominal pain. The presence of ketones and a high specific gravity sug­
gest poor food intake and dehydration. Large amounts of glucose and 
ketones in the urine indicate diabetic ketoacidosis. A pregnancy test 
should be performed on postpubertal girls, regardless of sexual activity 
history. The presence of both white cells and bacteria indicates a urinary 
tract infection; either finding alone may not be sufficient for that diag­
nosis (see Chapter 21). White blood cells may be present in the urine 
from irritation caused by an inflammatory mass adjacent to the bladder 
or ureter; hematuria may be seen with nephrolithiasis (see Chapter 23).
A
B
Fig. 13.3  A, The obturator sign. Pain occurs when the hip is flexed and 
rotated. Internal rotation is most likely to cause pain as a result of pel­
vic or retroperitoneal disease or both. B, The psoas sign. The test may 
be performed passively or actively. The hip is passively extended, thus 
stretching the psoas muscle (solid arrow). The hip is actively flexed usu­
ally against resistance, thus tensing the psoas muscle (dotted arrow). 
(From Reilly BM. Abdominal pain. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:714.)
TABLE 13.8  Red Flags and Clues to an 
Organic Cause of Abdominal Pain
Age <4 yr old
Localized pain in nonperiumbilical site
Referred pain
Sudden onset of excruciating pain
Crescendo nature of pain
Sudden worsening of pain
Fever (high fever >39.4°C suggests pneumonia, pyelonephritis, dysentery, 
cholangitis, more than perforation or abscess)
Jaundice
Distention*
Dysuria
Emesis (especially bilious)
Anorexia
Weight loss
Positive family history (metabolic disorders, peptic ulcer disease)†
Change in urine or stool color (blood, acholic) or frequency
Vaginal discharge
Menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea)
Sexual activity
Delayed sexual development (chronic pain)
Anemia
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated stool calprotectin
Specific physical findings (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, absent bowel 
sounds, adnexal tenderness, palpable mass, involuntary guarding, focal or 
diffuse tenderness, positive rectal examination results, perianal disease, 
joint swelling, rashes)
*Consider 5 Fs: fat, feces, flatus (aerophagia, obstruction), fluid (asci­
tes, hydronephrosis, cysts), fetus (pregnancy or fetal-­like abnormal 
growth [e.g., tumors]).
†Family history is also positive for chronic pain syndromes (constipation, 
irritable bowel, dysmenorrhea, and lactase or sucrase deficiency).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
230
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Other Laboratory Tests
Other laboratory tests, such as measurement of serum electrolytes, 
amylase, and lipase; liver function studies including γ-­glutamyl trans­
peptidase (GGT); inflammatory markers (CRP or sedimentation rate); 
blood cultures; stool cultures; and viral tests should be ordered on the 
basis of the differential diagnosis after a thorough history and physical 
examination are completed.
Imaging Evaluation
Multitudes of imaging studies are available; none should be obtained 
until the patient has been examined.
Plain Radiography
Plain radiographs, especially kidney-­ureter-­bladder (KUB) films, with 
or without upright lateral views of the chest and abdomen, are rou­
tinely obtained in most emergency departments as part of the evalua­
tion of acute abdominal pain. The chest film helps assess the presence 
of a lower lobe pneumonia, which often causes severe abdominal pain, 
especially in small children. However, early in the disease, the phys­
ical examination may be more helpful. Often, if the KUB-­abdominal 
radiographic study includes the lower lobes, the chest radiographic 
study can be deferred and performed only if the KUB demonstrates 
lung abnormalities.
Only approximately 10% of abdominal radiographic studies are 
positive when they are obtained as part of the routine work-­up for 
abdominal pain. Of those that are limited to patients with serious 
illness, 46% of the results are positive. Plain abdominal radiographs 
may be helpful to confirm the presence of intestinal obstruction, pneu­
matosis intestinalis, renal or biliary tract calculi, calcified fecaliths, or 
intestinal perforation (pneumoperitoneum–free air). These studies 
detect bowel distention (air-­fluid levels on upright views), calcification, 
free air, and large masses but are not helpful in detecting most other 
diseases. If free air or intestinal obstruction is suspected, the abdominal 
films must include a flat and upright or decubitus view of the abdomen 
to demonstrate the air-­fluid interface.
In acute appendicitis, a calcified appendicolith (appendiceal 
fecalith) may be seen (Fig. 13.4). This finding automatically makes 
the diagnosis of appendiceal dysfunction and confirms the need for 
appendectomy. The absence of an appendicolith on KUB does not 
rule out appendicitis. More often, the noncalcified appendicolith may 
obstruct the appendix; ultrasonographic or CT imaging is necessary 
to visualize this lesion. If an inflammatory mass lies near the iliopsoas 
muscle, mild lumbar scoliosis may be present as a result of spasm of 
the muscle.
Radiographic studies are not always necessary. If the diagnosis is 
already obvious, specific therapy is indicated. In some situations, other 
types of imaging studies are more useful, and plain radiographs are not 
prerequisite.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonographic examination is ideal for children. It is usually pain­
less, is readily available, emits no radiation, requires no intravenous 
contrast material, and can be performed without sedation. Unfor­
tunately, it is operator dependent and can be difficult to perform in 
the setting of extreme pain or lack of cooperation. Lower abdominal 
gynecologic pain in females, especially in adolescent females, can 
be confused with appendicitis. Pelvic ultrasonography demonstrates 
pathologic processes of the ovaries and fallopian tubes, the size of 
the uterus, and the presence of free fluid in the pelvis. An enlarged, 
TABLE 13.9  Peritoneal Signs of a “Surgical 
Abdomen”
Severe pain
Patient’s eyes anxiously open during examiner’s palpation
Patient is motionless
Absent bowel sounds
Extreme tenderness to palpation
Voluntary guarding with gentle palpation
Involuntary guarding: boardlike rigidity
Rebound tenderness (do not intentionally elicit)
Pain with movement or cough
If Shock Is Present, Consider:
Severe pancreatitis
Trauma: intraabdominal hemorrhage
Ruptured spleen (trauma, mononucleosis)
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Intestinal perforation (appendicitis, ulcer, inflammatory bowel disease, 
Clostridioides difficile colitis, penetrating trauma)
Intussusception
Urosepsis
Associated severe gastrointestinal bleeding
Rupture of fallopian tube from ectopic pregnancy
Pulmonary embolism
Aortic dissection
Volvulus
Child abuse
Addisonian crisis (adrenal insufficiency)
Fig. 13.4  The patient described the gradual onset of anorexia, nausea, 
and vague periumbilical abdominal pain. Twenty-­four hours later, the 
pain was much more severe in the right lower quadrant, where localized 
peritoneal signs were apparent. The radiographic film of the abdomen 
reveals a huge calcified density in the right lower quadrant; it proved to 
be an appendiceal fecalith at surgery. (From Reilly BM. Abdominal pain. 
In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1991:16.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
231
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
inflamed appendix can also be visualized (Fig. 13.5). Any female with 
abdominal pain in whom the diagnosis is not obvious should undergo 
an ultrasonographic examination.
Gallstones, a dilated thick-­walled gallbladder, or a dilated common 
bile duct can be visualized by ultrasonography; all three support the 
diagnosis of biliary disease. Edema and enlargement of the pancreas are 
seen in acute pancreatitis. Ultrasonography also details the character of 
abdominal masses, differentiating cystic from solid masses, and can be 
helpful in demonstrating free fluid or abscesses. The anatomy of the 
urinary tract is well defined by ultrasonography; nephromegaly may be 
seen with pyelonephritis. The choice of ultrasonography versus CT is 
dependent on the expertise of the regional imaging center. Abdominal 
ultrasonography is an excellent screening method for detecting intus­
susception and midgut volvulus. If an ileus or intestinal obstruction is 
present, interpretation of the ultrasonographic examination becomes 
difficult because of the multiple air-­filled loops of intestine.
Contrast Studies
In some situations, certain bowel lesions are best delineated with a contrast 
medium placed in the bowel, either in an upper gastrointestinal series or 
by enema. If a colonic obstruction is suspected, such as in Hirschsprung 
disease, the appropriate contrast material is a barium enema. However, the 
sensitivity and specificity of contrast enema for detection of Hirschsprung 
disease are approximately 70% and 83%, respectively. If the suspicion is 
high for the disease, the patient should be referred for further evaluation 
with either suction rectal biopsy or anorectal manometry. If the presence 
of gastrointestinal perforation is possible, regardless of the etiology, a 
water-­soluble agent should be used instead of barium.
Malrotation of the midgut with a volvulus in infants and older 
children is often seen on ultrasonography but can be diagnosed by an 
upper gastrointestinal study. In the infant who presents with an acute 
abdomen and bilious vomiting and in the older child who manifests 
chronic abdominal pain and intermittent vomiting, the oral barium 
contrast study is highly reliable to rule out causes of obstruction such 
as intestinal malrotation with midgut volvulus or other causes for ana­
tomic obstruction (duodenal web, annular pancreas, superior mesen­
teric artery syndrome).
Intussusception is both diagnosed and treated by means of air or 
barium enema; however, initial diagnosis is possible with ultrasonogra­
phy. The sudden onset of severe, diffuse pain, along with the suggestion 
of a soft, nontender mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen 
in a previously well young child, constitutes the classical picture of 
intussusception. Evidence of blood in the stool is usually a late finding 
and should not be expected early in the disease process. The plain films 
may be nonspecific, may show evidence of intestinal obstruction, or 
may show a mass in the right upper quadrant. A high index of sus­
picion is all that is needed to justify the air or barium enema study. 
Sedation with morphine is helpful for comforting the child and for 
performing a useful study. The air or barium enema often completely 
reduces the intussusception, eliminating the need for surgical interven­
tion. This study should always be performed in consultation with a sur­
geon and with the child prepared to go to the operating room in case of 
failure of reduction or perforation of the colon. Successful hydrostatic 
reduction of the intussusception is accomplished in 50–75% of cases. 
Contraindications for reduction enemas include perforation and signs 
of peritonitis. It should be kept in mind that patients beyond the usual 
age range (3 months–6 years) for intussusception often have an ana­
tomic lead point (polyp, Meckel diverticulum, lymphoma); successful 
hydrostatic reduction may not be possible in these situations. In the 
presence of pneumoperitoneum, peritonitis, or unsuccessful hydro­
static reduction, surgical intervention is indicated. Recurrences occur 
in 5% of patients treated with reduction enemas.
A mass from appendicitis that is pressing against the cecum or 
thickening of the cecal wall may be seen on the barium enema study, 
but ultrasonography and CT scanning with oral contrast media are 
much more reliable.
Computed Tomography
While ultrasound is an important diagnostic tool in the evaluation 
of acute abdominal pain in children, abdominal CT scan may also be 
valuable. Clinicians are reluctant to perform a CT scan due to the risk 
of radiation, especially in young children who are particularly sensitive 
to the adverse effects of radiation exposure. CT is very useful in the 
initial evaluation of abdominal trauma and in the determination of the 
extent of abdominal masses. Intravenous and gastrointestinal contrast 
must be used in CT of the abdomen to obtain the most information, 
especially if inflammatory bowel disease is suspected. CT is usually 
not helpful in the evaluation of chronic abdominal pain in children, 
A
B
Fig. 13.5  A transverse scan of the pelvis shows free fluid pooling behind the bladder (A). The longitudinal 
scan of the right lower quadrant (B) shows a shadowing appendicolith (curved arrow) in a thick-­walled appen­
dix, typical of appendicitis. Straight arrows outline the appendiceal tip, which looks ready to perforate. Free 
fluid in the pelvis always increases the suspicion of appendicitis. (From Teele R, Share J. Appendicitis and 
other causes of intraabdominal inflammation. In: Ultrasonography of Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1991:349.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
232
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
and while it may be useful to evaluate a chronic, undefined inflamma­
tory process, MRI has superior accuracy over CT with no radiation 
risk. MRI is not always easily accessible on an emergency basis and the 
examination can be time consuming.
Management
The immediate concern in management is the differentiation of serious 
surgical and medical problems from the more common but less serious 
causes of acute abdominal pain. A guide to the treatment of the child 
with acute-­onset abdominal pain is noted in Figure 13.6. A mild, non­
specific illness may be treated on an outpatient basis, with follow-­up 
by telephone or in the office. However, the child with abdominal pain 
who appears ill without a specific diagnosis may warrant evaluation 
by a pediatric surgeon. If the diagnosis is still not apparent, the child 
should be admitted for active observation, which includes no oral food 
or liquid, appropriate intravenous fluids, hourly vital signs, and fre­
quent examinations. If the abdominal examination is difficult because 
of poor cooperation, or severe pain, analgesia is appropriate. In the case 
of appendicitis, morphine therapy does not reduce the diagnostic accu­
racy by an experienced clinician. Analgesics may permit an adequate 
abdominal examination but do not eliminate the tenderness caused by 
an inflammatory process. The examination should be repeated every 
2–3 hours. About 10% of children admitted for observation go on to 
show obvious signs of a process warranting surgery in the first few 
hours. In approximately 50% of the observed children, a specific non­
surgical diagnosis becomes apparent.
SPECIFIC CAUSES OF ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN
Appendicitis
Appendicitis is an acute inflammation of the appendix that may be ini­
tiated by luminal obstruction by a fecalith, lymphoid hyperplasia (sec­
ondary to viral infections), inflammation, or, in rare cases, parasites 
(pinworm, Ascaris species). Obstruction with ongoing distal secretion 
of mucus causes distention of the appendix, increased luminal pressure, 
and subsequent arterial obstruction and ischemia. Mucosal ulceration, 
fibropurulent serosal exudates, and bacterial infection lead to gangrene 
from vascular obstruction with subsequent perforation. On occasion, 
the greater omentum may seal over a ruptured appendix, producing a 
right lower quadrant mass and periappendiceal abscess.
Appendicitis may be simple (focal inflammation, no serosal exu­
date), suppurative (obstructed, inflamed, edematous, increased local 
peritoneal fluid with omental and mesenteric containment, or walled 
off), gangrenous (similar to suppurative, plus gray-­green or red-­black 
areas of gangrene, with or without microperforations, and purulent 
peritoneal fluid), ruptured (gross perforation, usually on antimesen­
teric side; peritonitis present), or abscessed (development of pus from 
rupture into right ileal fossa, lateral to cecum or retrocecal, subcecal, or 
pelvic). The bacteriologic components of appendicitis include normal 
intestinal flora, such as enterococci, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas spe­
cies, Klebsiella species, and anaerobic bacteria, such as Clostridium and 
Bacteroides species.
Appendicitis affects approximately 60,000 children each year in the 
United States; it primarily affects adolescents and young adults but may 
develop at any age, even in neonates. The disease is particularly severe 
in very young children, often because of a delay in diagnosis with 
subsequent perforation. Appendicitis in young children is difficult to 
diagnose because of atypical manifestations and the clinician’s inability 
to obtain an accurate history. The thinness of the appendix and the 
paucity of the omentum in younger children may result in rapid, unim­
peded spread of intraabdominal infection after rupture.
Diagnosis
An accurate and early diagnosis is critical for avoiding perforation and 
peritonitis and for excluding other causes of abdominal pain. Appendici­
tis usually manifests initially with a gradual onset of periumbilical (occa­
sionally epigastric) pain, which may begin as a dull ache but becomes 
constant (or, less often, colicky) and of mild to moderate intensity. This 
is then followed by anorexia, nausea, and sometimes emesis. Emesis 
preceding the pain is more typical of gastroenteritis. On occasion, an 
inflamed appendix irritates the colon, producing diarrhea. Furthermore, 
the appendix may irritate the bladder, causing urinary frequency and 
CHILD WITH ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN
Nonspecific findings
No tenderness
No distention
With or without fever
With or without vomiting/diarrhea
Nonabdominal disease
(See Table 13.6)
Treat appropriately
for the specific
disease
“Acute Abdomen”
Point tenderness
Diarrhea with distention
Bilious vomiting
Peritoneal signs
Bloody stools
Palpable mass
Uncertain
Child ill, but
findings do not
fit specific
diagnosis
Surgical
consultation
Admit and
observe
NPO, IV fluid
Frequent exams
Resolves in
24 hr
Home
Not better in
24 hr
Further
evaluation
Worsens
Reconsult
surgeon
Immediate surgical
consultation
Surgeon to treat
appropriately
Not dehydrated,
retaining oral
fluids well
Home
Clear liquids
Return p.r.n.
Dehydrated
Cannot retain
oral fluids
IV hydration 12–24 hr
Bowel rest
Home when better
Probable
viral illness
Fig. 13.6  Algorithm for evaluating acute abdominal pain. IV, intravenous; NPO, nil per os (no oral intake); 
p.r.n., as needed.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
233
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
dysuria. Pain may transiently stop, but as local peritonitis develops, the 
pain will continue but shift to the right lower quadrant. The shifting of 
pain from the periumbilical area to the right lower quadrant area may 
take 12–36 hours but usually occurs in 2–8 hours and may not yet be 
evident in an acute onset of <4–6 hours. McBurney point corresponds 
to the location of the base of the appendix and is found by placing the 
little finger of one hand in the umbilicus and the thumb on the anterior 
superior ileal spine. The index finger, if extended perpendicularly to the 
abdominal wall, identifies McBurney point. Unfortunately, the appen­
dix is not always in its classic position; thus, appendicitis may produce 
pain in the pelvis, in the retrocecal area (back or flank pain, psoas mus­
cle spasm with limp), or elsewhere (Fig. 13.7). With these locations, the 
psoas or obturator sign may be positive (see Fig. 13.3).
Patients with unperforated appendicitis may present with a low-­
grade fever (<38.5°C) and display very characteristic behaviors. They 
can be anxious while watching where examiners place their hands, be 
motionless, walk slowly, get on the examining table with difficulty, or 
exhibit a nondistended but tender abdomen with voluntary guarding, 
reduced bowel sounds, and point tenderness in any area overlying the 
appendix. Rectal examination may reveal right-­sided or diffuse tender­
ness and a mass.
Perforation or extensive gangrene should be suspected in the pres­
ence of progression for more than 36–48 hours; high fever; diffuse 
abdominal pain and tenderness; a rigid, boardlike abdomen; leuko­
cytosis; a right lower quadrant mass; and other signs of generalized 
peritonitis (see Table 13.9).
Laboratory and Radiographic Testing
Ultrasonography has been of benefit in the diagnosis of appendici­
tis and in excluding other important disease processes (Table 13.10). 
Helpful ultrasonographic features suggestive of appendicitis include 
a noncompressible appendix, an inability to visualize the appendix 
when ruptured, the presence of periappendiceal fluid, or the pres­
ence of an appendicolith (Figs. 13.8 and 13.9). Ultrasonography helps 
define other disease processes, such as mesenteric adenitis (Fig. 13.10) 
and gynecologic processes. These conditions must be considered in 
all female patients. Ectopic pregnancy is a particularly serious condi­
tion that must not be missed (Fig. 13.11). Gastroenteritis is one of the 
more common conditions to be considered in the differential diagnosis 
(Table 13.11).
Treatment
Appendicitis is treated mainly by surgical appendectomy and ligation 
of the stump by open or more often laparoscopic methods, although 
there are advantages to medical-­only management. If an abscess is 
present in the right lower quadrant and the patient demonstrates few 
signs of toxicity, elective nonurgent appendectomy may be delayed to 
permit preoperative rehydration and broad-­spectrum antibiotic ther­
apy. If the appendix is not perforated and no fecalith is present, some 
centers treat with only broad-­spectrum antibiotics. In operative appen­
dicitis, parenteral antibiotics are given before surgery and are contin­
ued postoperatively only in the presence of frank contamination, such 
as gangrenous or perforated appendicitis. The duration of antibiotic 
therapy is determined by the presence of infectious complications. If 
the appendix appears normal, other intraabdominal sources of pain 
should be sought during the surgery.
Complications of appendicitis are uncommon but include sep­
sis, intraabdominal abscess formation, wound infections, hepatic 
abscesses, ileus, and peritoneal adhesion formation. There is subse­
quent risk for intestinal obstruction and tubal infertility in females.
Pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is an acute inflammatory condition of the pan­
creas and recent studies estimate the incidence at approximately 
1 in 10,000 children per year. Release and activation of pancre­
atic digestive enzymes subsequently result in extensive destruction 
(autodigestion) and necrosis of pancreatic and, if severe, adja­
cent tissue. Proteolysis, fat necrosis, and hemorrhage are noted in 
severe or fatal cases of pancreatitis, which is often complicated by 
A
B
Fig. 13.7  The appendix. A, The appendix may be located anteriorly, medially, or retrocecally or in the pelvis. B, 
The location of the appendix depends on the location of the cecum. Because the bowel may be quite mobile 
in some patients, the appendix may be located in many different sites in the abdomen. In this figure, the 
appendix is in the right upper quadrant. (From Reilly BM. Abdominal pain. In: Practical Strategies in Outpatient 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:728.)
TABLE 13.10  Final Diagnoses in Cases of 
Clinically Suspected Appendicitis
Appendicitis
Gastroenteritis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Ovarian cyst: torsion
Ectopic pregnancy
Crohn disease
Mesenteric adenitis
Perforated peptic ulcer
Urinary tract infection
Meckel diverticulitis
Pancreatitis
Primary peritonitis
Cholecystitis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
234
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Fig. 13.8  An ultrasound scan of the right lower quadrant in a 6-­year-­old 
girl, demonstrating a thick-­walled cecum (arrows) outlined by echogenic 
fluid. No appendix was found in spite of careful ultrasonographic search­
ing. During surgery, the patient was found to have a perforated appen­
dix and early periappendiceal abscess. TI, terminal ileum. (From Teele R, 
Share J. Appendicitis and other causes of intraabdominal inflammation. 
In: Ultrasonography of Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1991.)
A
B
Fig. 13.9  An 11-­year-­old girl presented with fever, diarrhea, and vomiting. Ten days before admission to 
the hospital, she was seen by a physician because of abdominal pain. She had been partially treated with 
antibiotics for a presumed “strep throat” in the interim. When she presented to the hospital, she again had 
pain in the right lower quadrant, especially when the ultrasound transducer was pressed over the area. A, 
The right lower quadrant abscess (arrows) was quickly identified. The appendix could not be visualized. B, 
In scans along the psoas, multiple lymph nodes (arrows) were apparent. The child’s appendix had ruptured 
1 week before admission, but her symptoms had been masked by the antibiotics that she had been given. 
(From Teele R, Share J. Appendicitis and other causes of intraabdominal inflammation. In: Ultrasonography of 
Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:348.)
Fig. 13.10  This longitudinal scan of the right lower quadrant shows 
lymph nodes arranged in a line along the psoas muscle (P). These are 
nodes enlarged from mesenteric adenitis. The patient did not have 
appendicitis. (From Teele R, Share J. Appendicitis and other causes of 
intraabdominal inflammation. In: Ultrasonography of Infants and Chil­
dren. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.)
multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (e.g., hypotension, acute respi­
ratory distress syndrome, acute kidney injury, cardiogenic shock). 
Pancreatitis is less common in children than in adults, in whom the 
cause is often alcohol ingestion or gallstones. The etiologic factors 
in childhood encompass a broad differential diagnosis and often 
include passage of biliary stones, drugs (valproate), multisystem 
diseases (hemolytic uremic syndrome, cystic fibrosis), trauma 
(including child abuse), biliary or pancreatic anatomic anomalies, 
infections, and metabolic conditions (hypercalcemia, hypertri­
glyceridemia) (Table 13.12).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
235
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
(Patients)
Shoulder
(74 Patients)
Entire abdomen
(83 Patients)
Lower abdomen
(487 Patients)
Back
(41 Patients)
Vagina
(6 Patients)
Opposite quadrant
from ectopic
(156 Patients)
as ectopic
Same quadrant
(331 Patients)
Total
Patients
654
Hours
23
53
24
20
2
7
3
6
22
A
B
23
(Patients)
Days
Weeks
48
68
45
46
7
1
1
5
5
16
23
23
2
6
2
2
3
3
3
4
80
150
(Patients)
o
v
e
r
 
3
 
u
n
k
n
o
w
n
 
Fig. 13.11  Ectopic pregnancy. A, Anatomic location of pain in 654 patients with ectopic pregnancy. B, Duration 
of abdominal pain before the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was confirmed among 654 patients. (Modified 
from Breen JL. A 21-­year survey of 654 ectopic pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1970;136:1304–1319.)
TABLE 13.11  Comparison of Gastroenteritis and Appendicitis
Gastroenteritis
Appendicitis
Pain
Diffuse, cramps, intermittent
Periumbilical shifting to RLQ; constant
Exacerbated by movement, coughing
Vomiting
With or before pain
Follows pain
Diarrhea
Frequent, large volume
Can occur; small volume (from irritation of bowel); may be watery too
Fever
Variable
Low grade, goes up with gangrene or perforation
Course
Intermittently improves
Worsens with time
Systemic symptoms
Variable: headache, malaise, myalgia, arthralgia, sore 
throat
Rare
Physical examination
General: fussy, restless, frequent motion
Quiet, discomfort with movement
Abdomen: soft, mild, diffuse tenderness, hyperactive 
bowel sounds
Abdomen: RLQ tenderness, guarding peritoneal signs, with/without rectal 
tenderness/mass, absent bowel sounds
Laboratory values
WBC count: variable, may be quite high
CRP: variable
WBC count: mild elevation, early left shift; becomes high only with gangrene 
or perforation
CRP: elevated
Urine: nonspecific
Urine: may have WBCs and/or RBCs if bladder irritated, ketosis if vomiting 
is prolonged
Imaging studies
Abdominal films: nonspecific ileus
Abdominal films: often nonspecific, with/without fecalith, with/without loss 
of psoas definition, with/without scoliosis caused by inflammation in RLQ
Ultrasonography: not indicated
Ultrasonography: enlarged appendix, peritoneal fluid, RLQ abscess, absent 
appendix, fecalith
RBC, red blood cell; RLQ, right lower quadrant; WBC, white blood cell.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
236
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 13.12  Causes of Acute Pancreatitis in Children
Drugs and Toxins
Alcohol
Acetaminophen
Azathioprine
l-­Asparaginase
Cimetidine
Corticosteroids
Didanosine
Estrogens
Furosemide
Gila monster bite
6-­Mercaptopurine
Methyldopa
Organophosphates
Pentamidine
Scorpion bites
Spider bites
Sulfonamides
Tetracycline
Thiazides
Valproic acid
Hereditary Pancreatitis
SPINK1
CFTR
Cationic trypsinogen
Infections
Coxsackievirus B
Epstein-­Barr virus
Hepatitis A, B
HIV
Influenza A
Leptospirosis
Measles
Mumps
Mycoplasma
Rubella
Reye syndrome
Obstructive
Ascariasis
Biliary sludge
Biliary tract malformation
Cholelithiasis
Crohn disease
Duplication cyst
Pancreatic pseudocyst
Pancreas divisum
Postoperative
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Tumor
Systemic Disease
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Diabetes mellitus
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Hemochromatosis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Hyperlipidemia types I, IV, and V
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypothermia
Kawasaki syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Malnutrition
Organic acidemias
Periarteritis nodosa
Peptic ulcer
Postpancreatic transplantation
Refeeding after malnutrition
Reye syndrome
Uremia
Traumatic
Blunt injury
Child abuse
Post-­ERCP
Surgical trauma
Total body cast
CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance receptor; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; SPINK1, serine protease inhib­
itor Kazal type 1.
Modified from Behrman RE, ed. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 14th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:999.
Manifestations
Manifestations of acute pancreatitis include intense epigastric abdom­
inal pain that may be described as steady, boring, constant, achelike, 
knifelike, and exacerbated by recumbency, that radiates to the back, 
upper abdominal quadrants, or the scapula. Emesis is common, often 
protracted, and occasionally bilious. Fever is usually low to moderate 
grade; high fever (>39°C) suggests the presence of a primary infectious 
process with or without secondary pancreatitis or bacterial superin­
fection and pancreatic abscess formation. The patient often assumes 
a hunched-­over or knee-­chest lateral fetal posture and may manifest 
epigastric tenderness; bowel sounds may be reduced or absent. Signs 
of peritonitis suggest more extensive necrosis, as do signs of spread­
ing hemorrhage, such as blue-­green discoloration of the flanks (Grey 
Turner sign) or of the periumbilical region (Cullen sign). Intravascular 
fluid depletion, cardiogenic shock, hemorrhagic shock, hypocalcemic 
tetany, or systemic inflammatory response syndrome with multiorgan 
system failure may ensue. Pain may last for 3–10 days.
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in children requires at least two 
of three of the following be met: (1) abdominal pain compatible with 
pancreatitis, (2) elevated serum amylase and/or lipase that is three times 
the upper limit of normal, and (3) imaging consistent with pancreati­
tis. Initial imaging should start with transabdominal ultrasonography. 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
237
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
Ultrasonography and CT scan are helpful in identifying the acutely 
inflamed pancreas (Fig. 13.12), the degree of necrosis, and the later 
development of a pancreatic pseudocyst (Fig. 13.13).
Testing for children with a first episode of acute pancreatitis in 
addition to a CBC, amylase, and lipase should start with liver enzymes 
(alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-­
glutamyl transferase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin), triglyceride 
level, and calcium level. This is based on the most common causes and 
those for which therapeutic options exist. The differential diagnosis of 
hyperamylasemia is seen in Table 13.13. Adverse prognostic factors in 
severe acute pancreatitis include the presence of leukocytosis (white 
blood count >16,000/mm3), hyperglycemia (glucose level >200 mg/
dL), a high lactic dehydrogenase level (>350 U/L), and a high aspar­
tate aminotransferase level (>250 U/L) on admission and a decrease 
in hematocrit value (>10%), an increase in BUN level (>5 mg/dL), a 
low calcium level (<8 mg/dL), hypoxia (Pao2 <60 mm Hg), acidosis 
(base deficit >4 mmol/L), or severe dehydration by 48 hours of hospi­
talization. The degree of pancreatic necrosis may be determined from 
the failure of CT scans to depict intravenous contrast parenchymal 
enhancement; severe pancreatitis is associated with more than 50% 
necrosis of the gland.
Complications
Complications of pancreatitis include local tissue necrosis with or 
without superinfection (pancreatic abscess), fistulization (to colon), 
left-­sided pleural effusion, gastrointestinal hemorrhage (ulceration, 
vascular rupture, splenic rupture), shock, coagulopathy, acute kidney 
injury, myocardial depression, acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
hyperglycemia, hypocalcemia, subcutaneous nodules (fat necrosis), 
hypoalbuminemia, mental changes, and retinopathy.
Management
The management of acute pancreatitis consists of supportive care, 
such as nasogastric tube decompression for patients with an ileus or 
severe emesis, administration of intravenous fluids, administration of 
Fig. 13.12  Acute pancreatitis. CT scan through the body of the pan­
creas demonstrates a halo of decreased attenuation around the pan­
creas that represents a peripancreatic zone of edema and fluid (curved 
arrows). Note the pancreatic ascites, most obvious lateral to the liver 
(small arrows). If intravenous contrast were administered before the 
CT scan, the inflamed pancreas would appear more dense (whiter). 
A, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; K, kidney; L, liver; PV, portal vein; S, 
spleen; ST, stomach. (From Freeny P, Lawson T. In: Putman CE, Ravin 
CE, eds. Textbook of Diagnostic Imaging. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1988.)
Fig. 13.13  Pseudocyst. Follow-­up CT scan (same patient as in Fig. 
13.12) 5 months after the episode of acute pancreatitis demonstrates a 
large pseudocyst (PC). This large pseudocyst will probably not resolve 
spontaneously and may need drainage. (From Freeny P, Lawson T. In: 
Putman CE, Ravin CE, eds. Textbook of Diagnostic Imaging. Philadel­
phia: WB Saunders; 1988.)
TABLE 13.13  Differential Diagnosis of 
Hyperamylasemia
Pancreatic Pathology
Acute or chronic pancreatitis
Complications of pancreatitis (pseudocyst, ascites, abscess)
Factitious pancreatitis
Complication of ERCP
Salivary Gland Pathology
Parotitis (mumps, Staphylococcus aureus, CMV, HIV, EBV)
Sialadenitis (calculus, radiation)
Eating disorders (anorexia nervosa, bulimia)
Intraabdominal Pathology
Biliary tract disease (cholelithiasis)
Peptic ulcer perforation
Peritonitis
Intestinal obstruction
Appendicitis
Systemic Diseases
Metabolic acidosis (diabetes mellitus, shock)
Renal insufficiency, transplantation
Burns
Anorexia-­bulimia
Pregnancy
Drugs (morphine)
Head injury
Cardiopulmonary bypass
CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; ERCP, endoscopic ret­
rograde cholangiopancreatography.
Modified from Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2076, Table 378.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
238
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
narcotics for pain, and therapy for accompanying complications (e.g., 
shock, adult respiratory distress syndrome, and acute kidney injury). 
Endoscopic sphincterotomy by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan­
creatography (ERCP) is of benefit if gallstones are present, although 
ERCP has risks that include the induction of pancreatitis.
After initial fluid resuscitation with either normal saline or lactated 
ringers, maintenance intravenous fluids should be provided at 1.5–2 
times with close monitoring of urine output.
In children with mild acute pancreatitis, starting enteral nutrition 
early (within 48–72 hours of presentation) has been shown to decrease 
length of stay and decrease risk of organ dysfunction.
There is no role for antibiotics in the management of acute pancre­
atitis in children, except in the presence of documented infected necro­
sis, or in children with necrotizing pancreatitis who are not improving 
or who demonstrate a worsening clinical course.
Cholelithiasis
Gallstones are uncommon in children, but they complicate chronic 
diseases, such as hemolytic anemia (sickle cell anemia, spherocytosis), 
cholestatic jaundice in which total parenteral nutrition is given, and 
other cholestatic diseases. Gallstones may result from prematurity or 
drug intake (furosemide, ceftriaxone), or they may be idiopathic. Bil­
iary obstruction (stone in cystic or common bile duct) often results in 
jaundice; sudden onset of severe, sharp right upper quadrant pain; local­
ized deep tenderness in the right upper quadrant (superficial tenderness 
suggests an associated cholecystitis); and emesis. The pain is episodic 
and colicky, but often constant and superimposed with waves of more 
intense pain, and may radiate to the angle of the ipsilateral scapula, back, 
or other areas of the abdomen or chest. Patients frequently move about to 
find a comfortable position. There may be associated diaphoresis, pallor, 
tachycardia, weakness, nausea, and lightheadedness. A round or pear-­
shaped tender mass may be palpated in the right upper quadrant of the 
abdomen if the gallbladder is distended. The pain may be diurnal, with 
increased intensity at night. Many patients with single or multiple gall­
stones without obstruction are asymptomatic.
Acute cholecystitis is caused by inflammation of the gallbladder 
wall as a result of duct obstruction (i.e., calculus) or nonobstructing 
(i.e., acalculous) conditions and is manifested by fever, mild jaundice, 
severe abdominal pain, emesis, nausea, and leukocytosis. Pain may be 
similar to that in cholelithiasis and radiates to the right scapula, shoul­
der, or chest. The Murphy sign is demonstrated by palpating an acutely 
inflamed gallbladder, which causes the patient to halt respiration and 
feel the pain. Fever of >39.5°C suggests perforation or gallbladder 
gangrene, whereas a high direct bilirubin level (>4 mg/dL) suggests a 
common duct stone. Pain may last for 5–10 days. Passage of stones 
or microlithiasis (sludge) may also produce acute pancreatitis. Intoler­
ance to fatty foods is, unfortunately, a nonspecific observation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasonography that demonstrates acal­
culous or calculus-­induced cholecystitis or acute duct obstruction by a 
stone (Fig. 13.14).
Treatment
Some treatment of obstructing stones may include endoscopic, open, 
or laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Some patients may go directly to 
surgery. However, supportive therapy with proper analgesia and rehy­
dration is of critical importance. Effective pain relief should include 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs with an attempt to avoid opioids. 
Antibiotic therapy should almost always be implemented in the setting 
of acute cholecystitis, regardless of etiology. Although most cases of 
acute, acalculous cholecystitis have a viral etiology, antibiotic therapy 
is often prescribed to prevent further complications and should include 
coverage against both gram-­negative and anaerobic microorganisms.
Peptic Ulcer Disease
Peptic ulceration is becoming recognized in children with increasing 
frequency (see Chapter 16). Risk factors for peptic ulcer disease include 
gastritis, a positive family history of ulcer disease, presence of Helico­
bacter pylori, treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents 
and corticosteroids, cigarette smoking, and severe injury (burns, head 
injury, shock). Manifestations include pain, gastrointestinal bleeding 
(melena, hematemesis, anemia), emesis, and, in rare cases, perforation. 
Nocturnal pain, pain relieved by food, and a family history of peptic 
A
B
Fig. 13.14  Transverse scan with linear array transducer shows pericolic edema in a teenaged boy, who pre­
sented with severe pain in the right upper quadrant from acute cholecystitis (A). A longitudinal scan of the 
right upper quadrant (B) shows a stone (arrow) that was thought to be impacted in the neck of the gallbladder 
because it did not change at all with position. The patient had severe pain with palpation over the gallbladder. 
(From Teele R, Share J. The liver. In: Ultrasonography of Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1991.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
239
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
ulcer disease are often present in older affected children. The pain is 
often chronic, recurrent, and located in the epigastrium; tenderness 
may be localized to the epigastric region, but this is an inconsistent 
finding.
Acute perforation is uncommon in children but is characterized by 
sudden worsening of pain or a new abrupt onset of excruciating epi­
gastric pain. There is associated pallor, faintness, weakness, syncope, 
diaphoresis, and a rigid abdomen.
Abdominal Wall Pain
Abdominal pain localized to abdominal muscles, particularly the rec­
tus muscles, may be due to thoracoabdominal nerve entrapment as 
the anterior branches enter the rectus channel or when the accessory 
nerves branch within the rectus channel. The nerve, artery, and vein 
form a neurovascular unit then may be compressed by the fibrous ring 
or the rectus aponeurosis.
Anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES) may 
present with acute or chronic pain that is usually unilateral and local­
ized to the lateral aspect of the rectus muscle. The pain may radiate 
across the abdomen or down the lower abdomen. Traction, increased 
abdominal pressure, sitting, exercise (sit-­ups, crunches, straight leg 
lifts), or twisting may aggravate the pain. Localizing (point) tenderness 
is usually present along the lateral aspect of the rectus muscle. Treat­
ment includes local injection of lidocaine or other anesthetic agents 
and, if not successful, anterior neurectomy.
CHRONIC ABDOMINAL PAIN
Recurrent abdominal pain (RAP) in children remains one of the most 
challenging common conditions treated by pediatricians. Intermittent 
severe, episodic pain can be frightening to both families and care pro­
viders because it may be an indication of serious disease. It has been 
reported to occur in 10–15% of children between the ages of 4 and 16 
years. In only a small minority of patients with RAP, the symptoms can 
be explained by discernable organic disease. However, the term RAP is 
a descriptive term and should not be used as a diagnosis. RAP may be 
caused by several different conditions that include, but are not limited 
to, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, peptic ulcer, biliary tract 
disease, pancreatitis, or functional pain. Pain pathways can initially be 
influenced by the presence of pathology such as inflammation or tissue 
damage that often persists despite the absence of identifiable pathology.
The term functional abdominal pain refers to pain that has no ana­
tomic, histologic, or “organic” etiology. This type of pain is the hallmark 
of functional abdominal pain disorders (FAPDs) that are subclassified, 
utilizing Rome IV criteria, into a number of clinically distinct entities, 
namely irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), functional dyspepsia, abdominal 
migraine, and functional abdominal pain not otherwise specified (FAP-­
NOS) (Table 13.14). A common feature among patients with functional 
gastrointestinal disorders is the heightened sensitivity to experimental 
pain, also known as visceral hyperalgesia. A unifying theory of all func­
tional gastrointestinal disorders is the alteration of the brain-­gut axis that 
can present with clusters of symptoms related to abnormal signals arising 
from the gastrointestinal tract or abnormal processing of signals in the 
central nervous system. Without proper explanation of the term func­
tional, most families would not understand the condition since the term 
is very vague and nondescriptive. Thus, FAPDs should be referred to as 
“disorders of gut-­brain interaction” given that their bio-­psychosocial 
etiology involves complex interactions within the gut-­brain axis. Symp­
toms are physiologic and modifiable by sociocultural and psychologic 
influences. Functional pain can be triggered or influenced by gastroin­
testinal infections, food, allergies, stress, and physical or sexual abuse. 
These experiences may have a long-­lasting impact on a child and make 
the child more susceptible to the development of FAPDs by affecting 
intestinal motility, altered intestinal permeability, or visceral hyperalge­
sia, which conversely impacts the development of altered or maladaptive 
coping skills later in life. The functional nature of this pain does not mean 
that the pain is imaginary or that it may not interfere with the child’s daily 
activities. Patients with functional abdominal pain experience real pain 
and should not be considered to be faking it or not experiencing it at all. 
Psychosocial factors, along with altered gut physiology, ultimately play 
an important role in the development of FAPDs including functional 
abdominal pain, IBS, functional dyspepsia, and abdominal migraine.
The diagnostic Rome criteria for each of these disorders permit 
clinicians to make a clinical diagnosis with limited diagnostic testing. 
Applying the criteria in the clinical setting allows the care provider 
to validate the reality of the symptoms and develop an appropriate 
physician-­patient relationship aimed at improving symptoms and 
functioning. All too often, the clinician repeatedly performs unnec­
essary diagnostic tests to rule out pathology. This often leads to dis­
missal of the patient’s concerns or prevents an effective collaboration 
in the patient’s care that promotes a vicious cycle of symptom anxiety 
and health-­seeking behavior. Applying the Rome criteria along with 
a proper history and physical examination that includes “red flags” is 
most of the time sufficient to make a clinical diagnosis of an FAPD and 
to initiate proper treatment (see Table 13.8).
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS OF FUNCTIONAL 
ABDOMINAL PAIN
The history should be detailed and, in most instances, obtained sepa­
rately from the parents and the child. A private conversation with each 
often provides better insight into all factors affecting the child. In addi­
tion to covering the historical information already detailed, the clinician 
should pay attention to factors in the child’s environment, family, school, 
and social interactions that may be sources of undue stress. Care provid­
ers often have difficulty making a positive diagnosis of a functional gas­
trointestinal disorder, particularly since there are no biologic markers. 
The diagnostic evaluation of a child with abdominal pain begins with a 
history to distinguish chronic from acute pain and addressing red flags. 
The revised Rome IV criteria for childhood functional abdominal pain 
are met if the duration of pain exceeds 2 months (episodic or continu­
ous). Children with FAPDs may be subclassified into one of four clinical 
diagnostic categories that include (1) functional dyspepsia (abdom­
inal pain associated with symptoms centered in the upper abdomen), 
(2) irritable bowel syndrome (abdominal pain associated with altered 
bowel pattern), (3) functional abdominal pain not otherwise specified 
(isolated paroxysmal abdominal pain not otherwise specified), or (4) 
abdominal migraine (paroxysmal intense pain that can be associated 
with either pallor, headache, photophobia, nausea, or vomiting) (see 
Table 13.14). The diagnosis of abdominal migraine is sometimes easier 
to make since symptoms are episodic and occur abruptly after periods 
of normal well-­being. It is not uncommon to get a history of the child 
waking up in the middle of the night with pain and vomiting and then 
having complete resolution of symptoms after 1–2 days. The frequent 
occurrence or change in location of pain or alternating bowel habits in 
the same patient, however, is not uncommon. Clinicians do not always 
feel comfortable simply relying on Rome criteria or are unaware that 
they exist. Functional pain should be considered when abdominal pain 
persists a month beyond the usual course of an acute illness (i.e., gastro­
enteritis). Children often present with intermittent, periumbilical pain 
that usually waxes and wanes and can often experience other comorbid 
symptoms, including headaches, joint pain, dizziness, pallor, and dia­
phoresis. Nausea occurs in as many as 50% of children with FAPDs and 
is a major factor contributing to significant disability.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
240
SECTION 4   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Severity and Location of Pain
Functional pain can vary in intensity, ranging from mild intermit­
tent pain to severe intense pain that disrupts a child’s life, family, and 
school attendance. Excluding organic causes of chronic abdominal 
pain remains a challenge for pediatricians, particularly given the het­
erogeneity of FAPD symptoms. Although the location of pain does 
not always help differentiate between functional and organic causes, 
periumbilical pain has been shown to be most likely associated with 
functional pain. Substernal pain should raise the suspicion for an 
esophageal cause, such as erosive esophagitis from gastroesophageal 
reflux. Chronic abdominal pain in the presence of dysphagia or his­
tory of food impaction should prompt a referral to the specialist to rule 
out eosinophilic esophagitis. In school-­age children (9–13 years old) 
with eosinophilic esophagitis, abdominal pain may be the only pre­
senting symptom, whereas in younger children (4–13 years old), vom­
iting may be a more common symptom. Epigastric pain can be caused 
from pathology in the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and pancreas 
or from functional dyspepsia. Pain originating from hepatobiliary 
structures, including the gallbladder, liver, and head of the pancreas, 
usually is primarily in the right upper quadrant. Certain conditions 
must be considered in patients who present with chronic pain in the 
right lower quadrant and these include chronic appendicitis, abdom­
inal wall pain, and Crohn disease. Identifying certain characteristics 
or “red flags” that can assist the clinician in detecting organic disease 
in patients with chronic abdominal pain would be important, since it 
could limit unnecessary diagnostic testing in those with FAPDs and 
potentially prevent a delay in the diagnosis of a specific organic dis­
ease. Determination of fecal calprotectin is increasingly being utilized 
as a noninvasive screen for Crohn disease. It is a marker of intestinal 
mucosal inflammation and appears to be superior to standard serologic 
testing such as CBC or CRP. A normal calprotectin level in children 
would minimize the need for colonoscopy in children with chronic 
abdominal pain.
Approach to Treatment
The first goal is to identify physical and psychologic stress factors that may 
have an important role in onset, severity, exacerbations, or maintenance of 
pain. Equally important is to reverse environmental factors that serve as 
reinforcers of the pain behavior. Parents and the school must work together 
to support the child. Regular school attendance is extremely important 
and should be encouraged even in the presence of pain. It is oftentimes 
helpful for the care provider to communicate directly to school officials 
to explain the nature of the problem. At home, less attention should be 
directed toward the symptoms. In the clinic, defining the problem and 
establishing an effective physician-­patient relationship is an important part 
of therapy. Attention should focus on improvement of daily symptoms and 
quality of life, as well as the child’s return to normal activities. Once the 
evaluation, including the history, physical examination, and appropriate 
screening laboratory tests, has been completed and findings are normal, 
a search for nonorganic sources of pain should not be continued. Instead, 
the appropriate treatment should be initiated. The child with functional 
pain may improve once the child and the family understand the nature of 
the pain and a proper explanation is given by the provider. Knowing that 
there is no serious organic disease and that the sensations are not imagi­
nary is usually welcome information to the family. However, the conver­
sation about functional abdominal pain should be brought up during the 
first visit and should not be discussed only after doing extensive testing. 
The family should understand that testing is only to confirm the absence of 
other disorders and confirm the possibility of functional pain.
There is a spectrum of functional pain in terms of severity. Some 
patients have minimal severity and frequency of pain while others have 
daily, unremitting pain that results in school absences, functional disabil­
ity, and diminished quality of life. The total number of days missed from 
school is a good indicator of disability and should always be asked during 
the visit. For those with mild symptoms not interfering with daily activ­
ities, simple treatment strategies such as stool softeners for constipation 
often provide sufficient relief, such that the child can resume a more nor­
mal life. Similarly, dietary manipulation with lactose, sucrose, or fructose 
avoidance is often an important first step in the child with mild, chronic 
abdominal pain. Carbohydrate malabsorption or intolerance from lac­
tose, sucrose, sorbitol, or high-­fructose corn syrup (fruit juices and sodas) 
may produce pain that responds to dietary elimination of the offending 
sugar. These simple strategies should not be tried on the child with signif­
icant disability and school absences, mainly because they are unlikely to 
work and time would be lost in trying to get the child back to functioning. 
The clinician should refrain from talking to patients and family using neg­
ative comments such as “You will have to learn to live with this pain.” This 
leads to considerable gloom and hopelessness and will make the condition 
much more difficult to treat. Sometimes, despite diligent evaluation by the 
most skilled and patient clinician, symptoms can persist. There are no U.S. 
TABLE 13.14  Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria 
for Functional Abdominal Pain Disorders
Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
Functional dyspepsia
Must include at least one of the following for at 
least 4 days per month:
 • Postprandial fullness
 • Early satiation
 • Epigastric pain or burning not associated with 
defecation
Criteria must be fulfilled for at least 2 mo.
Irritable bowel syn­
drome (IBS)
Must include all of the following:
 • Abdominal pain at least 4 days per month asso­
ciated with at least one of the following: related 
to defecation, a change in stool frequency, or a 
change in appearance of stool
 • In children with constipation, pain continues 
despite resolution of constipation (if pain 
resolves, the child has functional constipation)
Criteria must be fulfilled for at least 2 mo.
Abdominal migraine
Must include all of the following occurring at least 
twice:
 • Sudden episodes of intense, acute abdominal 
pain lasting at least 1 hr
 • Episodes are separated by weeks to months of 
mild or no abdominal pain
 • Typical pattern for each child
 • Pain is associated with at least two of the fol­
lowing: anorexia, nausea, vomiting, headache, 
photophobia, or pallor
Criteria must be fulfilled for at least 6 mo.
Functional abdominal 
pain not otherwise 
specified (FAP-­NOS)
Must include all of the following for at least 4 days 
per month:
 • Episodic or continuous abdominal pain not 
solely related to physiologic events (like eating 
or menses)
 • Does not meet criteria for other FAPDs
Criteria must be fulfilled for at least 2 mo.
FAPDs, functional abdominal pain disorders.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Liver 
Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:57, Table 6.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
241
CHAPTER 13  Abdominal Pain
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved drugs for the treatment 
of chronic abdominal pain in children and there is little evidence of effi­
cacy for most commonly used medications. It is important to consider that 
the clinician must spend time educating the family regarding the suspected 
mechanisms and how and why pharmacotherapy may or may not work. In 
the more severe, disabled patients, patient education should be considered 
part of a therapeutic program that includes physical reconditioning, exer­
cise, sleep restoration, and, in many cases, thought reprocessing. The FDA 
has approved IB-­Stim, a nonimplantable, percutaneous electrical nerve 
field stimulation device for the treatment of adolescents with functional 
abdominal pain associated with IBS. The auricular stimulation targets the 
brain-­gut axis through low-­frequency electrical stimulation of auricular 
cranial nerves and was shown to improve abdominal pain, global symp­
toms, and functional disability compared to placebo. The novelty of this 
approach comes at a critical time when the development of nonpharma­
cologic and nonaddictive therapies to treat chronic pain has become a 
major priority. Psychologic therapies such as cognitive-­behavioral therapy, 
hypnosis, relaxation, meditation, or biofeedback have been shown to be 
as effective as, and sometimes better than, pharmacologic therapy. Fami­
lies should always be educated on the potential modification of the “pain 
behavior” and potential benefits of lifestyle modifications.
A therapeutic trial with medications should be discussed with the 
family and should have a well-­defined duration and goals. Also, the dose 
should be adequate to achieve the desired effect. If history and physical 
examination suggest dyspepsia or epigastric pain without red flags, a trial 
of acid suppression is very appropriate as an initial step. Similarly, if the 
history and physical examination suggest constipation as the cause for 
pain, then the proper therapy with osmotic laxatives or cathartics should 
be initiated. Pharmacologic therapy, including anticonvulsant or antide­
pressant agents, has not consistently proven to be effective in children 
with functional abdominal pain. Such therapy has sometimes been effec­
tive in young adults but is not recommended for younger children under 
8 years of age. Amitriptyline has been used in small doses and anecdot­
ally has been successful in alleviating functional abdominal pain. It is 
widely used for chronic pain conditions including migraine headaches, 
fibromyalgia, and neuropathic pain and is considered to be effective at 
much lower doses than those used for depression.
Cyproheptadine is an antagonist of serotonin, histamine H1, 
and muscarinic receptors. It has been used to treat allergic rhinitis 
and migraine headaches and anecdotally as an appetite stimulant in 
children. Antispasmodics such as hyoscyamine or dicyclomine can 
produce significant anticholinergic side effects including dry mouth, 
dizziness, and blurred vision. Most antispasmodics should be used as 
adjuvant therapy for the treatment of chronic abdominal pain and only 
for episodic pain and not as daily treatment.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth may be a cause of chronic 
abdominal pain. Rifaximin has low systemic absorbance and localized 
effect on intestinal flora and is approved for diarrhea-­predominant 
IBS in adults. In adolescents with functional pain, bloating, and/or 
diarrhea, empirical treatment with this antibiotic may be considered. 
Although short-­term treatment appears to be well tolerated in adults, 
multiple treatments with rifaximin may be needed, which increases the 
concern for antimicrobial resistance.
The dearth of successful treatment options for chronic abdominal 
pain often results in patients opting for alternative methods. There 
appears to be a growing desire among patients and families for a more 
“natural” approach to therapy. It has been suggested that approximately 
35% of adult patients with functional bowel disorders use complemen­
tary or alternative medicine despite the perceived lack of efficacy by 
some clinicians.
If the symptoms are mild and not severe enough to interfere with a 
child’s school or daily activities, using alternative therapies for which there 
is some scientific evidence of benefit may be a good starting point. These 
include peppermint oil, melatonin, and STW5 (Iberogast). Concentrated 
peppermint oil is increasingly being used in the treatment of abdominal 
pain in children. The menthol component of peppermint oil acts as a cal­
cium channel blocker that causes relaxation of intestinal smooth muscle. 
Peppermint oil, administered in pH-­dependent, enteric-­coated capsules, 
has been shown to reduce abdominal pain severity over placebo in both 
adults and children. Melatonin is likely to be effective in less severe patients 
with functional pain with minimal comorbidities and has the added ben­
efit of having a low side effect profile. Iberogast is a mixture of nine herbal 
plant extracts that is being used as an alternative approach for the treat­
ment of functional dyspepsia and IBS. The exact mechanism of this herbal 
preparation is not known but several trials have suggested that it is effective 
in alleviating symptoms of functional dyspepsia and IBS. The combination 
consists of liquid extracts from chamomile flowers, bitter candytuft, angel­
ica root, caraway fruits, milk thistle, lemon balm leaves, greater celandine, 
licorice root, and peppermint leaves.
   	 R E D  F L A G S
Red flags or “alarm signals” are critical to investigate in the history and 
physical exam of abdominal pain (see Table 13.8). The presence of red 
flags raises the suspicion of an underlying organic disorder and includes 
pain localized away from the umbilicus, pain related to menstrual cycle, 
back pain, multisystem complaints, anorexia, weight loss, evidence of 
gastrointestinal bleeding (anemia, hematemesis, melena, hematoche­
zia, rectal bleeding, occult bleeding), profuse diarrhea, extraintestinal 
symptoms (fever, rash, recurrent aphthous ulcers), and a positive family 
history of inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or peptic ulcers. 
Anemia, hematochezia, and weight loss in children with chronic abdom­
inal pain are predictive of IBD. Physical findings of linear growth decel­
eration, localized fullness or mass effect, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
back or costovertebral angle tenderness, perianal skin tags or fistulas, 
soiling, or occult blood in stools should be taken seriously and should 
prevent the diagnosis of a FAPD until further work-­up is completed. 
Biochemical analysis that raises suspicion for organic disorders includes 
iron deficiency anemia, high sedimentation rate or CRP, hypoalbumin­
emia, abnormal liver or kidney function tests, or elevated amylase and 
lipase. A high stool calprotectin level suggests an inflammatory process 
and should be obtained if there is any suspicion for Crohn disease. In 
cases in which recurrent vomiting is a significant part of the history, an 
upper gastrointestinal series should be obtained to rule out gastric outlet 
disorder, malrotation, or partial small bowel obstruction. An abdomi­
nal ultrasound should also be considered to investigate the possibility of 
gallstones, pseudocyst, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, or a retroper­
itoneal mass. Contrast CT scans in the evaluation of chronic functional 
pain is seldom helpful and should not be part of the work-­up unless a 
specific cause is being investigated.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
241.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Diagnosis of right lower quad­
rant pain and suspected acute appendicitis – executive Summary. Compar­
ative effectiveness review. No. 157;2015. www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/
ehc/products/528/2159/appendicitis-­executive-­151214.pdf.
Apley J. The Child with Abdominal Pains. 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific; 
1975.
Harberg FJ. The acute abdomen in childhood. Pediatr Ann. 1989;18:169–178.
Hatch EI. The acute abdomen in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1985;32:1151–1164.
John SD. Imaging of acute abdominal emergencies in infants and children. 
Curr Probl Pediatr. 2001;31:315–358.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW III, Blum NJ, et al. (eds): Nelson Textbook of Pedi­
atrics, Vol. 21e. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
Acute Abdominal Pain
Alford BA, McIlhenny J. The child with acute abdominal pain and vomiting. 
Radiol Clin North Am. 1992;30:441–453.
Barr RG, Levine MD, Watkins JB. Recurrent abdominal pain of childhood due 
to lactose intolerance. N Engl J Med. 1979;300:1449–1451.
Bonadio WA. Clinical features of abdominal painful crisis in sickle cell ane­
mia. J Pediatr Surg. 1990;25:301–302.
Buchert GS. Abdominal pain in children: an emergency practitioner’s guide. 
Emerg Med Clin North Am. 1989;7:497–517.
Byrne WJ, Arnold WC, Stannard MW, et al. Ureteropelvic junction obstruc­
tion presenting with recurrent abdominal pain: diagnosis by ultrasound. 
Pediatrics. 1985;76:934–937.
Daneman A, Navarro O. Intussusception. Pediatr Radiol. 2003;33:79–85.
Grey DWR, Dixon MD, Collin J. The closed eye sign: an aid to diagnosing 
non-­specific abdominal pain. BMJ. 1988;297:836–837.
Helms M, Vastrup P, Gerner-­Smidt P, et al. Short and long term mortality as­
sociated with foodborne bacterial gastrointestinal infections: registry based 
study. BMJ. 2003;326:357–360.
Henrikson S, Blane CE, Koujok K, et al. The effect of screening sonogra­
phy on the positive rate of enemas for intussusception. Pediatr Radiol. 
2003;33:190–193.
Jeddy TA, Vowles RH, Southam JA. “Cough sign”: a reliable test in the diagno­
sis of intraabdominal inflammation. Br J Surg. 1994;81:279–281.
Katz JA, Wagner ML, Gresik MV, et al. Typhlitis: an 18-­year experience and 
postmortem review. Cancer. 1990;65:1041–1047.
Kim MK, Strait RT, Sato TT, et al. A randomized clinical trial of analgesia in 
children with acute abdominal pain. Acad Emerg Med. 2002;9:281–287.
Leahy AL, Fogarty EE, Fitzgerald RJ, et al. Discitis as a cause of abdominal 
pain in children. Surgery. 1984;95:412–414.
Lebenthal E, Rossi TM, Nord KS, et al. Recurrent abdominal pain and lactose 
absorption in children. Pediatrics. 1981;67:828–832.
Moustaki M, Zeis PM, Katsikari M, et al. Mesenteric lymphadenopathy as a 
cause of abdominal pain in children with lobar or segmental pneumonia. 
Pediatr Pulmonol. 2003;35:269–273.
Murphy TV, Gargiullo PM, Massoudi MS, et al. Intussusception among infants 
given an oral rotavirus vaccine. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:564–572.
Soltero MJ, Bill AH. The natural history of Meckel’s diverticulum and its rela­
tion to incidental removal. Am J Surg. 1976;132:168–173.
Thomas SH, Silen W. Effect on diagnostic efficiency of analgesia for undiffer­
entiated abdominal pain. Br J Surg. 2003;90:5–9.
Towne BH, Mahour GH, Woolley MM, et al. Ovarian cysts and tumors in 
infancy and childhood. J Pediatr Surg. 1975;10:311–320.
Peptic Ulcer Disease
Chiang B-­L, Chang M-­H, Lin M-­I, et al. Chronic duodenal ulcer in children: 
clinical observation and response to treatment. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 1989;8:161–165.
Colin-­Jones DG. Acid suppression: how much is needed? Adjust it to suit the 
condition. BMJ. 1990;301:564–565.
Drumm B, Rhoads JM, Stringer DA, et al. Peptic ulcer disease in children: 
etiology, clinical findings, and clinical course. Pediatrics. 1988;82:410–414.
Gormally S, Drumm B. Helicobacter pylori and gastrointestinal symptoms. 
Arch Dis Child. 1994;70:165–166.
Hosking SW, Ling TKW, Chung SCS, et al. Duodenal ulcer healing by 
eradication of Helicobacter pylori without anti-­acid treatment: randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 1994;343:508–510.
Huang JQ, Sridhar S, Hunt RH. Role of Helicobacter pylori infection and non-­
steroidal anti-­inflammatory drugs in peptic-­ulcer disease: a meta-­analysis. 
Lancet. 2002;359:14–22.
Murphy MS, Eastham EJ, Jimenez M, et al. Duodenal ulceration: review of 110 
cases. Arch Dis Child. 1987;62:554–558.
Suerbaum S, Michetti P. Helicobacter pylori infection. N Engl J Med. 
2002;347:1175–1186.
Appendicitis
Benjamin IS, Patel AG. Managing acute appendicitis. BMJ. 2002;325:505–506.
Doraiswamy NV. Leukocyte counts in the diagnosis and prognosis of acute 
appendicitis in children. Br J Surg. 1979;66:782–784.
Flum DR, Morris A, Koepsell T, et al. Has misdiagnosis of appendicitis de­
creased over time? J Am Med Assoc. 2001;286:1748–1754.
Huang L, Yin Y, Yang L, et al. Comparison of antibiotic therapy and appen­
dectomy for acute uncomplicated appendicitis in children: a meta-­analysis. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(5):426–434.
Jones DJ. Appendicitis. BMJ. 1992;305:44–48.
Knight PJ, Vassy LE. Specific diseases mimicking appendicitis in childhood. 
Arch Surg. 1981;116:744–746.
Lee SL, Walsch AJ, Ho HS. Computed tomography and ultrasonography do 
not improve and may delay the diagnosis and treatment of acute appendi­
citis. Arch Surg. 2001;136:556–562.
Murch SH. Diarrhoea, diagnostic delay, and appendicitis. Lancet. 
2000;356:787.
Neilson IR, Laberge J-­M, Nguyen C. Appendicitis in children: current thera­
peutic recommendations. J Pediatr Surg. 1990;25:1113–1116.
Oestreich AE, Adelstein EH. Appendicitis as the presenting complaint in cystic 
fibrosis. J Pediatr Surg. 1982;17:191–194.
Paulson EK, Kalady MF, Pappas TN. Suspected appendicitis. N Engl J Med. 
2003;348:236–242.
Tate JJT, Dawson JW, Chung SCS, et al. Laparoscopic versus open appendecto­
my: prospective randomized trial. Lancet. 1993;342:633–637.
Pancreatitis
Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al. Acute Pancreatitis Classification 
Working Group. Classification of acute pancreatitis—2012: revision of 
the Atlanta classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut. 
2013;62:2–11.
Beckingham IJ, Bornman PC. Acute pancreatitis. BMJ. 2001;322:595–598.
Bornman PC, Beckingham IJ. Chronic pancreatitis. BMJ. 2001;322:660–663.
Fernandez-­del Castillo C, Rattner DW, Warsha AL. Acute pancreatitis. Lancet. 
1993;342:475–479.
Kahler SG, Sherwood WG, Woolf D, et al. Pancreatitis in patients with organic 
acidemias. J Pediatr. 1994;124:239–243.
Lee SP, Nicholls JF, Park HZ. Biliary sludge as a cause of acute pancreatitis. N 
Engl J Med. 1992;326:589–593.
Mitchell RMS, Byrne MF, Baillie J. Pancreatitis. Lancet. 2003;361:1447–1455.
Morinville VD, Husain SZ, Bai H, INSPPIRE Group, et al. Definitions of 
pediatric pancreatitis and survey of present clinical practices. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;55:261–265.
Munoz-­Bongrand N, Panis Y, Soyer P, et al. Serial computed tomography is 
rarely necessary in patients with acute pancreatitis: a prospective study in 
102 patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193:146–152.
Rabeneck L, Feinstein AR, Horwitz RI, et al. A new clinical prognostic staging 
system for acute pancreatitis. Am J Med. 1993;95:61–70.
Steinberg W, Tenner S. Acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1198–1210.
Weizman Z, Durie PR. Acute pancreatitis in childhood. Pediatrics. 
1988;113:24–29.
Williamson RCN. Endoscopic sphincterotomy in the early treatment of acute 
pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:279–280.
Yazdani K, Lippmann M, Gala I. Fatal pancreatitis associated with valproic 
acid. Medicine (Baltim). 2002;81:305–310.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
241.e2
Hepatobiliary Tract Disease
Cuschieri A. Management of patients with gallstones and ductal calculi. Lan­
cet. 2002;360:739–740.
De Caluwe D, Akl U, Corbally M. Cholecystectomy versus cholecystolitho­
tomy for cholelithiasis in childhood: long-­term outcome. J Pediatr Surg. 
2001;36:1518–1521.
Debray D, Pariente D, Gauthier F, et al. Cholelithiasis in infancy: a study of 40 
cases. J Pediatr. 1993;122:385–391.
Indar AA, Beckingham IJ. Acute cholecystitis. BMJ. 2002;325:639–644.
Johnston DE, Kaplan MM. Pathogenesis and treatment of gallstones. N Engl J 
Med. 1993;328:412–421.
Kim SH. Choledochal cyst: survey by the surgical section of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics. J Pediatr Surg. 1981;16:402–407.
Krige JEJ, Beckingham IJ. Liver abscesses and hydatid disease. BMJ. 
2001;322:537–540.
Reif S, Sloven DG, Lebenthal E. Gallstones in children. Am J Dis Child. 
1991;145:105–108.
Chronic Abdominal Pain
Applegate WV. Abdominal cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES): 
a commonly overlooked cause of abdominal pain. Permanente J. 
2002;6(3):20–27.
Babygirija R, Sood M, Kannampalli P, et al. Percutaneous electrical nerve 
field stimulation modulates central pain pathways and attenuates post-­
inflammatory visceral and somatic hyperalgesia in rats. Neuroscience. 
2017;356:11–21.
Barr RG. Changing our understanding of infant colic. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 2002;156:1172–1174.
Castile RG, Telander RL, Cooney DR, et al. Crohn’s disease in children: assess­
ment of the progression of disease, growth and prognosis. J Pediatr Surg. 
1980;15:462–469.
Garrison MM, Christakis DA. Infant colic. Pediatr Case Rev. 2001;1:19–24.
Heida A, Holtman GA, Lisman-van Leeuwen Y, et al. Avoid endoscopy in 
children with suspected inflammatory bowel disease who have normal 
calprotectin levels. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2016;62:47–49.
Horwitz BJ, Fisher RS. The irritable bowel syndrome. N Engl J Med. 
2001;344:1846–1850.
Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Functional disorders: children and 
adolescents. Gastroenterology. 2016;S0016-­5085(16):00181–00185.
Kovacic K, Hainsworth K, Sood M, et al. Neurostimulation for abdomi­
nal pain-­related functional gastrointestinal disorders in adolescents: a 
randomised, double-­blind, sham-­controlled trial. Lancet Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2017;2:727–737.
Levine MD, Rappaport LA. Recurrent abdominal pain in school children: 
the loneliness of the long distance physician. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1984;31:969–991.
Liebman WM. Recurrent abdominal pain in children: a retrospective survey of 
119 patients. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1978;17:149–153.
Mamula P, Telega GW, Markowitz JE, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease in 
children 5 years of age and younger. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97:2005–
2010.
Markus J, Sibbing IC, Ket JCF, et al. Treatment strategies for anterior cutaneous 
nerve entrapment syndrome in children: a systematic review. J Pediatr 
Surg. 2021;56:605–613.
Murphy MS. Management of recurrent abdominal pain. Arch Dis Child. 
1993;69:409–415.
Oor JE, Ünlü C, Hazebroek EJ. A systematic review of the treatment for ab­
dominal cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome. Am J Surg. 2016;212:165–
174.
Silverberg M. Chronic abdominal pain in adolescents. Pediatr Ann. 
1991;20:179–185.
Talley NJ, Spiller R. Irritable bowel syndrome: a little understood organic 
bowel disease? Lancet. 2002;360:555–564.
Thiessen PN. Recurrent abdominal pain. Pediatr Rev. 2002;23:39–46.
Wade S, Kilgour T. Infant colic. BMJ. 2001;323:437–440.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
