500
An irritable infant is a challenge to the caregiver and medical provider 
and is a common presenting complaint in early infancy. An irritable 
infant is defined here as a patient younger than 1 year of age who, 
according to the caregiver, cries excessively or is excessively fussy 
without a specific defined time period. In addition, this chapter also 
addresses issues of an irritable toddler (∼2–3 years of age). There are 
many causes, but most irritable infants do not have significant underly­
ing pathologic processes. However, there are serious entities that must 
not be missed (Table 30.1).
Medical providers should also recognize the profound anxiety and 
stress that infant crying may place on families and other caregivers. 
Although excessive crying generally resolves with time, the family’s 
beliefs about the cause of the crying can have a lasting effect on the way 
they interact with the child and their beliefs about the infant’s health. 
Caregivers who perceived their infant’s crying as excessive or incon­
solable described higher rates of depression, strained family relation­
ships, and guilt about their inability to calm the infant. Excessive crying 
may even trigger thoughts of harming the infant and is reported as 
a common trigger for child physical abuse. Additionally, infants with 
early cry-­fuss problems in combination with family dysfunction are 
at higher risk for ongoing behavioral problems, highlighting the need 
for early identification and intervention in this population. Therefore, 
the provider’s response when evaluating an irritable infant should be 
focused on diagnosing potentially treatable medical conditions includ­
ing rare disorders and on addressing the caregiver’s understanding and 
response to the crying.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
Less than 5–10% of infants who present for medical care due to exces­
sive crying will have a serious underlying etiology. However, a thorough 
medical evaluation including a detailed history and physical examina­
tion is needed to identify the minority of infants with treatable issues, 
and in healthy infants a thorough evaluation may reassure caregivers. 
The initial evaluation should focus on ruling out potentially emer­
gent conditions (Fig. 30.1). The physical examination should include 
a complete examination of all body systems with the clothing removed. 
Table 30.2 lists elements of the history and physical examination sug­
gestive of emergent and common diagnoses that may present with a 
chief complaint of crying. The history should be comprehensive, given 
the wide array of possible diagnoses to consider. The history should 
include questions about the characteristics of the cry (the time of day, 
duration, whether it is associated with feeds) and any changes to the 
infant’s typical crying pattern. Infants with a sudden increase in the fre­
quency and duration of inconsolable crying compared to their normal 
crying pattern are more likely to have an underlying medical condition. 
Clinicians should also ask caregivers why they think the infant is crying 
to specifically address any fears about the infant’s health.
In most cases, the history and/or physical examination will suggest 
the diagnosis, which can be confirmed with the judicious use of lab­
oratory and imaging studies. However, providers should be aware of 
potentially serious diagnoses that may present with vague symptoms 
of fussiness and few other signs or symptoms on physical examination, 
including neurologic conditions and certain fractures. In very young 
infants, the neurologic exam is a poor screening tool to detect subtle 
neuropathology, and intracranial injury may not be accompanied by 
external evidence of trauma. In cases of physical abuse, an accurate 
history of injury may be concealed or unknown to the presenting care­
giver, and the child may present for medical care after the symptoms of 
acute injury have resolved. In addition to questions about recent symp­
toms, medical providers assessing crying complaints should ask about 
any remote history of bruising or other injury. A history of previous 
neurologic symptoms, such as episodes of unexplained seizures, apnea, 
altered mental status, developmental delay, or periods of extreme leth­
argy, may suggest an occult head injury or other nontraumatic neuro­
pathology. Consider head imaging and a skeletal survey in infants with 
a history of neurologic symptoms or prior injury.
Growth parameters, including head circumference, should be 
obtained. Increasing head circumference percentile may point to 
increased intracranial pressure in infants with otherwise vague symp­
toms. Though conditions such as constipation, gastroenteritis, and 
gastroesophageal reflux are most often benign, poor growth or devel­
opmental delay may indicate more severe disease or that another med­
ical condition is causing the symptoms.
A urinary tract infection (UTI) may also present with vague 
symptoms of irritability in infants. A UTI is one of the few conditions 
in which laboratory or imaging may lead to a diagnosis in the absence 
of a suggestive clinical picture. Some suggest that a urinalysis and 
culture should be a standard screening test in infants who present 
with crying.
When the history and physical examination do not suggest a diag­
nosis, additional laboratory or radiographic evaluation may be needed. 
In particular, if the infant is ill-­appearing, has evidence of poor growth 
or developmental delay, or is persistently inconsolable beyond the ini­
tial assessment, laboratory and radiographic studies should be done 
(Table 30.3). Patients may need to be monitored in the hospital until a 
diagnosis can be established. Some tests to consider include:
 • A CBC with differential, ESR, and/or CRP measurement (for infec­
tion or inflammation, anemia)
 • Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (for meningitis or encephalitis)
 • Blood culture
 • Serum pH and complete metabolic panel, amylase, and lipase (for 
electrolyte abnormalities, metabolic diseases, abdominal trauma)
 • UA and culture (for trauma or infection)
 • Stool guaiac (for intussusception, gastroenteritis, cow’s milk allergy)
 • A skeletal survey (for trauma)
The Irritable Infant
Angela L. Rabbitt
30
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 30.1  Differential Diagnosis in the Irritable Infant
Emergent/Urgent Diagnoses
Nonemergent/Urgent Diagnoses
Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat
Choanal atresia
Otitis externa
Corneal abrasion
Teething
Foreign body
Stomatitis
Glaucoma
Otitis media
Respiratory
Airway obstruction (croup, foreign body)
Upper respiratory tract infection
Lower respiratory tract infection (pneumonia, bronchiolitis)
Cardiovascular
Congestive heart failure
Supraventricular tachycardia
Anomalous coronary artery
Myocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Gastrointestinal System
Incarcerated hernia
Constipation
Gastrointestinal obstruction (intussusception, volvulus, pyloric stenosis, Hirschsprung disease)
Uncomplicated gastroenteritis
Anal fissure
Abdominal trauma
Gastroesophageal reflux
Peritonitis (appendicitis, spontaneous)
Inappropriate feeding volume or technique
Milk or soy protein allergy
Genitourinary System
Testicular torsion
Ovarian torsion
Urinary tract infection
Orchitis
Balanitis
Epididymitis
Musculoskeletal System
Osteomyelitis
Minor, soft tissue injury
Diskitis
Septic arthritis
Fractures
Radial head subluxation
Leukemia, neuroblastoma
Skin
Cellulitis
Impetigo
Tourniquet syndrome (digit, genitalia)
Dermatitis
Insect bites
Minor injury
Central Nervous System
Encephalitis
Meningitis
Increased intracranial pressure (trauma, hydrocephalus, intracranial hemorrhage)
Intracranial mass
Miscellaneous
Drug ingestion
Vaccine reaction
Neonatal abstinence syndrome
Poor caregiver-­infant interaction
Inborn error of metabolism
Normal crying
Sepsis
Sickle cell crisis
Physical abuse
Familial pain syndromes
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
502
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
 • CT scan or MRI of the head (for intracranial hemorrhage, mass, or 
hydrocephalus)
 • Comprehensive urine drug screen (for ingestion)
In the consolable infant without history or physical examination 
findings suggestive of a serious condition, nonemergent causes of crying 
are more likely (see Table 30.1). The most likely diagnosis in infants 
younger than 4 months of age is above-­average crying in a normal 
infant. However, because a definitive diagnosis has not been estab­
lished, infants should receive a follow-­up evaluation within 24 hours 
to ensure that a more serious illness was not missed and to address 
any additional concerns or questions about the crying. This element is 
especially critical if the clinician has any doubt concerning the estab­
lishment of the correct diagnosis.
Paradoxical irritability occurs when a parent attempts to console a 
crying infant but in the process of holding or cuddling the child, there 
is an exacerbation of crying. This should suggest that a painful site has 
been touched or moved and is seen in septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, 
meningitis, or a fracture.
ADDRESSING CAREGIVERS’ RESPONSE TO CRYING
The distress, frustration, and anxiety that persistent or inconsolable 
crying may cause caregivers should be recognized and acknowledged 
with empathy, regardless of the cause. After addressing any urgent 
medical needs, caregivers should be educated about the normal pattern 
of infant crying and methods to soothe the infant.
Supportive care as
required (airway,
breathing, circulation)
Careful history and physical
exam (consider emergent
diagnoses first)
(Table 30.2)
Does history or physical
exam suggest the
diagnosis?
Yes
Yes
No
No
• Ill-appearing
• Inconsolable beyond initial
  assessment
• History of unexplained poor
  growth, developmental delay
• History of previous neurologic
  symptoms or suspicious injuries,
  or other suspicion for abuse
Consider ancillary
testing if appropriate
(see Table 30.3)
Consider non-
emergent diagnoses
(see TabIe 30.1)
Consider ancillary
testing for emergent
diagnoses
(see Table 30.3)
For all diagnoses at initial presentation or at follow-up:
• Evaluate how caregivers are coping with the crying
• Address any fears about possible cause of crying
• Provide education on infant crying and soothing
• Consider referrals to support services and family therapy or
  infant mental health experts in high-risk families
Schedule
follow-up
Infant with
irritability
Fig. 30.1  Initial approach to the irritable infant.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
503
CHAPTER 30  The Irritable Infant
TABLE 30.2  Clinical Presentation of Selected Diagnoses in Infants Presenting with Crying
Review of Systems
Possible Physical Exam Findings
Diagnoses to Consider
Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat
 • Pain or irritation of one eye
 • Chronic or intermittent tearing
 • Photophobia
 • Tearing
 • Foreign body seen on lid inversion
 • Foreign body
 • Corneal abrasion
 • Glaucoma
 • Corneal enlargement or clouding
 • Ocular enlargement
 • Optic nerve cupping
 • Difficulty breathing and cyanosis during feeds; 
symptoms improve with crying
 • Inability to pass a nasogastric tube
 • Decreased air movement through nares
 • Choanal atresia
 • Otorrhea
 • Fever
 • Ear tugging
 • Decreased appetite
 • Bulging or immobile tympanic membrane
 • Abnormal color or perforated tympanic membrane
 • Otorrhea
 • Otitis media
 • Otitis externa
 • Excessive drooling
 • Decreased appetite
 • Inflamed gums
 • Tooth eruption
 • Erythema over frenulum
 • Sores or ulcerations
 • Teething
 • Lacerated frenulum
 • Herpetic stomatitis
Respiratory
 • Trouble breathing, cough, congestion
 • Abnormal breath sounds
 • Respiratory distress
 • Airway obstruction (foreign body, croup)
 • Pneumonia
 • Bronchiolitis
 • Chest trauma
Cardiovascular
 • Tachypnea and diaphoresis with feeds
 • Trouble breathing
 • Easy fatigability
 • Pallor, cyanosis
 • Tachycardia
 • Respiratory distress
 • Poor perfusion
 • Abnormal heart sounds
 • Abnormal breath sounds
 • Hepatomegaly
 • Cardiomegaly
 • Congestive heart failure
 • Supraventricular tachycardia
 • Anomalous coronary artery
 • Myocarditis
Gastrointestinal System
 • Constipation (hard stools, less than two per 
week)
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Stool mass in left lower quadrant
 • Anal fissure
 • Constipation
 • Delayed passage of meconium, poor growth, 
vomiting
 • Abdominal distention
 • Tight anal canal with empty ampulla
 • Hirschsprung disease
 • Vomiting
 • Poor feeding with or without poor weight gain
 • Crying associated with feeds
 • Diarrhea
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Hematochezia
 • Atopic dermatitis
 • Milk and/or soy protein allergy
 • Gastroesophageal reflux disease
 • Gastroenteritis
 • Sudden-­onset intermittent pain
 • Vomiting
 • Lethargy
 • Poor feeding
 • Hematochezia
 • Abdominal distention
 • Abdominal tenderness, guarding
 • Abdominal or pelvic mass
 • Intestinal obstruction (volvulus, intussusception)
 • Peritonitis
 • History of injury
 • No history or history of prior suspicious injury in 
abusive trauma
 • With or without evidence of injury on exam
 • Nonspecific abdominal exam
 • Abdominal trauma
 • Forceful vomiting
 • Hungry between episodes of emesis
 • Dehydrated
 • Palpable pyloric sphincter
 • Pyloric stenosis
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
504
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
TABLE 30.2  Clinical Presentation of Selected Diagnoses in Infants Presenting 
with Crying—cont’d
Review of Systems
Possible Physical Exam Findings
Diagnoses to Consider
 • Improper formula volume or mixing
 • Frustration with feeds
 • Poor latch
 • Feeding aversion
 • Poor growth
 • Vomiting
 • Excess gas
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Inappropriate feeding volume or technique
Genitourinary System
 • Testicular swelling
 • Testicular swelling, tenderness
 • Testicular torsion
 • Orchitis
 • Epididymitis
 • Previous urinary tract infection
 • Suprapubic tenderness
 • Fever
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Urinary tract infection
Musculoskeletal System
 • Decreased movement of an extremity
 • Increased crying with movement
 • Swelling, tenderness, warmth, erythema, pain or 
crepitus with palpation or movement
 • Fever
 • Pseudoparalysis
 • Fractures
 • Soft tissue injury
 • Osteomyelitis
 • Septic arthritis
 • Diskitis
 • Malignancy
Skin
 • Rash
 • Purulent drainage
 • Itching
 • Swelling, tenderness, warmth, erythema, rash
 • Infection
 • Dermatitis
 • Insect bites
 • Swollen appendage
 • Well-­demarcated line separating normal tissue 
from a distal dusky edematous appendage
 • Ligature deeply imbedded in a groove covered by 
edematous tissue
 • Tourniquet syndrome
 • Sudden onset of irritability
 • History of injury
 • No history of injury, history of prior suspicious 
injury in abusive trauma
 • Bruising, laceration, burns
 • Abusive or nonabusive trauma
 • Hernia
 • Dusky or nonreducible umbilical or inguinal bulge
 • Incarcerated hernia
Central Nervous System
 • Lethargy
 • Vomiting
 • Seizures
 • With or without fever
 • May present with subtle nonspecific symptoms
 • Abnormal neurologic exam
 • Ill-­appearing
 • Fever
 • Papilledema
 • Enlarged head circumference
 • Bulging fontanel
 • Meningitis
 • Encephalitis
 • Increased intracranial pressure (hydrocephalus, 
intracranial hemorrhage)
 • Intracranial mass
 • No history, or history of prior suspicious injury
 • Prior history of symptoms of increased intracra­
nial pressure
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Retinal hemorrhages (present in 85% of patients 
with abusive head trauma)
 • With or without other injuries
 • Abusive or nonabusive head trauma
Miscellaneous
 • Medication administration
 • Illicit drug use by caregivers
 • Seizures
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Altered mental status
 • Tachycardia
 • Respiratory or cardiac compromise
 • Seizures
 • Drug ingestion
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
505
CHAPTER 30  The Irritable Infant
Normal infant crying progressively increases after 2 weeks and 
peaks in the 2nd month of life, then gradually decreases by the 4th or 
5th month. It generally peaks in the late afternoon and evening within 
the first 6 months of life. At times it may be unrelated to the needs of 
the infant. Therefore, even in healthy infants some episodes of fussiness 
will not be soothed with typical caregiver attempts to soothe, such as 
feeding, cuddling, carrying, and diapering, and may occur for up to 
4–5 hours per day. This pattern of crying is consistent among normal 
infants regardless of caretaking styles, cultural groups, and socioeco­
nomic status, and has been demonstrated even in some nonhuman 
mammalian species. The pattern may reflect a developmental stage 
characterized by infants’ increased reactivity to their environment and 
an immature ability to self-­regulate. Though this crying pattern seems 
to be universal, the frequency and duration of crying varies signifi­
cantly between infants. This variation is due to several factors, includ­
ing infant temperament, the caregivers’ response to crying, and likely 
other unidentified factors.
Caregivers should be reassured that physical contact in the form of 
carrying and feeding on demand within the first months of life will not 
spoil the infant. Responding promptly to crying in very young infants 
before it becomes inconsolable may reduce the amount of crying over 
the long term by creating a more secure attachment between the infant 
and caregiver. Room sharing, with the infant’s crib or bassinet in the 
caregiver’s bedroom, may also decrease infant crying in the first 3 
months of life. Conversely, in infants older than 3–4 months of age a 
consistent daily routine of feeding and sleeping and reasonable delays 
in caregiver responses to crying may encourage infants to develop 
autonomous settling and improve infants’ ability to self-­regulate. 
Soothing techniques (swaddling, pacifier use, rocking the baby in a 
calm environment, or providing some background noise or vibration) 
are inconsistently effective in studies assessing their efficacy to reduce 
infant crying. However, these techniques cost nothing and are not asso­
ciated with adverse effects. It is reasonable to recommend these tech­
niques as an initial response to infant crying.
Despite caregivers’ best efforts, there will be times even healthy 
infants may not be soothed. The caregivers’ inability to soothe the 
infant is often their primary source of negative feelings such as frus­
tration, anger, or guilt, creating a loss of confidence in parenting skills 
and feelings of resentment toward the infant. Infants then respond to 
caregiver anxiety with increased crying. Caregivers may be reassured 
by information that bouts of fussing do not necessarily indicate illness 
or pain but may simply reflect the infant’s inability to regulate the cry­
ing once it has started. Medical providers can also reassure caregivers 
that most infant cry-­fuss problems are transient and not necessarily 
predictive of ongoing behavior problems in childhood. In a prospec­
tive, community-­based study of outcomes in infants with sleep and 
cry-­fuss problems, only 5% of mothers reported persistent problems 
at age 2 years.
The clinician must be aware that parental distress from prolonged, 
unexplained crying can lead to the use of ineffective, inappropriate, 
or even dangerous remedies. Fennel extract may show promise as a 
way to decrease crying, although additional study of this treatment 
and possible negative effects is needed. If herbal teas containing fennel 
replace infant formula, they may lead to malnutrition and electrolyte 
abnormalities. Treatments that have been shown to have no significant 
or reproducible effect in treating crying are acupuncture, reflexology, 
TABLE 30.2  Clinical Presentation of Selected Diagnoses in Infants Presenting 
with Crying—cont’d
Review of Systems
Possible Physical Exam Findings
Diagnoses to Consider
 • Maternal drug use during pregnancy
 • Poor feeding
 • Vomiting
 • Sneezing, hiccups, diarrhea
 • Poor sleep
 • Tremors
 • Seizures
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Neonatal abstinence syndrome
 • Vomiting
 • Poor growth
 • Developmental delay or regression
 • Seizures
 • Dehydration and shock
 • Organomegaly
 • Abnormal neurologic exam
 • Jaundice
 • Dysmorphic features
 • Abnormal odor
 • Tachypnea
 • Inborn error of metabolism
 • Lethargy
 • With or without fever
 • Seizures
 • Ill-­appearing
 • Cardiorespiratory compromise
 • Sepsis
 • Infant or family history of sickle cell disease
 • Trouble breathing
 • Respiratory distress
 • Splenomegaly
 • Swelling and tenderness of the hands and feet
 • Sickle cell crisis
 • Recent immunizations
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Vaccine reaction
 • Dysfunctional or chaotic home environment
 • Significant caregiver stress
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Poor infant-­caregiver interaction
 • Content between crying bouts
 • Feeding well
 • Normal growth and development
 • Nonspecific exam
 • Normal infant crying
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
506
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
TABLE 30.3  Initial Ancillary Testing or Referrals to Consider for Specific Diagnoses
Potential Diagnoses
Ancillary Testing or Consultations to Consider
Eyes, Ears, Nose, Throat
Corneal abrasion or foreign body
Fluorescein stain
Glaucoma
Ophthalmology consult
Foreign body
Radiographs and/or ENT consult
Respiratory
Pneumonia or bronchiolitis
Chest radiography, pulse oximetry, nasopharyngeal viral testing
Airway obstruction (croup, foreign body)
Chest and/or neck radiography, pulse oximetry, ENT consult for bronchoscopy
Cardiovascular
Congestive heart failure
Chest radiography, pulse oximetry, electrocardiogram, echocardiography, CBC, CMP, BNP, troponin, 
Cardiology consult
Supraventricular tachycardia
Anomalous coronary artery
Myocarditis
Gastrointestinal System
Incarcerated hernia
Ultrasonography with Doppler, Surgical consult
Gastrointestinal obstruction (intussusception, volvulus, pyloric 
stenosis, Hirschsprung disease), peritonitis, abdominal 
trauma
CBC, CMP, amylase, lipase, abdominal and pelvic radiography, abdominal ultrasound, upper gastro­
intestinal contrast study, abdominal and pelvic CT, air contrast enema for intussusception, Surgical 
consult
Milk and/or soy protein allergy
Hemoccult testing
Genitourinary System
Testicular torsion
Ultrasonography with Doppler, Surgical consult
Ovarian torsion
Pelvic ultrasonography or CT, Surgical consult
Urinary tract infection
UA with culture, CBC, blood culture
Musculoskeletal System
Osteomyelitis
CBC, ESR, CRP, blood culture, radiography, MRI, Orthopedics and Infectious Disease consult
Septic arthritis
Fractures
Skeletal survey
Diskitis
ESR, spine radiographs, spine MRI
Leukemia, metastatic neuroblastoma
CBC, bone marrow, abdominal imaging
Skin
Cellulitis, infection
CBC, wound culture
Central Nervous System
Encephalitis
Lumbar puncture, head CT or MRI, CBC, blood culture, EEG
Meningitis
Increased intracranial pressure (abusive or nonabusive 
trauma, hydrocephalus, intracranial hemorrhage), neoplasm
Head CT or MRI
Miscellaneous
Drug ingestion
Comprehensive urine drug screen (with confirmatory testing)
Neonatal abstinence syndrome
Urine or meconium drug screen
Inborn error of metabolism
CBC with differential, ABG, CMP, serum ammonia, serum uric acid, LDH, blood glucose, aldolase, 
creatine kinase, UA, urine reducing substances, serum amino acids, urine organic acids, serum 
acylcarnitine profile, lactate, Genetics consult
Sepsis
CBC, LP, UA, urine and blood culture
Sickle cell crisis
CBC, reticulocyte count, chest radiography, pulse oximetry
Physical abuse
Injury surveillance: Skeletal survey; head CT or MRI in infants <6 mo of age or current or prior symp­
toms of head injury; AST, ALT, amylase, lipase; comprehensive urine drug investigation screen with 
confirmatory testing, Child Protection Team consult
ABG, arterial blood gas; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BMP, basic metabolic panel; BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; 
CMP, comprehensive metabolic panel; EEG, electroencephalogram; ENT, Otolaryngologist; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LP, lumbar puncture; UA, 
urinalysis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
507
CHAPTER 30  The Irritable Infant
soy formula, simethicone, gripe water, glucose, sucrose, dimethicone, 
fiber-­enriched formula, and the introduction of lactase enzyme into 
the infant’s milk. Treatment with anticholinergic drugs (dicyclomine 
hydrochloride, dicycloverine, and cimetropium bromide) was effec­
tive in reducing infant crying but is associated with unacceptable side 
effects. In addition, several reports have been published of hospital­
ization or death in infants treated for excessive crying with sedating 
medications such as dextromethorphan and diphenhydramine, dimen­
hydrinate, and opiates. Clinicians should counsel caregivers about the 
dangers of using these medications in young infants.
Given the stress that crying can place on a family and the fact that 
all families will inevitably be faced with the challenge of a fussy infant, 
this education should be a routine part of each well-­child evaluation 
in the 1st year of life. It should not only be given to the caregiver who 
presents with the child for medical care, but also to all adults who will 
be caring for the child.
More intensive educational and behavior modification interven­
tions directed toward families with persistently fussy infants have 
shown promise to reduce crying, improve parent-­child relationships, 
and positively influence behavioral development in infants. Success­
ful programs generally assess and address caregiver needs, sources of 
vulnerability, and infant health. They also provide respite and educate 
families about infant crying, soothing, and ongoing emotional care. In 
addition, multidisciplinary approaches may include family therapy or 
referrals to perinatal and infant mental health experts who can support 
caregiver-­infant interactions.
SPECIFIC DIAGNOSES
Child Maltreatment
Caregiver perceptions of prolonged or inconsolable crying place the 
infant at risk of abuse; caregivers may smother, slap, or shake their baby 
in response to crying. Crying is a common stimulus for abusive head 
trauma, and the abuse is often repeated because the head injury stops 
the crying.
Any injury in a noncruising infant raises concern for abusive 
trauma and should prompt an evaluation for additional injuries. In 
older infants and children who can independently ambulate, most 
accidental bruising occurs over bony prominences on the anterior sur­
face of the body. Bruising to the ears, neck, genitals, and buttocks is 
unusual in nonabused children (Table 30.4). Abusive bruises tend to be 
larger, often clustered, and associated with other cutaneous injury. Pat­
terned injuries and any significant, unexplained, or poorly explained 
injury also may suggest abuse (Figs. 30.2, 30.3, and 30.4). The purpose 
of additional testing when infants present with suspicious findings is 
injury surveillance and identification of medical conditions that may 
mimic abusive trauma. The absence of additional injury does not rule 
out abuse. Even in isolation, the presence of a suspicious injury places 
the infant at risk for more severe ongoing abuse. In infants who were 
ultimately diagnosed with physical abuse, almost 30% of the infants 
had a history of previous, more minor suspicious injuries. Medical 
providers were reportedly aware of these injuries in 40% of cases but 
did not recognize them as concerning (Table 30.5). If there are doubts 
about whether an injury should be considered suspicious or what tests 
are indicated, providers should consult a child abuse specialist.
TABLE 30.4  Location of Cutaneous Injuries
Locations That May Raise 
Concern for Abuse
Common Locations of 
Accidental Injury in Mobile 
Infants
Any bruising in a precruising infant
Upper arms
Soft parts of the trunk
Ears
Soft parts of the face
Neck
Genitals
Buttocks
Hands and feet
Nose
Shins
Bony prominences of the trunk
Occiput
Forehead
Chin
Fig. 30.2  Lash marks from an electric cord. Such marks are distinc­
tive. The deep lacerations, which are looped if the cord is looped, result 
in deep tissue damage, and there is the potential for keloid formation 
on healing. (From Johnson CF. Inflicted injury versus accidental injury. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:791–815.)
belt buckle
belt
coat hanger
hand/knuckles
fly swatter
bite
sauce pan
paddles
hair brush
spoon
looped cord
board or
spatula
stick/whip
Fig. 30.3  Marks from objects. (From Johnson CF. Inflicted injury versus 
accidental injury. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:791–815.)
hot plate
light bulb
curling iron
car cigarette
lighter
steam iron
knife
grid
cigarette
forks
immersion
Fig. 30.4  Marks from burns. (From Johnson CF. Inflicted injury versus 
accidental injury. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1990;37:791–815.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
508
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
An evaluation for suspected child abuse may need to include 
imaging studies (Table 30.6 and Fig. 30.5) as well as an eye exam by 
an experienced ophthalmologist looking for traumatic retinal hem­
orrhage. Retinal hemorrhages may occur in a significant number of 
normal neonates after birth; over 75% resolve by 10 days of life, while 
all resolve by 2 months. Retinal hemorrhages atypical for a neonate or 
after 1–2 months suggest child abuse (Fig. 30.6).
Medical providers are in a unique position to identify infants at risk 
for maltreatment when they present for medical care, and to provide 
education and resources to high-­risk families. In infants hospitalized 
for abusive head trauma, the majority of victims’ caregivers sought 
medical care for excessive crying prior to the abuse. Multiple phone 
calls and visits to the pediatrician for excessive crying is a warning sign 
that it is causing significant distress in the family. Ask caregivers how 
the crying is affecting the family and address any feelings of guilt or 
frustration. Clinicians can also ask how caregivers typically respond 
to the crying. All families who present with a fussy infant should be 
encouraged to seek support and periodic relief from the infant’s care. 
Instruct the caregivers to safely place the infant in a crib or other safe 
location and walk away for a short time if they feel frustrated and at risk 
of harming the infant.
Infantile Colic
The definition of infantile colic varies within the medical literature. 
The most commonly used definition is derived from Wessel’s Criteria, 
where crying occurs for at least 3 hours a day, at least 3 days a week, 
TABLE 30.5  Pitfalls in Child Abuse 
Evaluation: 12 Costly Errors
	 1.	 A desire to not make the diagnosis
	 2.	 Failure to assemble past information on medical conditions and medical 
encounters
	 3.	 Too great a reliance on the information developed by others
	 4.	 Transference-­countertransference with custodial parent (formation of 
alliances or development of hostilities)
	 5.	 Overinterpretation or underinterpretation of signs and symptoms
	 6.	 Overinterpretation or underinterpretation of physical findings
	 7.	 Failure to know about conditions mistaken for sexual abuse
	 8.	 Faulty laboratory techniques resulting in either false-­positive or false-­
negative reports
	 9.	 Use of techniques easily challenged in court
	10.	 Impatience about arriving at a diagnostic conclusion
	11.	 Failure to understand normative data with regard to psychosexual 
development
	12.	 Failure to prepare adequately for court appearances
TABLE 30.6  Skeletal Injuries from Child 
Abuse
High-­Specificity Findings
 • Classic metaphyseal lesions
 • Posterior rib fracture
 • Scapular fracture
 • Sternal fracture
 • Spinous process fracture
 • First rib fracture
Moderate-­Specificity Findings
 • Multiple fractures
 • Fractures of differing age
 • Spine fracture
 • Complex skull fracture
 • Physeal fractures of the long bones
 • Digital fractures
Low-­Specificity Findings
 • Diaphyseal fractures of the long bones
 • Simple skull fractures
 • Clavicle fracture
 • Subperiosteal new bone formation
From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:1455, Box 143.2; modified from Kleinman 
PK. Diagnostic Imaging of Child Abuse. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 
1998.
A
C
D
B
Fig. 30.5  Child abuse. A, Radiograph of the proximal lower leg in a 
23-­day-­old infant with fussiness and suspected lower extremity pain 
reveals a classic metaphyseal lesion of the proximal tibia with a bucket-­
handle configuration (arrows). B, Chest radiograph in a 12-­month-­old boy 
presenting with constipation reveals multiple consecutive rib fractures, 
seen posteriorly near the costovertebral junctions (arrows). Fractures 
are healing, with callous formation evident. The patient had several 
additional rib head fractures better profiled on other views obtained 
as part of a complete skeletal survey. C, D, Radiographic views of the 
bilateral scapulae reveal minimally displaced fractures of the acromion 
processes (arrows) in an infant with multiple fractures of different ages 
on skeletal survey. (From Walters MM, Ronertson RL, eds. Pediatric 
Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:2599, 
Fig. 7.123.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
509
CHAPTER 30  The Irritable Infant
for at least 3 weeks in an otherwise healthy infant. Crying from colic 
generally occurs in the evenings, usually starts between 3 and 21 days 
of age, peaks at ∼6 weeks, and subsides by 3–4 months of age. During 
crying bouts, parents describe that colicky infants often flex their legs 
over the abdomen or may arch their backs with a “pained” look on 
their face. However, many of these criteria, including the appearance 
of pain, are also common features of normal infant crying. It is not 
clear whether the appearance of pain in these infants is due to a true 
organic etiology or related to caregivers’ anxiety about the duration and 
unsoothable nature of the cry.
The definition of colic for clinical purposes has shifted to remove 
strict criteria regarding the duration and characteristics of crying in 
colic. The 2016 Rome IV Criteria for Functional Gastrointestinal Dis­
orders in Infants and Toddlers support a diagnosis of colic in an infant 
who (1) is younger than 5 months of age when the symptoms start and 
stop; (2) experiences prolonged periods of infant crying, fussing, or 
irritability reported to occur without obvious cause, which cannot be 
prevented or resolved by caregivers; and (3) has no evidence of infant 
failure to thrive, fever, or illness.
A single clear cause of colic remains elusive. Some suggest that the 
crying from colic is a response to pain from gastrointestinal (GI) dys­
function, such as milk protein or lactose intolerance, gastroesophageal 
reflux disease, abnormal peristalsis, excessive gas, or altered GI micro­
biota. However, objective testing for these disorders has not revealed 
significant differences between colicky and noncolicky infants, and 
treatments for most have been inconsistently effective. Systematic 
reviews of complementary and alternative treatments of infant cry­
ing have found moderately strong evidence that some probiotics may 
reduce crying in breast-­fed infants, supporting a possible connection 
between altered GI microbiota and crying in some cases.
Many theorize that colic symptoms are not caused by a single con­
dition, but rather are a common end-­point for multiple processes, 
including infant temperament and caregivers’ responses to the crying. 
In this view, the term “colic” is used to describe a constellation of com­
mon symptoms rather than an underlying disease. Because of the sig­
nificant overlap in the pattern and characteristics of crying in infants 
diagnosed with colic and normal infants, colic may represent a point 
further along a continuum of normal infant behavior. This perspective 
suggests that, in healthy infants, the clinical focus should be shifted 
from attempting to diagnose and treat a particular medical condition 
to providing education and support to caregivers. From a practical 
standpoint, the clinician should follow the same method of evaluation 
that would be initiated for any crying infant regardless of whether the 
crying meets the definition of colic. The duration and frequency of 
crying in this population can be particularly distressing for caregiv­
ers, and education on soothing and coping with the crying should be 
emphasized.
Feeding and Gastrointestinal Dysfunction
A subset of otherwise healthy infants who present with excessive cry­
ing will have some form of GI dysfunction. A history of crying that 
is associated with vomiting or hematochezia or is temporally related 
to feeds may increase the likelihood. Common causes include con­
stipation, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), eosinophilic 
esophagitis, excessive gas, and cow’s and/or soy milk protein allergy 
or intolerance. Congenital lactose intolerance is rare, but infants may 
develop transient intolerance from inflammation of the intestinal villi 
due to gastroenteritis or a milk protein allergy. In infants with hema­
tochezia, a milk protein allergy is most likely. However, in less clear-­
cut cases, improper feeding volume or technique can cause symptoms 
that may be misdiagnosed as GERD or a milk protein allergy. Formula 
changes and pharmacologic interventions may not be without unde­
sirable consequences, including premature cessation of breast-­feeding 
or the development of parental anxiety concerning the possibility of an 
intrinsic abnormality in their infant.
When GI dysfunction is suspected, and after potentially seri­
ous medical conditions are ruled out, clinicians should first evaluate 
feeding volume and technique. Over-­ or underfeeding may contrib­
ute to infant irritability. Using a slow-­flow nipple can cause excessive 
air intake in a very vigorous feeder. Appropriate burping, feeding the 
infant in an upright position, using a formula thickener, and using bot­
tles with collapsible bags may also help reduce fussing from excessive 
intestinal gas or GERD. Poor attachment, latch, and oral motor dys­
function may contribute to feeding problems, fussing, and even infant 
aversion to feedings. Consider consultation with a lactation specialist 
in breast-­feeding infants.
Unfortunately, no specific laboratory test exists for diagnosing pro­
tein allergy in relation to excessive infant crying, and the symptoms of 
Fig. 30.6  Retinal hemorrhages. Arrows point to hemorrhages of various sizes. (From Kliegman RM, St. Geme 
JW III, Blum NJ, et al., eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:104, Fig. 
16.9.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
510
SECTION 6   Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
GERD are often nonspecific. In fact, inflammation of the GI tract from 
cow’s milk protein allergy may be the cause of the vomiting and symp­
toms of pain in up to 40% of infants diagnosed with GERD. Clinicians 
should inquire about a past medical or family history of atopy, which 
may increase the likelihood of a cow’s milk protein allergy. Guidelines 
caution against empiric treatment with acid-­reducing medications to 
diagnose GERD in young infants with nonspecific symptoms due to 
potential side effects with the overuse of these medications, and because 
their efficacy in decreasing crying is low. There is evidence that a trial of 
an extensively hydrolyzed or amino acid–based formula, or a milk-­ and 
egg-­free diet in breast-­feeding mothers, may decrease crying compared 
to controls in otherwise healthy infants with suspected GI dysfunction. 
The introduction of soy formula may not resolve symptoms because 
a significant number of infants with milk protein allergies are also 
allergic to soy protein. There is also evidence that probiotics may be 
beneficial to reduce low-­grade intestinal inflammation and crying in 
some infants, especially breast-­fed infants and those with symptoms of 
GERD or constipation. When potentially serious medical conditions 
have been excluded, and the infant’s feeding volume and technique are 
appropriate, it is reasonable to try these interventions. Changes should 
be implemented one at a time and continued for at least 2 weeks to 
evaluate the effects of each change. If a 2–4 week trial of hydrolyzed or 
amino acid–based formula is beneficial, a cow’s milk–based formula 
challenge should be planned to confirm the diagnosis of cow’s milk 
allergy. In infants with persistent symptoms and suspicion of GERD, 
clinicians can consider a trial of a proton pump inhibitor and/or refer­
ral to a gastroenterologist.
Teething
Many complaints, ranging from fever to irritability, have been ascribed 
to teething. The most common symptoms associated with teething 
are irritability, excessive drooling, and loss of appetite. Some studies 
do support the belief that teething is associated with low-­grade fever 
and diarrhea, but this finding is not consistent. No symptom or cluster 
of symptoms can reliably exclude other medical conditions; therefore, 
teething should be considered a diagnosis of exclusion.
Management consists of allowing the infant to bite on any appro­
priate hard object, such as a teething ring. Objects that are small or 
may break into pieces such as teething biscuits or frozen foods are not 
recommended due to the risk of choking. Chilling the object in the 
refrigerator may reduce gum inflammation and pain. However, plastic 
teething rings should not be frozen or boiled unless directed by the 
manufacturer. Extreme temperatures may damage plastic teething 
rings and cause fluid to leak, and frozen rings may injure gums. An 
oral systemic analgesic such as acetaminophen may provide additional 
relief, but topical anesthetic agents are not recommended due to poten­
tial serious side effects (methemoglobinemia) with the overuse of these 
medications.
Drug Reactions
Some therapeutic medications and illicit drugs may cause infant 
irritability when directly ingested or when transferred to the infant 
through breast milk. Substances associated with irritability include 
cocaine, amphetamines, opiates (from withdrawal), fluoxetine, the­
ophylline, clemastine, and caffeine. Pseudoephedrine use in breast-­
feeding mothers may be associated with infant irritability, but this 
finding is not consistent among studies. However, when directly 
ingested by infants, pseudoephedrine can cause irritability as well as 
other more serious and life-­threatening complications. In the evalu­
ation of the irritable infant, a careful infant and maternal drug his­
tory are important to obtain along with a comprehensive urine drug 
screen if indicated.
In the neonate, irritability may also be a symptom of drug with­
drawal or the continued effects of in utero exposure. Drugs associated 
with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) include benzodiazepines, 
methamphetamine, heroin, methadone, buprenorphine, and other pre­
scription opioid analgesics. Some antidepressants and anxiolytics have 
been found to potentiate withdrawal in infants as well. Manifestations 
include irritability, jitteriness, sneezing and congestion, emesis, seizures, 
poor feeding, hiccups, diarrhea, sleeplessness, hyperactivity, and trem­
ors. Caregivers often describe the crying as high-­pitched and inconsol­
able. NAS usually begins in the 1st week of life and may last for up to a 
month, depending on the type of substance used. This initial phase may 
be followed by a relapsing course that includes ongoing irritability and 
may last for several months. Newborns exposed to cocaine may display 
similar symptoms of irritability soon after birth, but these likely repre­
sent continued effects of the drug rather than withdrawal symptoms.
Mild cases of NAS are often treated with behavioral management 
such as reducing stimulation, swaddling, demand feeding, and other 
calming techniques. Pharmacotherapy is required when supportive ther­
apy fails, or if more serious side effects such as seizures and dehydration 
develop. Education on coping with infant crying and methods to soothe 
the infant, as well as close monitoring of the home environment, are par­
ticularly important in this population due to the challenges of caring for 
an infant with irritability from NAS and to the lack of caregiver resources 
and coping skills often associated with maternal drug use.
Monogenetic Pain Syndromes
Heterozygous gain-­of-­function pathologic gene variants involving 
various channelopathies may result in an autosomal dominant form 
of familial painful peripheral neuropathy. Of interest, loss-­of-­function 
gene variants in the same gene may be associated with hereditary 
insensitivity to pain syndromes (Table 30.7).
Familial episodic pain syndrome type 1 (FEPS) is an autosomal 
dominant disorder due to pathologic variants in the TRPA1 gene. The 
onset is during infancy and is characterized by arm and chest pain, 
tachycardia, and diaphoresis, which is triggered by cold, hunger (fast­
ing), or physical stress (exertion). Episodes last ∼1–2 hours. FEPS type 
2 is seen predominantly in adults. FEPS type 3 is an autosomal dom­
inant disorder due to pathologic variants in the SCN11A gene, pro­
ducing a small-­fiber painful neuropathy seen predominantly in adults. 
Infants may present with recurrent episodes of crying due to limb and 
distal joint pain. Fatigue, intercurrent illnesses, and weather changes 
are common triggers.
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (PEPD) (aka familial rectal 
pain syndrome) is an autosomal dominant, painful neuropathy due 
to pathologic gain-­of-­function variants in the SCN9A gene. Pain may 
begin after birth and is often stimulated by defecation or perineal irri­
tation (wiping, rectal thermometer). Jaw pain may be initiated by cold 
fluids, spicy foods, and emotions; ocular pain may be caused by cold 
wind. The pain is severe, paroxysmal, and associated with harlequin 
color change, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, and tonic stiffening episodes, 
which may be confused with seizures, syncope, or hyperekplexia. The 
painful episodes last seconds to a few minutes. Treatment is difficult 
and has included carbamazepine, mexiletine, topical lidocaine, and 
stool softeners.
Inherited erythromelalgia (aka primary erythermalgia) (IEM) is 
due to pathologic gain-­of-­function genetic variants in SCN9A and 
is characterized by recurrent episodes of bilateral burning pain, ery­
thema, and swelling primarily of the feet but also the hands. Over 
time, the face and ears may be involved; the pain may become con­
stant. It is more common during childhood, but episodes may begin 
in infancy. Triggers include a warm environment or prolonged stand­
ing. Treatment includes cooling with a fan or ice; the latter may 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
511
CHAPTER 30  The Irritable Infant
produce cold injury if used too often. Medical therapy is similar to 
PEPD. The differential diagnosis includes Fabry disease (may initially 
present in infancy with painful feet and hands) and secondary auto­
immune causes of erythromelalgia.
Pathologic genetic variants in SCN2A cause benign familial 
infantile seizures, febrile seizures plus syndrome, and intractable 
epilepsy of infancy. A gain-­of-­function genetic variant is associated 
with neonatal seizures, episodic ataxia, myoclonus, and pain.
STING-­associated vasculopathy infantile onset (SAVI) is a severe 
autosomal dominant autoinflammatory disorder due to a pathologic 
gain-­of-­function variant in TMEM173, which encodes the STING 
protein (stimulator of interferon genes). Interferon-­driven inflamma­
tion (interferonopathy) results in painful ulcerating lesions (digits, 
face, nose, ears) that become eschars and necrotic. Associated features 
include interstitial lung disease, livedo reticularis, Raynaud phenom­
enon, and elevated ESR and CRP. The differential diagnosis includes 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and 
other infant-­onset autoinflammatory diseases (see Chapter 54).
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome is an autosomal recessive (occa­
sionally autosomal dominant), systemic autoinflammatory interfer­
onopathy that presents in infancy with irritability and progresses to 
dystonia, seizures, developmental delay, and progressive microcephaly. 
Some patients may develop systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)-­like 
symptoms as well as cold-­induced chilblains. Familial chilblain lupus 
is another interferonopathy with early childhood onset of acral lesions 
(fingers, toes, nose, cheeks, ears). This disorder is a monogenetic form 
of cutaneous lupus with autosomal dominant inheritance (TREX1, 
SAMHD1, STING gene variants)
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Although at times a simple diagnosis is easily established, the infant 
with excessive irritability often presents a significant challenge. Estab­
lishment of the likely diagnosis, combined with exclusion of signifi­
cant pathophysiologic processes (see Table 30.1) and rare causes, is a 
prerequisite to the formulation of an appropriate management plan. 
Through a logical and stepwise approach, the clinician can usually 
establish the cause and develop a treatment plan. When the clinician 
cannot determine the underlying cause, close follow-­up monitoring 
should result in optimal patient care.
Red flags include inconsolability, paradoxical irritability, abnormal 
level of consciousness, abnormal vital signs, evidence of trauma or 
­anemia, prior suspicious injuries, abdominal tenderness or distention, 
eye tearing, photophobia or conjunctival irritation, and abnormalities 
of growth including increasing head circumference percentile. Con­
solability by being held by the caregiver is often reassuring. In contrast, 
paradoxical crying or irritability when being held suggests that the 
holding process aggravates a painful process such as a fracture, osteo­
myelitis, or meningitis.
In all cases, clinicians should evaluate the level of distress that the 
crying is causing caregivers and should provide education and support. 
Families with a history of maltreatment, mental illness or drug use in 
caregivers, caregivers with limited social support, or those who frequently 
seek medical care or report significant distress and frustration from the 
crying are at a higher risk for adverse outcomes. When these risk fac­
tors are identified, a multidisciplinary approach involving education and 
resources for the caregivers, medical care for the infant, and family ther­
apy or referrals to perinatal and infant mental health experts can improve 
caregiver-­infant interactions and long-­term outcomes for the child.
TABLE 30.7  Clinical Features of Human Disorders Caused by Mutations in Ion-­Channel Genes 
That Lead to Altered Pain Perception and Are Inherited in a Mendelian Manner
Mutated Gene 
(Protein)
Type and Effect of 
Mutation
Main Phenotype
Additional Features
Inherited 
erythromelalgia
SCN9A (Nav1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset by age 20 yr; episodic pain triggered by 
warmth; feet affected more frequently than hands
Erythema of feet
Paroxysmal extreme 
pain disorder
SCN9A (Nav1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at birth; episodic pain; sacral region is affected 
most frequently, face is affected more often than 
the limbs; physical triggers include defecation
Erythema of the sacrum; tonic 
attacks
Small-­fiber neuropathy
SCN9A (Nav1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at any age but more common in early adult­
hood; persistent burning pain; feet affected more 
frequently than hands
Could be autonomic features
Small-­fiber neuropathy
SCN10A (Nav1.8)
Heterozygous, activating
Persistent burning pain
Could be autonomic features
Familial episodic pain 
syndrome type I
TRPA1 (TRPA1)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at birth or in infancy; episodic chest or arm 
pain; triggers are hunger and cold
—
Familial episodic pain 
syndrome type III
SCN11A (Nav1.9)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset in 1st decade; episodic hand and foot pain; 
triggers are intercurrent illness or exercise
—
Nav, sodium ion channel.
Modified from Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:587–599 (Table 1, p. 590).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
511.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Child Maltreatment
Adamsbaum C, Grabar S, Mejean N, et al. Abusive head trauma: judicial ad­
missions highlight violent and repetitive shaking. Pediatrics. 2010;126:546–
555.
Barr RG. Crying as a trigger for abusive head trauma: a key to prevention. 
Pediatr Radiol. 2014;44(suppl 4):S559–S564.
Binenbaum G, Mirza-­George N, Christian CW, et al. Odds of abuse associated 
with retinal hemorrhages in children suspected of child abuse. J Am Assoc 
Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2009;13(3):268–272.
Christian CW. Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect. The evaluation of 
suspected child physical abuse. Pediatrics. 2015;15(5):e1337–e1354.
Fairbrother N, Barr RB, Pauwels J, et al. Maternal thoughts of harm in 
response to infant crying: an experimental analysis. Arch Womens Ment 
Health. 2015;18:447–455.
Gilkerson L, Burkhardt T, Katch LE, et al. Increasing parenting self-­efficacy: 
the Fussy Baby Network intervention. Infant Ment Health J. 2020;41:232–
245.
Henry KM, Feudtner C, Fortin K, et al. Occult head injuries in infants evaluat­
ed for physical abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 2020;103:e104431.
Maguire S, Mann M. Systematic reviews of bruising in relation to child 
abuse—what have we learnt: an overview of review updates. Evid.-­Based 
Child Health. 2013;8:255–263.
Narang SK, Fingarson A, Lukefahr J. Council on Child Abuse and Ne­
glect. Abusive head trauma in infants and children. Pediatrics. 
2020;145(4):e20200203.
Reijneveld SA, van der Wal MF, Brugman E, et al. Infant crying and abuse. 
Lancet. 2004;364:1340–1342.
Sheets LK, et al. Sentinel injuries in infants evaluated for child physical abuse. 
Pediatrics. 2013;131(4):701–707.
Starling SP, Patel S, Burke BL, et al. Analysis of perpetrator admissions to 
inflicted traumatic brain injury in children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2004;158(5):454–458.
Talvik I, Alexander RC, Talvic T. Shaken baby syndrome and baby’s cry. Acta 
Paediatr. 2008;97:782–785.
Watts P, Maguire S, Kwok T, et al. Newborn retinal hemorrhages: a systematic 
review. J Am Assoc Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2013;17:70–78.
Infantile Crying and Colic
Bamber D, Powell C, Long J, et al. Parental and health professional evaluations 
of a support service for parents of excessively crying infants. BMC Health 
Serv Res. 2019;19:592.
Barr RG, Hopkins B, Green JA. Crying as a Sign, a Symptom, and a Signal: 
Clinical, Emotional and Developmental Aspects of Infant and Toddler Cry­
ing. Cambridge University Press; 2000.
Barr RG, Konner M, Bakeman R, et al. Crying in Ikung San infants: a test of 
the cultural specificity hypothesis. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1991;33:601–610.
Botha E, Joronen K, Kaunonen M. The consequences of having an excessively 
crying infant in the family: an integrative literature review. Scand J Caring 
Sci. 2019;33:779–790.
Carnes D, Plunkett A, Ellwood J, et al. Manual therapy for unsettled, distressed 
and excessively crying infants: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. BMJ 
Open. 2018;8:e019040.
Daelemans S, Peeters L, Hauser B, et al. Recent advances in understanding and 
managing infantile colic [version 1; referees: 2 approved]. F1000Research. 
2018;7:1426.
Dobson D, Lucassen PLBJ, Miller JJ, et al. Manipulative therapies for infant 
colic. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:CD004796.
Douglas PS, Hill PS. The crying baby: what approach? Curr Opin Pediatr. 
2011;23:523–529.
Ellwood J, Draper-­Rodi J, Carnes D. Comparison of common interventions for 
the treatment of infantile colic: a systematic review of reviews and guide­
lines. BMJ Open. 2020;10:e035405.
Fleisher DR. Infant colic. In: Faure C, Di Lorenxo C, Thapar N, eds. Pediatric 
Neurogastroenterology: Gastrointestinal Motility and Functional Disorders in 
Children. New York: Springer; 2013:347–354.
Freedman SB, Al-­Harthy N, Thull-­Freedman J. The crying infant: diag­
nostic testing and frequency of serious underlying disease. Pediatrics. 
2009;123(3):841–848.
Giesbrecht GF, Letoumeau N, Campbell T, et al. Parental use of “cry out” in a 
community sample during the first year of infant life. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 
2020;41:379–387.
Hall B, Chesters J, Robinson A. Infantile colic: a systematic review of medical 
and conventional therapies. J Paediatr Child Health. 2012;48:128–137.
Harb T, Matsuyama M, David M, et al. Infant colic—what works: a systematic 
review of interventions for breast-­fed infants. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2016;62:668–686.
Hemmi MH, Wolke D, Schneider S. Associations between problems with cry­
ing, sleeping and/or feeding in infancy and long-­term behavioral outcomes 
in childhood: a meta-­analysis. Arch Dis Child. 2011;96:622–629.
Hjern A, Lindblom K, Reuter A, et al. A systematic review of prevention and 
treatment of infantile colic. Acta Paediatr. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1111/
apa.15247.
Mackey S, Hettiaratchy S, Dickinson J. Hair-­tourniquet syndrome—multiple 
toes and bilaterally. Eur J Emer Med. 2005;12:191–192.
Patrick S, Garcia J, Griffin L. The role of family therapy in mediating adverse 
effects of excessive and inconsolable neonatal crying on the family system. 
Fam Syst Health. 2010;28(1):19–29.
Perry R, Hunt K, Ernst E. Nutritional supplements and other comple­
mentary medicines for infantile colic: a systematic review. Pediatrics. 
2011;127(4):720–733.
Perry R, Leach V, Penfold C, et al. An overview of systematic reviews of 
complementary and alternative therapies for infantile colic. Syst Rev. 
2019;8:271.
Matijasic N, Premilovac ZP. Inconsolable crying in infants: differential diagno­
sis in the pediatric emergency department. Clin Pediatr. 2019;58(2):133–
139.
Olsen AL, Ammitzboll J, Olsen EM, et al. Problems of feeding, sleeping and 
excessive crying in infancy: a general population study. Arch Dis Child. 
2019;104:1034–1041.
Steutel NF, Benninga MA, Langendam MW, et al. Reporting outcome mea­
sures in trials of infant colic. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;59:341–346.
St. James-­Roberts I. The Origins, Prevention and Treatment of Infant Crying and 
Sleep Problems: An Evidence-­Based Guide for Healthcare Professionals and 
the Families They Support. New York: Routledge; 2012.
St. James-­Roberts I, Alvarez M, Hovish K. Emergence of a developmental ex­
planation for prolonged crying in 1-­ to 4-­month-­old infants: review of the 
evidence. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013;57(suppl 1):S30–S36.
St. James-­Roberts I, Morris S, Owen C, et al. Use of a behavioural programme 
in the first 3 months to prevent infant crying and sleep problems. J Paediatr 
Child Health. 2001;37:289–297. 2006;149(4):512–517.
Wake M, et al. Prevalence, stability, and outcomes of cry-­fuss and sleep 
problems in the first 2 years of life: prospective community-­based sample. 
Pediatrics. 2006;117(3):836–842.
Wessel MA, Cobb JC, Jackson EB, et al. Paroxysmal fussing in infancy, some­
times called colic. Pediatrics. 1954;14(5):421–434.
Zeevenhoven J, Browne PD, L’Hoir MP, et al. Infant colic: mechanisms and 
management. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;15:479–496.
Zeevenhooven J, Koppen IJN, Benninga MA. The new Rome IV criteria for 
functional gastrointestinal disorders in infants and toddlers. Pediatr Gas­
troenterol Hepatol Nutr. 2017;20(1):1–13.
Zeifman DM, St. James-­Roberts I. Parenting the crying infant. Curr Opin 
Psych. 2017;15:149–154.
Gastrointestinal Causes of Irritability
Farahmand F, Najafi M, Ataee P, et al. Cow’s milk allergy among children with 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Gut and Liver. 2011;5(3):298–301.
Indrio F, et al. Prophylactic use of a probiotic in the prevention of colic, regur­
gitation, and functional constipation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Pediatr. 2014;168(3):228–233.
Onyeador N, Paul PS, Sandhu KB. Paediatric gastroesophageal reflux clinical 
practice guidelines. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2014;99:190–193.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
511.e2
Bibliography
Rosen R, Vandenplas Y, Singendonk M, et al. Pediatric gastroesophageal reflux 
clinical practice guidelines: joint recommendations of the North Amer­
ican Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition 
(NASPGHAN) and the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, and Nutrition (ESPGHAN). J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2018;66(3):516–554.
Salvatore S, Vandenplas Y. Gastroesophageal reflux and cow milk allergy: is 
there a link? Pediatrics. 2002;110(5):972–984.
Vandenplas Y, Hauser B, Salvatore S. Functional gastrointestinal disorders in 
infancy: impact on the health of the infant and family. Pediatr Gastroenter­
ol Hepatol Nutr. 2019;22(3):207–216.
Teething
Drug Safety Communications. FDA Recommends Not Using Lidocaine to Treat 
Teething Pain and Requires New Boxed Warning. Silver Spring, MD: US 
Food and Drug Administration; 2014.
Macknin ML, Piedmonte M, Jacobs J, et al. Symptoms associated with infant 
teething: a prospective study. Pediatrics. 2000;105(4):747–752.
Owais A, Zawaidey F, Bataineh O. Challenging parents’ myths regarding their 
children’s teething. Int J Dent Hygiene. 2010;8:28–34.
Medication or Drug Reactions
Drugs and Lactation Database. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [In­
ternet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); 2006. Available 
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/?report=classic. 
Accessed May 1, 2020.
Kocherlakota P. Neonatal abstinence syndrome. Pediatrics. 2014;134(2):
e547–e561.
Martin TC, Rocque M. Accidental and non-­accidental ingestion of methadone 
and buprenorphine in childhood: a single center experience, 1999–2009. 
Curr Drug Saf. 2011;6:12–16.
Paul IM, Kate M, Kauffman RE, et al. Adverse events associated with pediatric 
exposures to dextromethorphan. Clin Toxicol. 2017;55(1):25–32.
Trajanovska M, Manias E, Cranswick N, et al. Use of over-­the-­counter medi­
cines for young children in Australia. J Paediatr Child Health. 2010;46:5–9.
Sachs HC. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on drugs. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(3):e796–e809.
Yust E, Slattery A. Cold and cough medications for children: danger­
ous and over the counter. Cough and Cold Medications for Children. 
2012;13(4):292–299.
Genetic Painful Neuropathies
Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neu­
rol. 2014;13:587–599.
Faber CG, Lauria G, Merkies ISJ, et al. Gain-­of-­function Nav1.8 mutations in 
painful neuropathy. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2012;109:19444–19449.
Hisama FM, Dib-­Hajj SD, Waxman SG. SCN9A neuropathic pain syndromes. 
Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al, eds. GeneReviews (Internet). 
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle: 1993–2020.
Kremeyer B, Lopera F, Cox JJ, et al. A gain-­of-­function mutation in TRPA1 
causes familial episodic pain syndrome. Neuron. 2010;66:671–680.
Lee-­Kirsch MA. The type I interferonopathies. Annu Rev Med. 2017;68:297–315.
Liao Y, Anttonen AK, Liukkonen E, et al. SCN2A mutation associated with 
neonatal epilepsy, late-­onset episodic ataxia, myoclonus, and pain. Neurol­
ogy. 2010;75(16).
Liu Y, Jesus AA, Marrero B, et al. Activated STING in a vascular and pulmo­
nary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(6):507–518.
Okuda H, Noguchi A, Kobayashi H, et al. Infantile pain episodes associated 
with novel Nav1.9 mutations in familial episodic pain syndrome in Japa­
nese families. PloS One. 2016;11(5):e0154827.
Raouf R, Quick K, Wood JN. Pain as a channelopathy. J Clin Invest. 
2010;120(11):3745–3752.
Volpi S, Picco P, Caorsi R, et al. Type I interferonopathies in pediatric rheuma­
tology. Pediatr Rheum. 2016;14:35.
Zhang XY, Wen J, Yang W, et al. Gain-­of-­function mutations in SCN11A cause 
familial episodic pain. Am J Hum Genetics. 2013;93:957–966.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
