1106
POLYURIA AND URINARY INCONTINENCE
Urinary incontinence is a normal developmental stage. When present 
beyond a certain age defined by parental and societal expectations, 
it can cause concern and anxiety in the patient and family. Urinary 
incontinence can also be a symptom of significant pathologic pro­
cesses. The challenge to the clinician is identifying the child with an 
organic disorder among the many who are proceeding along a normal 
developmental track.
VOIDING PHYSIOLOGY
Urinary continence is dependent on normal bladder function and nor­
mal urine production. Normal development of bladder function results 
in the storage and release of urine in a socially and physically accept­
able way. During storage, the detrusor muscle is relaxed, and the capac­
ity of the bladder allows urine to be held for several hours. Micturition 
is then voluntary, with coordinated detrusor contraction and sphincter 
relaxation, resulting in complete bladder emptying. The bladder capac­
ity in children learning to be toilet trained is variable, being dependent 
on their own sensation of bladder fullness. The maximum functional 
bladder capacity may differ greatly among children when measured by 
home diaries. Cystometry, a method of measuring bladder volume, can 
be estimated by the following formula:
	
Cystometric bladder capacity  (ounces) = (2 × age  [years]) + 2	
In children 2 years of age or older:
	Cystometric bladder capacity  (ounces) = age  (years)
2
+ 6
	
Although the innervation of the bladder is predominantly auto­
nomic, bladder function is under control of cortical function. Thus, a 
complex integration of visceral and somatic innervation is necessary 
for normal voiding, which perhaps explains the wide spectrum in the 
ages for urinary continence. Parasympathetic neural activity provides 
the primary input during micturition, leading to relaxation of the 
urethral smooth muscle and initiating detrusor contractions. Pelvic 
nerves conducting parasympathetic activity form a reflex arc with the 
centrally located pontine micturition center. The thoracolumbar sym­
pathetic branch, via hypogastric and pelvic sympathetic nerves, inner­
vates the detrusor to relax and the urinary sphincter to contract during 
urine storage.
Urinary continence thus relies on the abilities to (1) store urine 
without leakage, (2) release urine voluntarily and completely, and (3) 
interrupt micturition voluntarily. The third ability is indicative of fully 
coordinated cortical-­autonomic function.
TOILET TRAINING
The age at which toilet training is achieved is influenced by cultural 
factors as well as psychosocial factors. The achievement of daytime uri­
nary continence follows the attainment of bowel control. There is evi­
dence that the age of daytime and nighttime continence has increased 
worldwide in the past century. Data suggest a change in parental atti­
tudes toward the toilet training process and their expectations. Among 
social factors reported, children of single parents are successfully toilet 
trained at an earlier age, whereas enrollment in daycare does not have 
a significant influence. There is no consensus on age of readiness for 
toilet training in Western society. Nearly two dozen signs of readiness 
have been reported, but no evidence-­based studies are available to indi­
cate which readiness signs and how many are needed for a child to suc­
cessfully toilet train. Consistent predictive factors include that females 
are toilet trained earlier than males and Black children are trained ear­
lier than White children. Techniques for toilet training are varied and 
range from the child-­oriented approach to single-­day training inten­
sive methods to the use of daytime wet alarms.
URINE VOLUME AND SOLUTE DIURESIS
Polyuria is the overproduction of urine. Polyuria is a symptom that is 
fixed and therefore occurs during both the daytime and the nighttime. 
“Nocturnal polyuria,” a symptom proposed in a subset of patients with 
primary nocturnal enuresis, is discussed separately. Overproduction of 
urine indicates a defect in one of several mechanisms regulating water 
and solute homeostasis. Identification of children with incontinence 
caused by polyuria is essential for diagnosing a variety of disorders 
(Table 58.1).
Urine production varies depending on the intake of fluids and 
solute, activity, caloric expenditure, and the environment. The vol­
ume reflects the maintenance of normal fluid and electrolyte balance 
(1) through the regulation of plasma osmolality by vasopressin and 
through the thirst mechanism and (2) by the regulation of extracellular 
volume and solute (mainly sodium) homeostasis by the kidney. The 
sensation of thirst occurs when plasma osmolality rises above a thresh­
old of 280–290 mOsm/L. Release of vasopressin, a peptide produced 
by the hypothalamus, parallels the sensation of thirst and then acts on 
receptors in the collecting ducts of the kidney to diminish water excre­
tion and to concentrate the urine. Hypovolemia is also a stimulant for 
vasopressin. Once serum osmolality is restored to normal, vasopressin 
release is inhibited, and renal water excretion increases. Maintenance 
of extracellular fluid volume depends on sodium homeostasis and 
directly affects urine volume. It involves the interaction of several 
systems, including (1) the renin-­angiotensin system, (2) the atrial 
natriuretic peptide, and (3) the sympathetic nervous system.
Polyuria and Urinary Incontinence
Cynthia G. Pan
58
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1107
CHAPTER 58  Polyuria and Urinary Incontinence
Among patients with primary nocturnal enuresis, there is a subset 
of patients with “nocturnal polyuria,” in which larger volumes of more 
dilute urine are produced than in patients who remain dry. Respon­
siveness to the administration of vasopressin analogs, such as des­
mopressin acetate (1-­deamino[8-­d-­arginine] vasopressin [DDAVP]), 
differentiates such patients into responders and nonresponders.
History
The history should begin with determining if urinary incontinence is 
limited to primary nocturnal enuresis versus daytime urinary inconti­
nence (DUI). The next step is to inquire whether it is primary or sec­
ondary. Primary nocturnal enuresis is considered a separate disorder 
and unlikely to have organic etiology, whereas the determination of 
secondary nocturnal enuresis or secondary DUI should call for careful 
evaluation. Questions to determine whether the patient has polyuria 
are important as the presence of polyuria suggests a variety of meta­
bolic, systemic, and kidney diseases. The absence of polyuria directs 
more focus on the lower urinary tract (Table 58.2; see also Table 58.1).
Polyuria
Polyuria, the excessive production of urine, can result from the absence 
of release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), failure of the kidney to 
respond to ADH, or an osmotic diuresis. This can lead to urinary 
incontinence, especially in young children. Polyuria always results in 
polydipsia. It is often easier to query parents as to whether the vol­
ume of fluid intake by the child is excessive rather than to obtain an 
estimate of the volume of urine output. The first clue to polydipsia in 
infants is irritability and “hunger” after a successful feeding of formula 
or breast milk. In young children, favoring water over solids or milk, 
as well as seeking water in unusual places (e.g., toilets), can be a sign of 
polydipsia. Waking to seek fluids at night in a consistent pattern is also 
a sign of polydipsia. Parental stories of bed linens being soaked despite 
a “double diaper” or training pull-­on diaper are remarkable, especially 
when recounted by experienced parents.
An osmotic diuresis leading to polyuria may be an early sign of 
diabetes mellitus. The previously dry child may develop secondary 
nocturnal or even daytime enuresis. Associated symptoms include 
polydipsia and polyphagia with poor weight gain and fatigue. Chil­
dren with central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and the genetic forms of 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) produce very large amounts of 
hypotonic urine. Along with polyuria and enuresis, these children may 
have a history of frequent hospitalizations for dehydration, often pro­
voked by relatively minor illnesses. The dehydration is often associated 
with moderate or severe hypernatremia. Failure to thrive may develop 
because of a preference for low-­calorie-­containing fluids over solid 
foods. The secondary causes of NDI may include a partial defect in 
the mechanism for renal concentrating, and urinary incontinence may 
be the only symptom (see Table 58.2). Conversely, other children may 
also have growth retardation because of associated chronic renal failure 
or the associated metabolic abnormalities (e.g., metabolic acidosis in 
renal tubular acidosis [RTA] or rickets in Fanconi syndrome, metabolic 
alkalosis in Bartter syndrome). Polydipsia can also result from a behav­
ioral problem and result in polyuria, but patients will demonstrate nor­
mal urinary concentrating ability using appropriate testing.
Voiding History
In the presence of enuresis but the absence of polyuria, a voiding his­
tory helps to determine whether additional evaluation is warranted. Is 
the urinary incontinence nocturnal only, or is daytime incontinence also 
present? Does the patient have stool incontinence? Voiding frequency is 
sometimes difficult to ascertain in a school-­age child, and an assignment 
to keep a diary of voiding can be given on the first visit. This should 
include information on both bladder and bowel habits, specifically urine 
volumes and when urinary incontinence occurs. Voiding postpone­
ment, or urine holding patterns, with overflow incontinence is most 
easily identifiable with a diary. Incontinence can be a symptom of a uri­
nary tract infection (UTI) (see Chapter 21). Associated symptoms may 
include dysuria, frequency, and urgency. Other urinary symptoms such 
as dysuria, urgency, dampness in the underwear, or other signs of UTI 
TABLE 58.1  Causes of Urinary Incontinence
With Polyuria
Diabetes mellitus
Primary polydipsia (psychogenic, behavioral)
Central diabetes insipidus
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Primary
Genetic
Secondary
Obstructive uropathy: concurrent (anatomic, neurogenic) 
or postobstructive
Polyuric phase of acute kidney injury
Chronic renal failure
Juvenile nephronophthisis
Fanconi syndrome (e.g., cystinosis)
Hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia
Bartter syndrome
Gitelman syndrome
Sickle cell disease
Renal tubular acidosis
Medications (e.g., lithium)
Interstitial nephritis
Without Polyuria
Primary nocturnal enuresis*
Dysfunctional voiding syndromes
Neuropathic bladder
Anatomic defects of the urinary tract
*Some cases may be characterized by nocturnal polyuria.
TABLE 58.2  Secondary and Acquired 
Forms of Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus–Like 
Disorders
Acquired
Chronic pyelonephritis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Chronic renal failure secondary to obstructive uropathy
Drug-­induced tubulopathy
Hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia
Congenital
Renal tubular acidosis
Nephrocalcinosis
Cystinosis
Sickle cell nephropathy
Juvenile nephronophthisis
Renal dysplasia
Cystic kidney disease
Bartter syndrome
Storage, metabolic diseases (tyrosinemia, Fabry disease)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1108
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
can all be signs of voiding dysfunction. Asking parents for specific obser­
vations—such as (1) the sudden urge to void followed by incontinence 
or (2) maneuvers to prevent urine leakage, such as squatting and press­
ing the heel of the foot into the perineum—elicits clues to a hyperactive 
detrusor muscle. Incontinence may occur with giggling, with physical 
stress while jumping, or with activities that require Valsalva maneuvers.
Secondary enuresis is defined as enuresis occurring after a dry 
period of at least 6 consecutive months and can be the first sign of an 
acquired renal or metabolic disease. Fecal soiling or constipation may 
be an accompanying sign of voiding dysfunction, but it should first 
raise suspicion for an occult spinal lesion such as spina bifida or a teth­
ered cord. In addition, continuous dribbling, a poor urinary stream, or 
recurrent infections may be a sign of anatomic or neuropathic lesions 
(see Table 58.1).
Primary Nocturnal Enuresis
The patient with nocturnal enuresis (bedwetting) is typically without 
any major daytime symptoms. Enuresis is considered primary when 
the patient has not had any dry periods for >6 months. Toilet train­
ing for daytime control is often achieved easily. The frequency of wet 
nights should be ascertained to gauge the magnitude of the problem. 
Approximately 5–10% of 7-­year-­old children are affected and for some 
the problem persists into adolescence and even adulthood. A family 
history of nocturnal enuresis increases a patient’s risk for nocturnal 
enuresis. If both parents have a history of enuresis, the rate of occur­
rence in offspring may be as high as 70–80%. If the father had primary 
nocturnal enuresis, the child has a fivefold to sevenfold increase in 
risk. The pathophysiologic mechanism is multifactorial; explanations 
include defects in osmoregulation (nocturnal polyuria), nocturnal 
detrusor over-­reactivity, and disorders of sleep or arousal states.
Behavioral Issues
Social stressors should be ascertained because psychologic factors are 
important in the occurrence of secondary enuresis. There are reports of 
other psychiatric issues, such as attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disor­
der, autism, and conduct disorders, associated with a higher incidence 
of daytime and nighttime incontinence. It has been widely accepted, 
however, that many affected children are often emotionally well 
adjusted. Nonetheless, care should be taken not to underestimate the 
sequelae of both enuresis and DUI in the older school-­age child, who 
may feel “abnormal” among peers. Evaluation of the patient should 
always include inquiring how the patient and other family members 
are reacting to the problem and whether it may be interfering socially, 
with school issues, and with quality of life.
Finally, primary nocturnal enuresis may be a sleep disorder or a 
disorder of arousal. Patients with severe nocturnal enuresis may have 
defects in arousal to auditory stimuli. Inquiry into symptoms of sleep 
apnea should also be made, such as snoring or restless sleep, as it may 
lead to altered arousal states, leading to nocturnal enuresis in patients 
with sleep apnea (see Chapter 6).
Physical Examination
In all affected patients, their growth should be evaluated, because fail­
ure to thrive can be seen in many of the metabolic disorders that pro­
duce polyuria. The presence of hypertension suggests underlying renal 
or urologic abnormalities. Careful evaluation of the lower back may 
reveal cutaneous abnormalities such as hair tufts, pits, dimpling, or vas­
cular malformations, which are possible signs of spina bifida occulta or 
tethered cord. A significant deviation of the gluteal cleft may also sug­
gest the possibility of spinal dysraphism. The abdominal examination 
is important for detecting a distended bladder, suprapubic tenderness, 
or significant stool retention. A neurologic examination should include 
assessment of lower extremity deep tendon reflexes, observation of 
the gait, and evaluation of perineal sensation and anal sphincter tone, 
again screening for the possibility of a neuropathic bladder. Anatomic 
abnormalities leading to incontinence should be sought by inspection 
of the genitalia. In females, the examination includes a search for fused 
labial folds and dribbling urine from an ectopic ureter. In males, the 
phallus should be inspected for the presence of epispadias or unde­
scended testicles.
Diagnosis
The presence or absence of polyuria helps guide the necessary labora­
tory and radiologic testing (Figs. 58.1 and 58.2). An immediate UA is 
critical for differentiating the glycosuria of diabetes mellitus from the 
low specific gravity (osmolality) of diabetes insipidus or the proteinuria 
and/or hematuria of chronic renal disease.
A water deprivation test to examine urine concentrating capacity 
of patients when diabetes insipidus is suspected should be done in a 
hospital setting, with close observation of and attention to urine and 
serum osmolarity, urine output, and weight loss. In patients with sig­
nificant polyuria, dehydration and hyperosmolarity are easily precipi­
tated with several hours of water deprivation. For patients with a less 
suspect history of polyuria, a first morning void after an overnight fast 
should be sufficient for checking urine osmolarity or specific gravity.
In some patients, the problem can be better defined with a home 
voiding diary, which outlines how often and how much they are void­
ing and when urinary incontinence, constipation, or encopresis occurs.
Laboratory Assessment
Routine laboratory examination in patients with monosymptomatic 
nocturnal enuresis includes a UA and then is diagnosed by taking a 
good history and performing a complete physical examination. In 
patients with DUI or secondary nocturnal enuresis, or when polyuria 
or polydipsia is present, a screening UA, followed by appropriate blood 
chemistry studies, is important for evaluating for diabetes mellitus 
or electrolyte disorders such as metabolic acidosis (RTA), metabolic 
alkalosis (Bartter syndrome), hypercalcemia, and hypokalemia. Hyper­
natremia can be seen in the severe forms of diabetes insipidus. UTI 
should be sought in most patients with incontinence by obtaining a UA 
and urine culture. A UA also helps screen for occult, chronic glomer­
ular or tubular renal disease. Hematuria or proteinuria can be a sign 
of renal disease, although its absence does not exclude this possibility. 
Glycosuria, when associated with normal serum glucose, can indicate 
tubulointerstitial disease, where proximal tubular injury results in a 
lowered threshold for glucose reabsorption.
Imaging and Cystometry
Radiologic imaging is not necessary in most patients with primary 
nocturnal enuresis. In select patients with secondary enuresis, day­
time symptoms, or a suspect history or UA, renal ultrasonography may 
provide information regarding acquired or congenital renal diseases. 
Images of the bladder can reveal urologic abnormalities, including 
poor bladder emptying or thickened bladder wall. A voiding cysto­
urethrogram is indicated only in patients with a questionable urinary 
stream, continuous dribbling (aberrant ectopic ureter), or suspected 
spinal cord lesions with lower extremity neurologic signs. MRI of the 
lower spine should be reserved for patients with cutaneous signs, neu­
rologic or orthopedic symptoms of the lumbar-­sacral spine, or complex 
spinal bone deformities seen on plain radiographs (Table 58.3 and Figs. 
58.3 and 58.4). All patients with CDI must undergo cerebral MRI with 
specific focus on the hypothalamic-­pituitary region.
Cystometry examination is useful for a select group of patients 
with a history of dysfunctional voiding symptoms whose response to 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1109
CHAPTER 58  Polyuria and Urinary Incontinence
therapy is poor. Bladder instability is characterized by involuntary con­
tractions at more than 15 cm of water pressure during filling. Small 
bladder capacity is almost always a functional problem, not anatomic.
Differential Diagnosis
Primary Nocturnal Enuresis
Primary nocturnal enuresis (bedwetting) is considered abnormal in 
most social contexts after the age of 5 years. In the Diagnostic and Sta­
tistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-­5), primary 
enuresis is defined as wetting clothes or the bed at least twice a week 
for more than 3 consecutive months. Most affected patients have no 
daytime symptoms. It is a common problem, but only a small propor­
tion of patients seek medical advice. The incidence of pure primary 
nocturnal enuresis without other symptoms is twice as common 
among males as among females.
Daytime Urinary Incontinence
DUI is defined as involuntary, intermittent leakage during the day in 
children older than 5 years of age with a frequency of once a month 
and persisting for >3 months. This occurs when there is an imbalance 
or lack of coordination of activity between the detrusor muscle activ­
ity (bladder contracture) and the bladder neck or external sphincter 
With Polyuria
Abnormal
Normal
Severe defect
Labs: Electrolytes, Ca+, blood glucose, serum creatinine
Partial defect
Urinary
concentrating
ability
Metabolic
disorders
Diabetes mellitus
Hypercalcemia
Hypokalemia
Central diabetes insipidus
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Sickle cell nephropathy
Juvenile nephronophthisis
Interstitial nephritis
Medication
RTA
Bartter syndrome
Cystinosis
Chronic renal failure
Polyuric phase of AKI
Renal
disorders
Fig. 58.2  Diagnosis of enuresis with polyuria. AKI, acute kidney injury; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
Without Polyuria
Daytime voiding symptoms
or secondary enuresis
Primary
nocturnal enuresis
UTI
Anatomic defect
Neuropathic bladder
Anatomic defect
MRI spine
VCUG
Renal U/S
MRI spine
VCUG
Renal U/S
Renal U/S
VCUG
Abnormal
Normal
Physical exam
Voiding dysfunction
Neuropathic bladder
Anatomic defect
Cystometry
Physical exam
Nocturnal enuresis
U/A  (+)
UTI
U/A  (–)
Abnormal
Normal
U/A  (–)
U/A  (+)
Fig. 58.1  Diagnosis of enuresis without polyuria. U/S, ultrasonography; UTI, urinary tract infection; VCUG, 
voiding cystourethrogram; +, positive; −, negative.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1110
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
activity (bladder outlet control). This poor coordination can, over 
time, cause a wide spectrum of disorders, including incontinence. The 
severity depends on the balance of forces among the detrusor activity, 
bladder neck, and external sphincter. In the extreme case, high bladder 
pressures produce acquired urologic abnormalities, including hydrone­
phrosis, vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), and renal damage. Dysfunctional 
voiding can be classified as mild, moderate, or severe. Early recognition 
can lead to proper management and avoidance of long-­term sequelae.
Mild voiding dysfunction. Daytime urinary frequency is 
characterized by frequency and urgency as often as every 15–20 
minutes. This is usually associated with incontinence or mild pain 
and occurs in children aged 3–8 years. The condition is also usually 
self-­limiting. A thorough history should be documented, a careful 
physical examination conducted, and UA performed to rule out other 
pathologic processes.
Moderate voiding dysfunction. There are two extremes in the 
spectrum of moderate dysfunctional voiding. Over time, voiding 
postponement, or urine holding, as infrequent as once every 8–12 hours, 
results in incontinence and recurrent UTIs. This can be a consequence 
of behaviors developed when the young child is learning voluntary 
contraction of the external sphincter muscle while toilet training. It 
may also develop when a child goes to school or camp and does not 
want to use an unfamiliar toilet or be in an embarrassing situation. 
The child learns additional maneuvers to void infrequently, such as 
squatting and pressing the heel of the foot in the perineum. This turns 
into dysfunctional voiding when over time the child is unable to relax 
the external sphincter in coordination with detrusor activity during 
voiding. This results in incomplete and inefficient bladder emptying.
The overactive bladder, or urge syndrome, is also a common abnor­
mality in DUI. Low-­quantity, frequent voiding leading to incontinence 
is secondary to delayed resolution of uninhibited bladder contractions 
that normally resolve as the child matures. This asynchronous activ­
ity between detrusor muscle and sphincter contraction leads to higher 
intravesical pressures. Urgency and urge incontinence are the most 
common symptoms, but recurrent UTIs and VUR may result as well. 
Complications may include thickening, trabeculations, or diverticula 
of the bladder. High bladder pressure can also cause hydroureter and 
hydronephrosis.
Severe dysfunctional voiding. This is often referred to as the 
non-­neurogenic neurogenic bladder (Hinman syndrome), a syndrome 
representing the extreme end of the spectrum of dysfunctional voiding. 
Inappropriate voluntary contraction of the external sphincter during 
voiding produces high intravesical pressure and a functional outlet 
obstruction, leading to abnormal bladder function, hydronephrosis, and 
possibly renal failure. With time, the voiding pattern becomes habitual, 
and the anatomic changes in the bladder impede the ability to void 
normally. Biofeedback and clean intermittent straight catheterization 
may restore bladder emptying and function and prevent renal failure.
Special considerations. Giggle incontinence is most often seen 
in females and is characterized by incontinence after laughter. It too 
is usually self-­limiting. Stress incontinence follows athletic activities 
such as running or jumping and landing; it is common with activities 
such as gymnastics and cheerleading. Timely bladder emptying before 
exercise is effective in preventing this problem. Urethrovaginal reflux 
can lead to postvoid dribbling and can occur in young females who 
develop habits of incomplete voiding or can result from urine that is 
collected in the vagina during voiding. Sitting with the knees slightly 
apart or sitting on the toilet facing backward eliminates this problem. 
Anatomic issues such as meatal anomalies and labial adhesion can also 
be a cause of this form of incontinence.
Neuropathic Bladder
The neuropathic bladder most often occurs in patients with spina 
bifida, an open or closed congenital spinal cord fusion defect. This 
results in distortion of normal neural tissues in the spinal cord or nerve 
TABLE 58.3  Cutaneous Lesions Associated 
with Occult Spinal Dysraphism
Imaging Indicated
Subcutaneous mass or lipoma
Hairy patch
Dermal sinus or cyst
Atypical dimples (deep, >5 mm, >25 mm from anal verge)
Vascular lesion, e.g., hemangioma or telangiectasia
Skin appendages or polypoid lesions, e.g., skin tags, tail-­like appendages
Scarlike lesions (aplasia cutis)
Imaging Uncertain
Hyperpigmented patches
Deviation of the gluteal fold
Imaging Not Required
Simple dimples (<5 mm, <25 mm from anal verge)
Coccygeal pits
From Williams H. Spinal sinuses, dimples, pits and patches: what lies 
beneath? Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2006;91:ep75–ep80.
B
C
A
D
Fig. 58.3  Clinical aspects of congenital median lumbosacral cutaneous lesions. A, Midline sacral heman­
gioma in a patient with an occult lipomyelomeningocele. B, Capillary malformation with a subtle patch of 
hypertrichosis in a patient with a dermal sinus. C, Human tail with underlying lipoma in an infant with lipomy­
elomeningocele. D, Midline area of hypertrichosis (faun tail) overlying a patch of hyperpigmentation. (A–C, 
From Kos L, Drolet BA. Developmental abnormalities. In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds. Neonatal 
Dermatology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2008; D, from Spine and spinal cord: developmental disor­
ders. In Schapira A, ed. Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2007.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1111
CHAPTER 58  Polyuria and Urinary Incontinence
roots. The range of anomalies includes meningocele, lipomeningocele, 
primary tethered cord, dermoid cyst, syrinx, and sacral agenesis (see 
Fig. 58.4). Closed defects can be initially asymptomatic and manifest 
during toilet training years with incontinence, recurrent UTIs, or 
orthopedic problems in later childhood. Many children who present 
with symptoms have a cutaneous finding over the lumbosacral spine 
noted since birth. The severity of the symptoms does not seem to pre­
dict the severity of the bladder dysfunction or renal damage. Despite 
lesser neurologic deficits in closed spina bifida, affected patients have 
demonstrated bladder dysfunction as severe as that observed in open 
spina bifida. Acute spinal injury (trauma), compression (tumor), or 
infection (transverse myelitis) may produce similar bladder conditions 
such as acute urinary retention.
Anatomic Defects
Posterior urethral valves and urethral obstruction. This is the most 
common form of urinary obstruction leading to kidney failure in male 
infants and children. It is a result of persistence of fetal folds in the 
posterior urethra, which act as a valve to create urinary obstruction. 
Poor urinary stream and bladder distention are the most common 
urinary complaints, but dribbling and incontinence are also observed. 
UTI can be the presenting problem, and when it is diagnosed in young 
males, especially infants, posterior urethral valves should always be 
sought.
Eagle-­Barrett, or prune-­belly, syndrome is another important 
cause of urethral obstruction. Early obstruction during embryogenesis 
leads to hydronephrosis, hydroureter, abdominal distention, abdom­
inal musculature deficiency, and excessive skin folds, thus giving the 
wrinkly “prune” appearance of the abdomen in severe cases. A spec­
trum of renal dysplasia and chronic kidney disease can result in both 
conditions.
Renal duplication. This is a result of duplication of the ureteric 
bud during embryogenesis, causing a double collecting system, or two 
ureters. Duplicated ureters can open separately inside the bladder, 
but in rare cases, an ectopic ureter can end in the vagina, urethra, or 
vestibule, leading to dribbling and incontinence.
Vesicoureteral reflux. VUR is the retrograde flow of urine from 
the bladder into the ureters and kidney. Normal insertion of the ureter 
into the bladder submucosal wall forms a flap-­valve mechanism that 
prevents urine backup during filling and contraction. Congenital VUR 
is secondary to shorter ureteric segments in the bladder wall. Urine 
flow mechanics are disrupted by the constant filling of the bladder 
with urine that has flowed backward and then returns to the emptied 
bladder. The inability to completely empty the bladder eliminates an 
important defense against UTIs. Secondary VUR can be associated 
with dysfunctional voiding. Dyssynergia between detrusor contraction 
and sphincter relaxation may result in VUR and recurrent UTIs. 
Urethral obstruction leading to high intravesical pressure also leads to 
VUR, poor bladder emptying, and thus UTIs and incontinence.
Metabolic Disorders
Hypercalcemia. This is an uncommon electrolyte disorder in 
children but can be observed in primary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin 
D intoxication, immobilization, Williams syndrome, malignancy, 
and idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy. Polyuria is a symptom 
of hypercalcemia and is a result of its inhibitory effect on Na+, K+-­
ATPase function in renal tubules. This leads to renal sodium and 
water losses and thus to polyuria and volume contraction. In chronic 
hypercalcemia, increased calcium excretion over time can lead to 
nephrocalcinosis, tubular damage, and poor urinary concentrating 
ability, thus enhancing polyuria.
Hypokalemia. This is another electrolyte disorder that induces 
polyuria. In children, it occurs as a result of diuretic use, aldosterone 
excess states, Cushing syndrome, and intrinsic renal disorders that 
affect potassium handling. The latter includes disorders such as RTA, 
Bartter syndrome, or renal injury from nephrotoxic medications. 
Hypokalemia interferes with water reabsorption in the collecting duct 
of the kidneys.
Diabetes mellitus. Polyuria and urinary incontinence can be the 
first symptoms of diabetes mellitus and are secondary to hyperglycemia 
and the osmotic diuresis resulting from chronic glycosuria. The renal 
threshold for reabsorption of glucose is exceeded when the blood 
glucose level is higher than approximately 180 mg/dL. If oral intake of 
fluid decreases, as occurs when diabetic ketoacidosis causes anorexia 
and emesis, significant dehydration and shock frequently develop.
Central Diabetes Insipidus
In CDI, the lack of circulating ADH prevents concentration of the 
urine, leading to high quantities of dilute urine. The defect can be com­
plete or partial, and thus the degree of polyuria is variable. In complete 
CDI, the massive polyuria can lead to severe dehydration and hyperna­
tremia. CDI can be secondary to congenital malformations of the pitu­
itary gland, intracranial surgery, head trauma, or tumor involving the 
nuclei of the hypothalamus (where ADH is produced) or the neurohy­
pophysial axis itself. There is also an idiopathic form and familial forms 
of CDI. Abnormalities in the AVP gene are the most common famil­
ial form inherited in most patients as an autosomal dominant trait; 
X-­linked or autosomal recessive inheritance has also been reported. In 
the idiopathic form, infiltrative diseases such as Langerhans cell his­
tiocytosis (Letterer-­Siwe syndrome) should be sought. A significant 
Fig. 58.4  Dermal sinus tract—similar to a lipomyelomeningocele but 
with an additional fibrous tract (red arrow) extending from a superficial 
skin dimple to the placode. (From Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, 
eds. Fanaroff’ & Martins’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine. 11th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2020:1075, Fig. 58.4.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1112
SECTION 11  Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders
proportion of young children initially diagnosed with idiopathic CDI 
have been found to have histiocytosis in subsequent years. Treatment 
is with ADH or its analogs.
Renal Concentrating Defects
Renal tubular acidosis. In distal (type 1) RTA, the most common 
form of RTA, there is a defect in the tubular secretion of hydrogen 
ions and decreased formation of NH4+ cations in the urine. In 
children, the presentation includes failure to thrive, polyuria, and 
polydipsia. Hypokalemia is a common finding and can be profound, 
leading to weakness. Hypercalciuria and low urine citrate excretion 
combine to produce nephrocalcinosis. The autosomal recessive form 
of the disease is frequently associated with hearing loss. There are 
also autosomal dominant forms of the disease. Distal RTA may 
be secondary to medications (e.g., amphotericin) or a variety of 
conditions, including interstitial nephritis, obstructive uropathy, 
nephrocalcinosis, renal transplantation, sickle cell disease, and 
systemic lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 59).
Proximal RTA is less common and is a primary defect in bicarbon­
ate reabsorption in the proximal tubule. When associated with other 
proximal tubular defects, such as salt wasting, phosphate wasting, 
glycosuria, and aminoaciduria, it is referred to as Fanconi syndrome. 
Manifesting in infancy to early adulthood, cystinosis is the most com­
mon cause of proximal RTA in children. This autosomal recessive 
disorder results from a defect in cystine transport and results in the 
lysosomal accumulation of cystine throughout the body. The infantile 
form usually manifests in the first year of life. Without intervention, 
this form results in end-­stage renal failure. Acidosis, rickets, polyuria, 
and severe failure to thrive are hallmarks of the disease. Early interven­
tion with oral cysteamine to bind cysteine has dramatically improved 
the outcome in affected patients. Proximal RTA is a feature of several 
other genetic disorders manifesting in childhood (such as galactose­
mia, tyrosinemia, hereditary fructose intolerance, glycogen storage 
disease type I, Lowe syndrome, Wilson disease, osteopetrosis) or inges­
tion of toxins (e.g., heavy metals) (see Chapter 59).
Sickle cell disease. Hemoglobin S is a genetic defect in hemoglobin 
A that results in red blood cells that deform under low oxygen tension 
(see Chapter 49). The renal medulla is a site with high osmolality, 
low oxygen tension, and relative acidosis, all conditions that promote 
sickling. This results in occlusion of blood vessels and damage to the 
renal medulla, the primary site where the urine is concentrated. The 
resultant decreased ability to concentrate leads to a higher incidence of 
nocturnal enuresis in affected patients.
Nephronophthisis. Juvenile nephronophthisis is an autosomal 
recessive disorder that leads to end-­stage renal failure between 
preadolescence and early adulthood. Patients have high urine output 
because of poor renal concentrating ability and renal salt wasting. 
Patients may have primary or secondary nocturnal enuresis. The salt 
wasting causes salt craving, and patients prefer salty foods or even eat 
salt directly from the saltshaker. A small percentage of these patients 
have retinitis pigmentosa, which may cause blindness at birth or later 
in life. Patients may present with symptoms of chronic renal failure.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The congenital form of NDI 
is often diagnosed before toilet training, but it can lead to urinary 
incontinence in later childhood. Infants may present with poor growth, 
severe dehydration, seizures, and central nervous system injury or 
death. In families in which the diagnosis has already been made, early 
intervention in infants can prevent these symptoms and lead to an 
excellent outcome. Ninety percent of patients have the X-­linked form 
of the disease, which is caused by a gene variant ADH receptor. Female 
carriers may be mildly affected. The autosomal recessive and autosomal 
dominant forms of NDI are caused by variants in aquaporin, the water 
channel that allows uptake of water in the collecting duct. Treatment is 
with indomethacin, sodium restriction, and thiazide diuretics.
Treatment
Primary Nocturnal Enuresis
Establishing whether the primary nocturnal enuresis is the only symp­
tom (monosymptomatic) or whether there are associated symptoms 
such as DUI, constipation, sleep disorders, or behavioral issues is nec­
essary before a treatment strategy is developed.
Many families whose child has monosymptomatic nocturnal enure­
sis simply want reassurance that there is not an organic explanation. It 
is also helpful to let the family and child know that almost all patients 
“outgrow” primary nocturnal enuresis. Positive reinforcement for dry 
nights, dispelling any negative attitudes, and avoiding blame enhance 
the child’s self-­esteem. If treatment is sought, the enuresis alarm has a 
high success rate, but patient selection is important. These devices are 
designed to awaken patients when micturition begins and result in the 
development of increased bladder capacity. Its effect may not be seen 
for up to 12 weeks, and therefore the family and patient must be highly 
motivated. Older patients who are ready to take charge of the problem 
and who do not have difficulty waking are the best candidates.
Pharmacologic therapy for primary nocturnal enuresis includes 
the use of DDAVP, an ADH analog. There is probably a subpopulation 
of patients with enuresis who have “nocturnal polyuria,” which led to 
the drug’s popularity, but there is evidence that this is independent of 
vasopressin secretion. DDAVP is most effective in children with a pos­
itive family history of primary nocturnal enuresis, with normal blad­
der capacity, and who are older than 7 years. Its safety profile has been 
excellent, but patients should be given careful instruction on restrict­
ing fluid intake after the bedtime dose. There are occasional reports of 
hyponatremic seizures in children who drink excessively while taking 
DDAVP.
Patients with small bladder capacity and diurnal symptoms tend 
not to respond to DDAVP; these patients may benefit from anticho­
linergic therapy, such as oxybutynin. Combination therapy involving 
a bed alarm plus DDAVP or DDAVP plus anticholinergic therapy may 
be helpful in select patients.
Imipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant, has been shown to be effec­
tive, but its side effects and toxicity have limited its use for this benign 
condition. Patients with enuresis and other behavioral problems who 
take selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have reported improvement 
in the enuresis. This may be an appropriate option in this population.
Daytime Urinary Incontinence
Treatment of mild functional forms of DUI should begin with non­
pharmacologic management, or urotherapy, that is individualized to 
patient symptoms. Patients should receive education on bowel and 
bladder function, and also be instructed to void on a regular schedule, 
even if they do not feel the urge to void. This encourages voiding when 
the patient is relaxed and will lead to fewer contractions of the external 
sphincter during micturition. They may also benefit from counseling 
on posture, fluid intake, and diet. Keeping a diary of the voiding sched­
ule involves the child in management and makes them more aware of 
bladder and bowel habits. Aggressive management of constipation (see 
Chapter 19) improves good bladder emptying and decreases bladder 
instability. These nonpharmacologic approaches to urotherapy are 
often enough to treat the majority of neurologically and anatomically 
intact children.
When DUI continues despite nonpharmacologic methods, phar­
macologic therapy is used as an adjunct. Anticholinergic therapy is 
the mainstay of drug treatment, especially in the child with an overac­
tive bladder or urge syndrome, blocking receptors in the bladder and 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1113
CHAPTER 58  Polyuria and Urinary Incontinence
suppressing bladder contractility. Oxybutynin should be started at a 
low dosage and titrated to its maximum dosage if necessary. The min­
imum effective dosage should be used to minimize side effects (dry 
mouth, flushing, constipation, concentration problems, and blurred 
vision). Use of the extended-­release form of oxybutynin bypasses the 
first-­pass metabolism and is reported to result in better tolerance. The 
use of α-­adrenergic antagonists (e.g., doxazosin, tamsulosin, tera­
zosin) is currently reserved for off-­label use in the treatment of non-­
neurogenic bladder dysfunction, reducing bladder outlet resistance.
Patients with recurrent UTIs who develop urine-­holding patterns 
that lead to overflow incontinence may benefit from a trial of antibi­
otic prophylaxis. This may keep the child free of infection and may 
prevent the painful urination that reinforces exaggerated external 
sphincter contraction and urine holding. Botulinum toxin is a neuro­
toxin that inhibits acetylcholine release at the presynaptic junction and 
is approved for sphincteric injections. It is not approved for voiding 
dysfunction in children. The off-­label use in children with neuropathic 
bladders and treatment-­resistant non-­neurogenic bladders has shown 
reports of favorable outcomes.
Biofeedback is reserved for patients with moderate to severe dys­
functional voiding. Patients can learn to increase bladder capacity and 
inhibit detrusor contractions through this method. Neuromodulation 
using transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) has shown 
promise in reducing incontinence episodes and urgency in random­
ized controlled trials. More evidence is needed, but it remains an 
adjunct therapy in children.
Polyuria
The treatment of polyuria depends on the cause. In certain disorders, 
such as diabetes mellitus, hypokalemia, or hypercalcemia, the underly­
ing disorder can be corrected. The high urine output in CDI decreases 
markedly with the use of DDAVP. In contrast, there is no effective ther­
apy for reducing urine output in patients with disorders such as juve­
nile nephronophthisis or obstructive uropathy.
The hereditary forms of NDI cause massive polyuria. A combina­
tion of sodium restriction and a thiazide diuretic can decrease this 
high urine output by producing a subtle volume depletion that results 
in less water being delivered to the collecting duct. The addition of 
indomethacin or other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs can, by 
reducing renal blood flow, further decrease urine output in patients 
with NDI. The use of indomethacin also reduces the high urine output 
in Bartter syndrome. Despite therapy, patients with Bartter syndrome 
and NDI continue to have high urine output, and the family should be 
counseled that a delay in achieving nighttime continence is expected.
Neuropathic Bladder and Anatomic Disorders
The treatment of these disorders depends on the specific defect. In 
patients with neuropathic bladders resulting from spina bifida, chronic 
intermittent catheterization of the bladder may be the only way to 
achieve continence. Uninhibited bladder contractions may necessitate 
anticholinergic therapy as an adjunct.
Anatomic disorders such as posterior urethral valves or VUR may 
still necessitate medical therapy or biofeedback after corrective surgery. 
Urodynamic testing can be very helpful in this population to define the 
problem leading to incontinence.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Most children with urinary incontinence do not have an organic 
problem. The work-­up consists of a thorough history and physical 
examination with laboratory analysis when indicated. Red flags that 
indicate the need for diagnostic tests are shown in Table 58.4.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 58.4  Red Flags
Polyuria
Polydipsia
Failure to thrive
Poor urinary stream
Encopresis
Secondary enuresis
Abnormal gait, including toe walking
Recurrent urinary tract infections
Cutaneous lesions over lumbosacral spine
Diminished lower extremity reflexes
Abnormal genitalia
Palpable bladder
Hypertension
Headache
Visual disturbances
Obstructive sleep apneas
Recurrent fevers
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1113.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Voiding Physiology
Blum NJ, Taubman B, Nemeth N. Relationship between age at initiation of 
toilet training and duration of training: a prospective study. Pediatrics. 
2003;111(4 Pt 1):810–814.
Brazelton TB. A child-­oriented approach to toilet training. Pediatrics. 
1962;29:21–128.
Kaefer M, Zurakowski D, Bauer SB, et al. Estimating normal bladder capacity 
in children. J Urol. 1997;158:2261–2264.
Kaerts N, Van Hal G, Vermandel A, et al. Readiness signs used to define the 
proper moment to start toilet training: a review of the literature. Neurourol 
Urodyn. 2012;31(4):37–440.
Mattsson S, Gladh G, Lindström S. Relative filling of the bladder at daytime 
voids in healthy school children. J Urol. 2003;170(4 Pt 1):1343–1346.
Nevéus T. Nocturnal enuresis—theoretic background and practical guidelines. 
Pediatr Nephrol. 2011;26(8):1207–1214.
Signs and Symptoms
Combs AJ, Van Batavia JP, Chan J, et al. Dysfunctional elimination 
syndromes—how closely linked are constipation and encopresis with 
specific lower urinary tract conditions? J Urol. 2013;190:1015–1020.
Herndon CD, Joseph DB. Urinary incontinence. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2006;53(3):363–377.
Issenman RM, Filmer RB, Gorski PA. A review of bowel and bladder control 
development in children: how gastrointestinal and urologic conditions 
relate to problems in toilet training. Pediatrics. 1999;103:1346–1352.
Diagnostics
Drzewiecki BA, Bauer SB. Urodynamic testing in children: indications, 
technique, interpretation and significance. J Urol. 2011;186(4):1190–1197.
Hoebeke P, Bower W, Combs A, et al. Diagnostic evaluation of children with 
daytime incontinence. J Urol. 2010;183(2):699–703.
Patel HP. The abnormal urinalysis. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2006;53(3):325–337.
Wraige E, Borzskowski M. Investigation of daytime wetting: when is spinal 
cord imaging indicated? Arch Dis Child. 2002;87(2):151–155.
Specific Disorders
Alexopoulos EI, Malakasioti G, Varlami V, et al. Nocturnal enuresis is 
associated with moderate-­to-­severe obstructive sleep apnea in children 
with snoring. Pediatr Res. 2014;76(6):555–559.
Barakat LP, Smith-­Whitley K, Schulman S, et al. Nocturnal enuresis in 
pediatric sickle cell disease. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2001;22:300–305.
Bockenhauer D, Bichet DG. Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015;11:576–588.
Dabrowski E, Kadakia R, Zimmerman D. Diabetes insipidus in infants and 
children. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metabol. 2016;30:317–328.
Dinneen MD, Duffy PG, Barratt TM, et al. Persistent polyuria after posterior 
urethral valves. Br J Urol. 1995;75:236–240.
Elder JS, Diaz M. Vesicoureteral reflux—the role of bladder and bowel 
dysfunction. Nat Rev Urol. 2013;10(11):640–648.
Johnston LB, Borzyskowski M. Bladder dysfunction and neurological disability 
at presentation in closed spina bifida. Arch Dis Child. 1998;79:33–38.
Readett DR, Morris J, Serjeant GR. Determinants of nocturnal enuresis in 
homozygous sickle cell disease. Arch Dis Child. 1990;65:615–618.
Rodriguez-­Soriano J, Vallo A. Renal tubular acidosis. Pediatr Nephrol. 
1990;4:268–275.
Von Gontard A, Equit M. Comorbidity of ADHD and incontinence in 
children. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015;24:127–140.
Treatment
Buckley BS, Sanders CD, Spineli L, et al. Conservative interventions 
for treating functional daytime urinary incontinence in children. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;9(9):CD012367. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD012367.pub2.
Chang S, Van Laecke E, Bauer S, et al. Treatment of daytime urinary 
incontinence: a standardization document from the International 
Children’s Continence Society. Neurourol Urodyn. 2017;36:43–50.
Feldman AS, Bauer SB. Diagnosis and management of dysfunctional voiding. 
Curr Opin Pediatr. 2006;18(2):139–147.
Glazener CM, Evans JH. Desmopressin for nocturnal enuresis in children. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD002112.
Kuwertz-­Bröking E, Von Gontard A. Clinical management of nocturnal 
enuresis. Pediatr Nephrol. 2018;33:1145–1154. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00467-­017-­3778-­1.
Metcalfe PD, Luerssen TG, King SJ, et al. Treatment of occult tethered cord 
for neuropathic bladder: results of sectioning the filum terminale. J Urol. 
2006;176(4 Pt 2):1826–1829.
Robson WL. Clinical practice: evaluation and management of enuresis. N Engl 
J Med. 2009;360(14):1429.
Vermandel A, Weyler J, De Wachter S, et al. Toilet training of healthy young 
toddlers: a randomized trial between a daytime wetting alarm and timed 
potty training. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2008;29(3):191–196.
Wiener JS, Mischca TS, Hampton J, et al. Long-­term efficacy of simple 
behavioral therapy for daytime wetting in children. J Urol. 2000;164:786–
790.
Yamanishi T, Yasuda K, Murayama N, et al. Biofeedback training for detrusor 
overactivity in children. J Urol. 2000;164:1686–1690.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
