398
Hematuria is a common issue faced by primary physicians who care 
for children. While it can cause great anxiety in the patient and family 
when it presents as gross hematuria, rarely does hematuria alone her­
ald a serious illness during childhood. Indeed, despite thorough evalu­
ation, no cause can be found in a large percentage of children who have 
hematuria. Nearly 40% of children who present with gross hematuria 
and 80% of patients with persistent, isolated microscopic hematuria 
have no identifiable cause despite a thorough investigation. This raises 
the question of how much investigation should be performed on a child 
who presents with hematuria, particularly if it is isolated microscopic 
hematuria, because the evaluation can be costly and at times invasive.
How extensive an evaluation is appropriate depends much on 
the context. Those children who present with gross hematuria or 
microscopic hematuria with associated signs or symptoms deserve a 
thorough evaluation. These two groups contain those more likely to 
have an identifiable cause and include the subset that has an acute or 
potentially serious illness that can progress to significant morbidity or 
sequelae if not identified and treated. Associated symptoms and signs 
that indicate the need for prompt evaluation include other urinary or 
systemic symptoms that led to testing the urine for blood, and findings 
of hypertension, edema, poor growth, fever, or other systemic signs at 
presentation.
The more difficult question is how much testing is required of 
an apparently healthy child discovered to have isolated microscopic 
hematuria on routine screening urinalysis. Thorough testing of such 
a child with no symptoms, a normal physical examination, and no 
significant family history of kidney disease rarely identifies a cause of 
hematuria. A screening urinalysis in children, with the potential atten­
dant costly and usually uninformative additional investigation, is not 
recommended for early school-­aged children. It is reasonable to screen 
children who have a significant family history of kidney disease, partic­
ularly if there is a family history of hereditary nephritis.
GROSS HEMATURIA
Gross hematuria, defined as blood in the urine visible to the naked eye, 
is a dramatic symptom that is usually brought to medical attention, 
unless an older child with the symptom is too frightened to bring it to 
the attention of the parents. Carefully defining the appearance of the 
urine can be the first and a major clue to the origin of the blood. Hema­
turia emanating from a nonglomerular, lower urinary tract source can 
present as frankly bloody urine varying in color from dark red, cherry, 
or pink-­tinged urine. On occasion, lower tract hematuria can result in 
passing blood clots. Seeing blood in the urine only on initiation or at 
termination of voiding is an additional clue that the source is from the 
lower tract. Blood seen at the urethral meatus or only on initiation of 
voiding suggests a urethral source. In contrast, hematuria originating 
from a glomerular source more often presents with description of other 
color changes in the urine, such as brown-­, cola-­, tea-­, or, on occasion, 
even green-­colored urine.
The first step when presented with this symptom is to perform a 
urinalysis. If no hemoglobin is found on macroscopic urinalysis, 
then causes of urine discoloration other than hematuria need to be 
considered (Table 23.1). One common presentation that can be par­
ticularly frightening to a parent is finding a pink or red-­tinged wet 
diaper, thought to be blood in the urine. This most often is from a sim­
ple benign entity commonly called red diaper syndrome, caused by 
precipitation of urate crystals in the diaper. A macroscopic urinalysis 
negative for heme indicates this to be the most likely cause, and in an 
otherwise healthy infant, no further investigation is warranted.
If red blood cells (RBCs) are found in the urine of a child with a 
history suggestive of gross hematuria, then evaluation for potential 
causes is needed (Tables 23.2 and 23.3 and Fig. 23.1). The first step is a 
thorough history and physical examination.
History
Development of pain with the onset of hematuria usually indicates 
a lower urinary tract source. Irritative symptoms, such as dysuria, 
urgency, or frequency, can be seen in bleeding from the bladder from a 
variety of causes. Although not a typical feature of urinary tract infec­
tion (UTI), the most common identifiable cause of gross hematuria is 
a UTI and is usually accompanied by significant dysuria or abdom­
inal pain, and sometimes fever. Severe and episodic or colicky flank 
or abdominal pain should raise suspicion for urolithiasis, which may 
have accompanying dysuria as the stone is being passed. Urinary tract 
obstruction, such as posterior urethral valves in males or ureteropelvic 
junction obstruction in either gender, may remain occult until infection 
or trauma causes hematuria. In the former, the only preceding symp­
toms may be a male who voids only infrequently, commonly strains to 
void, or has ongoing urinary incontinence beyond the toddler years. 
Bleeding from renal tumors is an uncommon cause of gross hematu­
ria in children but should be considered particularly in the setting of 
associated abdominal pain, a palpable mass, or passing of blood clots.
Gross hematuria due to glomerular disease is rarely accompanied 
by significant pain, though some may report mild abdominal pain or 
flank discomfort. An exception is immunoglobulin A (IgA) vasculi­
tis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura [HSP]), a common pediatric systemic 
vasculitis, which can have variable, including severe, gastrointestinal 
disease. Clues to underlying glomerular disease may be a recent history 
of pharyngitis, streptococcal skin infection, or other febrile illnesses, 
indicating possible acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis. Patients 
with glomerulonephritis or renal insufficiency may report shortness 
of breath, edema, or weight gain from fluid retention. They may also 
have a headache or visual changes secondary to severe hypertension. 
Abdominal pain, diarrhea, hematochezia, rash, and arthralgias are 
symptoms indicative of a systemic vasculitis, such as IgA vasculitis 
Hematuria
Scott K. Van Why and Cynthia G. Pan
23
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
399
CHAPTER 23  Hematuria
(HSP). Recurrent, painless gross hematuria is often seen in young 
patients with IgA nephropathy in association with concurrent respira­
tory illness. Recurrent fever, weight loss, alopecia, mouth ulcers, chest 
pain, fatigue, and arthritis suggest systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
Hemoptysis or cough is seen in pulmonary-­renal syndromes caused by 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-­associated disease, and 
on occasion in lupus and HSP.
The patient’s medical history may be most informative. Stressed 
neonates from birth asphyxia, infection, or volume depletion can 
develop renal vein thrombus that presents as gross hematuria. Patients 
with African ancestry should be queried for personal or family history 
of sickle cell hemoglobinopathy since gross hematuria from renal pap­
illary necrosis can occur in those with sickle cell disease as well as in 
children with simple sickle cell trait. Medication history can uncover a 
cause of gross hematuria from drug-­induced interstitial nephritis, seen 
with several antibiotics, anticonvulsants, or nonsteroidal antiinflam­
matory drugs; the latter can also cause papillary necrosis. Cyclophos­
phamide can cause a severe hemorrhagic cystitis, which usually has 
concomitant prominent bladder symptoms.
A history of frequent or severe bleeding from other sites, such as 
heavy menses, prolonged nosebleeds, hemarthroses, or significant 
bleeding associated with surgical procedures, suggests an undiag­
nosed bleeding disorder. Exposure history to tuberculosis should be 
obtained, as well as a travel history, as parasitic infections such as schis­
tosomiasis of the bladder, uncommon in Western societies, is com­
mon in other parts of the world. Questions specific to other potential 
sources of blood in the urine include those directed at a foreign body 
from self-­instrumentation of the urethra, trauma, sexual abuse, and 
menstruation. Extreme sports activities such as running a marathon or 
long-­distance cycling can cause gross hematuria.
Review of the family history is important to uncover hereditary 
nephritis, hereditary cystic kidney disease, or potential benign famil­
ial hematuria. A family history of kidney disease leading to end-­stage 
renal failure, especially if in men in multiple generations and if not 
clearly due to diabetes mellitus, would suggest Alport syndrome, the 
most common cause of hereditary nephritis. Alport syndrome is pre­
dominantly an X-­linked recessive disorder that may cause gross hema­
turia in childhood, although more often it is microscopic. When gross 
hematuria occurs in Alport syndrome, it is often triggered by any infec­
tious process such as a common cold. The gross hematuria then subse­
quently clears, but microscopic hematuria is a persistent finding. The 
early clinical features of hereditary nephritis can be exactly the same 
as benign familial hematuria but then evolve to develop other features. 
Early in the course of the disease, there is no associated proteinuria, but 
that feature develops later, often in childhood as the nephropathy pro­
gresses. Hearing loss is a common but variable feature of Alport syn­
drome that tends to run in affected families. Female family members 
who are carriers usually have persistent and isolated hematuria that 
does not progress, but on occasion may develop progressive nephritis.
Benign familial hematuria and familial thin basement membrane 
nephropathy are also responsible for both microhematuria and gross 
hematuria. The primary difference in family history that separates 
benign familial hematuria from progressive hereditary nephritis is that 
TABLE 23.1  Urine Discoloration from 
Sources Other Than Hematuria
Pink, Red, Cola-­Colored, Burgundy
Disease Associated
Hemoglobinuria*
Myoglobinuria*
Porphyrinuria
Associated with Drug or Food Ingestion
Aminopyrine
Anthocyanin
Azo dyes
Beets
Blackberries
Chloroquine
Deferoxamine mesylate
Iron sorbitol
Methyldopa
Nitrofurantoin
Phenazopyridine
Phenolphthalein
Pyridium
Red food coloring
Rifampin
Rhodamine B
Rhubarb
Sulfasalazine
Urates
Dark Brown, Black
Disease Associated
Alkaptonuria
Methemoglobinemia
Homogentisic aciduria
Tyrosinosis
Melanin
Bile pigments
Associated with Food or Drug Ingestion
Alanine
Resorcinol
Cascara
Thymol
*Heme tests positive.
TABLE 23.2  Laboratory Testing in Suspected Glomerulonephritis*
Symptoms
Suspected Glomerulonephritis
Laboratory
History of preceding pharyngitis, URI, or impetigo
Acute postinfectious GN
C3, C4 complement (low C3, normal C4)
Arthralgia, purpura, pedal edema, abdominal pain, 
hematochezia
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Skin biopsy
Arthritis, rash, fever, oral ulcers, weight loss, alopecia, 
weakness, central nervous system symptoms, other 
systemic symptoms
Systemic lupus erythematosus
C3, C4 (both low)
ANA, anti-­dsDNA (both high)
Family history of renal failure, hearing loss, hematuria
Familial nephritis—Alport syndrome
Audiogram, slit-­lamp exam, genetic testing
Recurrent, painless gross hematuria
IgA nephropathy
None (kidney biopsy)
Hemoptysis, cough, fevers
Goodpasture syndrome
Anti-­GBM Ab
Rash, sinus disease, hemoptysis, systemic symptoms
ANCA-­associated vasculitis
ANCA
*All patients: serum creatinine, electrolytes, CBC, random urine protein:creatinine ratio, 24-­hr urine collection for protein.
Ab, antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; anti-dsDNA, anti–double-­stranded DNA antibody; anti-­GBM, 
anti–glomerular basement membrane antibody; GN, glomerulonephritis; IgA, immunoglobulin A; URI, upper respiratory infection.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
400
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
members of sequential generations of the family with benign familial 
hematuria, either male or female, have persistent isolated hematuria 
that never progresses to significant renal disease. The genetics of benign 
familial hematuria due to thin basement membrane nephropathy has 
been defined and includes gene variants that are identical to those seen 
in some patients with autosomal recessive forms of progressive heredi­
tary nephritis. Patients with thin basement membrane nephropathy, or 
benign familial hematuria, may be carriers of genes that cause autoso­
mal recessive Alport syndrome.
Patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 
(ADPKD) may present initially with gross hematuria from sponta­
neous bleeding into the macrocysts. Because the course of ADPKD 
can vary widely from one generation to the next, with some members 
having very mild disease with minimal clinical features until late adult­
hood, the family history of the disease may not be apparent on presen­
tation. Early onset of hypertension, during youth or young adulthood 
in a parent of an affected child, may be the only clue to a family mem­
ber being affected by ADPKD.
Gross hematuria is a presenting complaint in 15% of children with 
urolithiasis. Kidney stone disease can be familial, and in some cases 
related to specific genes, as in X-­linked recessive nephrolithiasis (Dent 
disease) or primary hyperoxaluria. Therefore, family history of early-­
onset nephrolithiasis, especially in siblings, should be sought in chil­
dren presenting with gross hematuria and symptoms or imaging that 
indicate kidney stone disease as the cause. A family history of a bleed­
ing disorder such as hemophilia or platelet disorders should be sought.
Physical Examination
The initial focus of the physical examination should be for evidence of 
systemic disease for which the hematuria is one manifestation, and for 
potential sequelae of renal disease. Accurate measurement and atten­
tion to blood pressure, recognizing age differences in blood pressure, is 
critical. Hypertension may be the sole feature on physical examination 
that indicates underlying acute glomerulonephritis, or chronic kidney 
disease from several causes. The finding of edema in this context is 
highly suggestive of underlying renal parenchymal disease, either 
acute or chronic, with likely accompanying renal insufficiency. Poor 
growth or failure to thrive may indicate chronic renal disease. Pallor, 
fever, rashes, or musculoskeletal findings suggest systemic vasculitis 
with renal involvement from diseases such as HSP, SLE, or, less often, 
ANCA-­associated disease. Examination of the abdomen may reveal 
abdominal or flank masses that could be tumors, cystic kidneys, or 
urinary obstruction. The most common renal tumor in childhood, 
typically seen in young children (ages 1–4 years), is Wilms tumor, 
though other types occur. Hydronephrosis or enlarged cystic kidneys 
may be palpable. Suprapubic tenderness may indicate bladder infec­
tion, stone, or other less common causes of bladder pathology as the 
source of blood. The genitalia should be inspected for blood at the ure­
thral meatus that suggests a urethral source, tears or lacerations due 
to abuse or accidents such as from straddle injuries, or to look for a 
foreign body.
Evaluation
Laboratory Tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examination of the urine is the first essen­
tial step in laboratory evaluation. If no heme is found on macroscopic 
examination, then other causes of urine discoloration need to be con­
sidered (see Table 23.1 and Fig. 23.1). If the urine is heme positive on 
macroscopic examination but no red cells are found on microscopic 
examination of the urine sediment, then myoglobinuria or hemoglobin­
uria need to be considered as the possible source, since rhabdomyolysis 
TABLE 23.3  Causes of Gross Hematuria in 
Children
GLOMERULAR
Primary
Acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis
IgA nephropathy*
Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Familial nephritis (Alport syndrome)
Benign familial hematuria—thin basement membrane disease
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
Systemic
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
ANCA-­associated vasculitis
Goodpasture disease (rare in childhood)
Bacterial endocarditis
INTERSTITIAL DISEASE
Pyelonephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis
Polycystic kidney disease (autosomal dominant)
VASCULAR
Trauma
Sickle cell disease and trait
Renal artery/vein thrombosis
Arteriovenous malformation
Nutcracker syndrome
Sports-­ and exercise-­induced hematuria
Hemangioma/hamartoma
NEOPLASTIC
Wilms tumor
Renal cell carcinoma
Uroepithelial tumors
Rhabdoid tumors
Congenital mesoblastic nephroma
Angiomyolipoma
URINARY TRACT
Cystitis
Bacterial
Viral (adenovirus)
Parasitic (schistosomiasis)
Tuberculosis
Cyclophosphamide
Urethritis
Urolithiasis
Idiopathic hypercalciuria without urolithiasis
Trauma
Hydronephrosis, severe
Foreign body
BLEEDING DISORDERS
Hemophilia A or B
Platelet disorder
Thrombocytopenia
Coagulopathy, congenital or acquired
*Common cause of asymptomatic gross hematuria.
ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; IgA, immunoglobulin A.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
401
CHAPTER 23  Hematuria
Confirm RBC on
urinalysis
Urine microscopy
Other causes of urine color change:
Myoglobinuria, hemaglobinuria (heme +)
Medications, foods, food coloring (heme –)
Red urine (pink, bright or dark)
Clots
Dysuria
Frequency
Urgency
Flank/abdominal pain
CVA tenderness
Likely lower urinary tract source:
Common:
UTl/pyelonephritis/cystitis (bacterial, viral,
parasitic, drug induced)
Trauma (e.g., urethral, meatal irritation)
Other:
Coagulopathy
Cysts
Malignancy (e.g., Wilms tumor)
Hypercalciuria
Hyperuricosuria
Sickle cell disease/trait
Stones (obstructing/nonobstructing)
Urinary tract obstruction (e.g., UPJ obstruction)
Vascular (e.g., renal vein thrombosis, “nutcracker”
syndrome)
Diagnostic testing considerations:
Laboratory:
Urine culture
(in select cases: Testing for viral/parasitic
pathogens)
Urine calcium:creatinine ratio
(in select cases: 24-hr urine collection for stone
forming factors including calcium, phosphate,
uric acid, oxalate, cystine)
In select cases:
Basic metabolic panel
Complete blood count
Coagulation testing (PT/PTT)
Imaging: Renal bladder ultrasound with Doppler
(in select cases, CT or MRI)
Cystoscopy (in select cases)
Consultations:
Pediatric nephrology/urology evaluation
Diagnostic testing considerations:
Laboratory:
Basic metabolic panel
Complete blood count
Albumin (if nephrotic)
Complement component C3 and C4
Streptococcal antibodies (e.g., ASLO,
Streptozyme)
Antinuclear antibodies (select cases:
anti-DNA Ab or ANCAs)
Urine protein:creatinine ratio
Imaging:
Renal bladder ultrasound with
Doppler
Renal biopsy (select cases)
Parental urine testing (select cases)
Genetic testing (select cases, e.g.,
suspected Alport)
Consultations:
Pediatric nephrology evaluation
Likely upper urinary tract source
Common:
Postinfectious GN
lgA nephropathy
Vasculitis (e.g., HSP/SLE nephritis)
Other GNs:
Rapidly progressive GN
MPGN
TBMN/Alport syndrome
Interstitial nephritis
Red-, brown-, cola-, or tea-colored urine
Painless
Hypertension
Proteinuria
Impaired renal function
Dysmorphic RBC
RBC casts
Systemic symptoms (e.g., fever, rash, joint
pain)
Yes
No
Fig. 23.1  Gross hematuria work-­up. Abs, antibodies; ANCAs, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; CVA, cerebrovas­
cular accident; GN, glomerulonephritis; HSP/SLE, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura/systemic lupus erythematosus; IgA, immu­
noglobulin A; MPGN, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; PT/PTT, prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time; 
RBC, red blood cell; TBMN, thin basement membrane disease; UPJ, ureteropelvic junction; UTI, urinary tract infection. 
(From Brown DD, Reidy KJ. Approach to the child with hematuria. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2019;66:15–30 [Fig. 2, p. 18].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
402
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
and acute hemolysis are both potential life-­threatening diseases that 
require immediate attention. If urine is heme positive but no red cells 
are seen and there is no evidence for rhabdomyolysis or acute hemolytic 
disease, then other reasons for the findings need to be considered. Urine 
test strips can on occasion be falsely positive for blood if the urine is 
infected with peroxidase-­producing bacteria. More likely is that red cells 
were present but lysed in urine that either was very dilute or was held 
for an extended time before microscopic examination was performed. 
Finding red cell casts in a resuspended pellet of spun urine (centrifuged 
3–5 minutes at 1,500–2,000 rpm) under high-­power field is a clear indi­
cation that the source of hematuria is glomerular. While the specificity 
of this finding in localizing the source to the glomerulus is high, the 
sensitivity of finding red cell casts in the hands of clinical labs is low. 
When red cell casts have been found in the urine sediment by experi­
enced nephrologists, clinical laboratory reports of finding RBC casts in 
the urine of the same patients is very low. Unless the urine is thoroughly 
examined by an experienced clinician, the lack of RBC casts in a lab 
report does not lower the chance the patient might have a glomerular 
source of the hematuria. Another finding on microscopic examination 
of the urine sediment that suggests a glomerular source is the presence 
of a significant number of dysmorphic red cells (see Fig. 23.1). This find­
ing requires careful inspection of erythrocyte morphology and is best 
done with a phase-­contrast microscope. Clinical labs do not report the 
number of dysmorphic red cells present, in part because differentiat­
ing dysmorphic RBCs from simple crenated RBCs (a result of osmotic 
shrinkage of RBCs) takes an experienced eye. Keeping these caveats in 
mind, if an experienced clinician finds RBC casts or a significant num­
ber of dysmorphic RBCs in a patient with hematuria, subsequent testing 
can be focused on identifying potential glomerular causes of hematuria, 
avoiding unnecessary, costly, or potentially invasive imaging procedures.
An additional feature of urinalysis that may help guide to the source 
of the red cells is the presence of proteinuria. Gross hematuria from 
lower tract bleeding can result in urine positive for protein, particularly 
if any lysis of urinary red cells occurs, but usually is <2+ proteinuria by 
dipstick reading. Anything >2+ proteinuria should raise suspicion of glo­
merular disease, especially if the hematuria is only microscopic. Bacteria 
and significant pyuria suggest pyelonephritis or cystitis, but pyuria can 
also be a feature of acute suppurative glomerulonephritis. Quantifica­
tion of the gross hematuria using a “urocrit,” with a result >1%, can 
indicate lower tract bleeding.
All patients with suspected glomerulonephritis or suspected 
chronic kidney disease should have prompt assessment of their renal 
function with a serum creatinine and a CBC. Serologic studies for 
immune-­mediated glomerulonephritis should be performed including 
complement levels (C3, C4), antinuclear antibody, and anti–double-­
stranded DNA antibody. ANCA and anti–glomerular basement mem­
brane antibody titers should also be obtained if vasculitis or pulmonary 
renal syndromes are suspected (see Table 23.2 and Fig. 23.1).
The diagnosis of most cases of postinfectious glomerulonephritis 
can be made clinically. The diagnosis of HSP is also made clinically, 
but skin biopsy of purpuric lesions demonstrating vasculitis with pre­
dominantly IgA deposits can be supportive evidence. A kidney biopsy 
is often needed to define other forms of glomerulonephritis, especially 
primary, idiopathic glomerulopathies (Fig. 23.2). In addition, even if 
the diagnosis of vasculitis (Fig. 23.3 and Table 23.4) is made based on 
clinical and serologic criteria, staging of the severity of renal disease 
with renal pathology, such as in SLE, HSP, or ANCA-­positive disease, 
is important for guiding therapy. High levels of proteinuria are often 
an indication to obtain a kidney biopsy to provide a diagnosis or stage 
the severity of the lesion in several forms of glomerulonephritis. The 
degree of proteinuria can be assessed with a 24-­hour urine collection or 
with a spot urine protein:creatinine ratio (see Chapter 22).
A urine culture is indicated in patients with any bladder symptoms, 
fever, flank pain, or abdominal pain. Gross hematuria can also be seen 
with nonbacterial infections such as tuberculosis, adenovirus, or schis­
tosomiasis. In immunocompromised patients, BK polyomavirus can 
cause prominent cystitis.
Idiopathic hypercalciuria can be a cause of gross hematuria. It is 
characterized by excessive urinary calcium excretion in the absence of 
hypercalcemia or other known causes of hypercalciuria (Table 23.5). 
The hematuria is thought to be secondary to calcium oxalate and phos­
phate crystals adhering to urothelium. The risk of developing kidney 
stones is not known. Although often asymptomatic, hypercalciuria is 
also implicated in causing urinary symptoms including abdominal and 
flank pain. Therefore, in a patient who has any such symptom concom­
itant with gross hematuria, especially if UTI and anatomic causes of 
hematuria are ruled out, urinary calcium should be measured.
Hypercalciuria is defined by a 24-­hour urine for calcium excretion 
>4 mg/kg/day. A spot urine calcium:creatinine ratio of >0.22 is con­
sidered abnormal in the older child and adolescent, but normal val­
ues may be significantly higher in younger children, especially those 
younger than 7 years of age.
Imaging and Cystoscopy
Renal imaging with noninvasive ultrasonography is recommended in 
all cases of gross hematuria, unless strong evidence for glomerulone­
phritis is found on clinical grounds as detailed earlier. Ultrasound is 
excellent in children to investigate potential urologic and congenital 
abnormalities, as well as certain genetic diseases including polycystic 
kidney disease and those causing nephrocalcinosis, such as Dent dis­
ease. The ultrasound should include imaging of the bladder, which can 
identify rare bladder tumors, as well as find evidence of obstructive 
urologic disease. Ultrasound can also provide some evidence for renal 
parenchymal disease. Enlarged, echogenic kidneys with poor corti­
comedullary differentiation may be seen in significant glomerular or 
interstitial nephritis. Nephrolithiasis or calcinosis may be found on 
ultrasound, as well as hydronephrosis secondary to urinary obstruc­
tion from lower tract kidney stones. Urolithiasis may be missed on 
ultrasound; if the history and examination are highly suggestive of a 
stone as the source of the hematuria, a CT scan is then necessary.
CT imaging is most useful to identify kidney stones (using the heli­
cal technique) and is the primary indication to perform this study. CT 
also provides detailed images of the bladder, pelvis, and retroperito­
neum when looking for masses. Angiogram of the kidney may be nec­
essary to identify an arteriovenous malformation of the kidney.
Cystograms generally have no major role in the evaluation of 
gross hematuria unless there is ultrasound evidence of bladder out­
let obstruction from unrecognized urethral valves, or an unusual mass 
such as a urothelial tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, or fibromatous polyp. 
Cystoscopy is rarely indicated in the usual evaluation of hematuria in 
children. However, if passing blood clots is part of the presentation, or 
if renal and bladder ultrasound shows a bladder mass or an obstruc­
tive lesion, cystoscopy may then be definitive in diagnosing bladder 
and ureteral sources of bleeding and provides an opportunity to obtain 
tissue for diagnosis. Cystoscopy may also be helpful to look for unilat­
eral bleeding from one ureter, which can be seen with renal papillary 
necrosis, or more uncommon lesions such as vascular malformations 
or polyps of the bladder or ureter, all of which can be difficult to define 
by radiologic methods.
MICROSCOPIC HEMATURIA
While thorough evaluation of gross hematuria is always warranted, 
how far to proceed with the evaluation of microscopic hematuria can 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
403
CHAPTER 23  Hematuria
be a difficult question. Much depends on the context in which the 
microscopic hematuria was identified. Thorough evaluation of micro­
scopic hematuria identified on a screening urinalysis at a well-­child 
visit rarely reveals an etiology. One exception is when there is a fam­
ily history of renal disease known or suggestive to be from heredi­
tary nephritis. In that context, particularly if in a pattern indicative of 
Alport disease where there can be associated hearing loss, performing 
a screening urinalysis to determine whether a child may be affected is 
reasonable. The lack of any hematuria in an older child effectively rules 
out that child having hereditary nephritis. If microscopic hematuria is 
found, additional noninvasive study can help define whether a child 
has Alport disease, including audiometry to evaluate for subclinical 
high-­frequency hearing deficit and examination by an ophthalmolo­
gist who can identify retinal or lens abnormalities that are character­
istic of Alport disease. If no hearing or ophthalmologic abnormalities 
are found, and if proteinuria accompanies microscopic hematuria in a 
child from a family affected by hereditary nephritis, further investiga­
tion may include collagen IV gene sequencing or kidney biopsy.
When microscopic hematuria is found on urinalysis performed 
because of symptoms or signs, further evaluation is then indicated. 
If the presentation was with urinary symptoms or abdominal or 
flank pain, urine culture and imaging of the urinary tract, first with 
ultrasound to include the bladder, is the first step. If those tests are 
not revealing, and particularly if abdominal or flank pain is colicky, 
abdominal CT scan with kidney stone protocol is then indicated. If 
imaging studies are normal and urine culture is negative, evaluation for 
idiopathic hypercalciuria may then be pursued.
Abnormalities on physical examination that led to a urinalysis being 
performed should drive further evaluation for underlying intrinsic 
kidney disease. Specifically, if hypertension, edema, or failure to thrive 
triggered the urinalysis, blood tests to assess kidney function and CBC 
should be performed. If acute glomerulonephritis is suspected because 
of prodromal illness, hypertension, or edema, blood complement C3 
and C4 levels should also be measured. If other symptoms or signs sug­
gest possible systemic vasculitis, testing for lupus or ANCA-­associated 
disease should then be considered. If the patient has had poor growth 
suggesting a chronic process, or supportive evidence for acute nephri­
tis is lacking, renal ultrasound may identify small kidneys indicating 
a chronic nephropathy, obstructive nephropathy, or cystic kidney dis­
ease as the etiology.
MORE COMMON CAUSES OF HEMATURIA
Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
Gross hematuria appearing 5 days to 4 weeks after a febrile illness sug­
gests a diagnosis of acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN), 
Immunoglobulin- and complement-mediated glomerulonephritis
Anti-GBM disease
Immune complex GN
C3 glomerulopathy
ANCA disease
ANCA GN
Anti-GBM
GN
Goodpasture’s
syndrome
MPA
DDD
C3 GN
GPA
EGPA
Immune
complex MPGN
Membranous
GN
Lupus
nephritis
IgA
vasculitis
IgA
nephropathy
Postinfectious
acute GN
Fibrillary
GN
Other immune
complex GN
Linear GBM
immunoglobulin
IF staining
Granular IF staining
for immunoglobulin
and C3
Granular IF staining
for C3 and little or
no immunoglobulin
Paucity of IF staining
for immunoglobulin
and complement
No
systemic
vasculitis
Vasculitis
with no
granulomas,
or asthma
Dense
deposits
in GBMs
No dense
deposits
in GBMs
No lung
hemorrhage
Lung
hemorrhage
Vasculitis with
granulomas,
no asthma
Vasculitis
with
granulomas
and asthma
Thick
capillaries and
hypercellularity
Thick
capillaries, no
hypercellularity
Systemic
lupus
erythematosus
Dominant
IgA and
vasculitis
Dominant
IgA and no
vasculitis
Acute strep
or staph
infection
~20 nm
fibrils
Other
features
Fig. 23.2  Algorithm for the diagnostic classification of glomerulonephritis that is known or suspected of being 
mediated by antibodies and complement. Note that the integration of light microscopy, immunofluorescence 
(IF) microscopy, electron microscopy, laboratory data, and clinical manifestations is required to diagnose glo­
merulonephritis (GN) precisely. ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody; DDD, dense deposit disease; 
EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; GPA, granulo­
matosis with polyangiitis; MPA, microscopic polyangiitis. (From Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, et al., eds. 
Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1072, Fig. 31.35.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
404
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
the most common form of acute nephritis in childhood. The typical 
child with PIGN is school age. The classical findings are hematuria, oli­
guria, edema, some level of renal insufficiency, and hypertension. It is 
not uncommon for PIGN to be asymptomatic, and hypertension may 
not be a feature at initial presentation. The child with suspected PIGN 
requires close follow-­up including monitoring for the development of 
hypertension, since severe symptomatic hypertension is a common 
sequela of acute PIGN.
PIGN is a self-­limited disease that in the vast majority of cases 
resolves without the development of chronic kidney disease or estab­
lished hypertension. Microscopic hematuria is present in virtually all 
cases; gross hematuria is present in about 30%. The urine is commonly 
described as smoky or tea-­ or cola-­colored. The gross hematuria usu­
ally disappears in 3–5 days; proteinuria disappears in several weeks, 
and microscopic hematuria resolves in months to 1 year. Group A 
streptococcal (GAS) infection is the most well-­defined cause, described 
in up to 80% of patients with PIGN, with the triggering infection being 
either pharyngeal or impetiginous. Other infectious agents have also 
been implicated in causing PIGN, including several other bacteria and 
viruses.
The criteria for diagnosis of PIGN relies on defining the clinical pic­
ture, supported by finding glomerular hematuria (red cell casts or many 
Small-vessel
vasculitis
Medium-vessel
vasculitis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Kawasaki disease
Large-vessel
vasculitis
Giant cell arteritis
Takayasu arteritis
Circulating antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA) associated
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA)
GPA (Wegener)
EGPA (Churg-Strauss)
Drug-induced ANCA-associated
  vasculitis
Inflammatory
  bowel disease
  vasculitis
Paraneoplastic
Lymphoproliferative
  neoplasm–induced
  vasculitis
Myeloproliferative
  neoplasm–induced
  vasculitis
Immune-complex associated
Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (HSP)
Anti-GBM (glomerular basement
  membrane) disease
Infection-induced immune
  complex vasculitis
  (e.g., hepatitis B and C)
Serum sickness vasculitis
Lupus vasculitis
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Hypocomplementemic
  urticarial vasculitis
Behçet disease
Drug-induced immune-complex
  vasculitis
Vasculitis
Fig. 23.3  Major categories of noninfectious vasculitis. Not included are vasculitides that are known to be caused 
by direct invasion of vessel walls by infectious pathogens, such as rickettsial vasculitis and ­neisserial vasculitis. 
EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatous polyangiitis; GPA, granulomatous polyangiitis; HSP, ­Henoch-­Schönlein pur­
pura; IgA, immunoglobulin A. (From Feehally J, Floege J, Tonelli M, et al., eds. Comprehensive ­Clinical Nephrol­
ogy. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:292, Fig. 25.2.)
TABLE 23.4  Organ System Involvement in Small-­Vessel Vasculitis
Organ System
FREQUENCY OF INVOLVEMENT (%)
Microscopic 
Polyangiitis
GPA (Wegener)
EGPA (Churg-­
Strauss)
IgA Vasculitis (HSP)
Cryoglobulinemic 
Vasculitis
Kidney
90
80
20
50
55
Skin/cutaneous
40
40
40
90
90
Lungs
50
90
90
<5
<5
Ear, nose, throat
35
90
70
<5
<5
Musculoskeletal
60
60
50
75
70
Neurologic
30
50
40
10
40
Gastrointestinal
50
50
40
60
30
EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; GPA, granulomatosis with polyangiitis; HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; IgA, immunoglobulin A.
From Feehally J, Floege J, Tonelli M, et al., eds. Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:294, Table 25.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
405
CHAPTER 23  Hematuria
dysmorphic RBCs) in the urine sediment by an experienced examiner, 
and a simple serologic pattern. Practitioners will commonly perform 
serologic testing for streptococcal infection, an old habit that is not typ­
ically informative. Serology positive for antistreptococcal antibodies at 
presentation is neither necessary nor sufficient to confirm, nor does the 
absence of such antibodies rule out, the diagnosis of PIGN. Evidence of 
recent streptococcal infection can be helpful and may be provided by 
positive culture for GAS in the correct time frame preceding onset of 
nephritis. Most important is testing C3 serum complement level at pre­
sentation. In nearly all cases of PIGN, C3 level is low at presentation, 
then returns to normal by 6–12 weeks after presentation, as the nephri­
tis spontaneously resolves. If the serum C3 level does not return to nor­
mal, other causes of nephritis need to be considered, including lupus 
nephritis, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), or C3 
nephropathy. The complement pattern in active lupus nephritis often 
is a low C4 along with the low C3 level. In MPGN or C3 nephropathy, 
C4 is usually normal with persistently low C3. If C3 level is normal at 
presentation of glomerulonephritis, other etiologies need to be consid­
ered, including several idiopathic forms that may only be diagnosed by 
kidney biopsy (see Tables 23.2 and 23.3).
Therapy for PIGN is symptomatic, with particular attention to 
hypertension. Early treatment of the streptococcal infection does not 
prevent development of nephritis. The acute complications from PIGN 
are principally from hypertension and may include seizures, hyperten­
sive encephalopathy, and heart failure. The prognosis of PIGN is excel­
lent. Mortality is low at ∼0.5%. While some level of renal insufficiency 
is typical, fulminant renal failure is uncommon. Complete recovery 
occurs in over 95% of patients, with an occasional patient developing 
rapidly progressive, crescentic glomerulonephritis or indolent chronic 
glomerulonephritis that progresses to end-­stage kidney disease. 
Recurrent hematuria and proteinuria can occur in patients who have 
a nonspecific upper respiratory tract illness within several months fol­
lowing the episode of PIGN, but it is unusual for the other features of 
acute nephritis (hypertension and renal insufficiency) to recur.
Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy
Recurrent episodes of painless gross hematuria are a common presen­
tation of childhood IgA nephropathy. This form of glomerulonephritis 
is common in both children and adults, with the mean age of presenta­
tion in children being 9–10 years. Episodes of gross hematuria are trig­
gered by upper respiratory illnesses, but in contrast to PIGN where the 
illness precedes onset of hematuria, in IgA nephropathy the illness is 
concurrent with onset of gross hematuria. Serum complement is nor­
mal. Serum IgA levels have been found to be elevated in only 8–16% of 
affected children so are not helpful in the diagnosis. Confirmation of 
the diagnosis is possible only by renal biopsy demonstrating immune 
deposits of primarily IgA in glomeruli, principally in the mesangium. A 
wide range of histologic glomerulopathy can be found in IgA nephrop­
athy, ranging from mild mesangial proliferation to crescentic, rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis. Most cases of IgA nephropathy have 
a benign pattern, with recurrent episodes of gross hematuria during 
illnesses, followed by complete resolution of gross hematuria within 
days. Between episodes, the urine may be free of blood or may show 
persistent microscopic hematuria but lack of proteinuria. This benign 
pattern commonly does not progress nor require treatment. However, 
the disease is quite variable between patients, with some developing 
acute nephritic symptoms, acute renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, 
or progression to end-­stage kidney disease in up to 10% of affected 
­children. Other disorders are also associated with IgA nephropathy 
(Table 23.6). No specific therapy exists for IgA nephropathy, but an 
extended course of steroid therapy can be beneficial for patients with 
more severe forms of IgA nephropathy, including those with acute 
nephritic syndrome or nephrotic-­range proteinuria.
Hereditary Nephritis
A family history of renal disease with progression to renal failure, 
restricted to male members of the family on the maternal side, suggests 
a diagnosis of Alport syndrome, a predominantly X-­linked recessive 
nephropathy (Table 23.7). Affected patients uniformly have some level 
of hematuria beginning at an early age, even in infancy. The majority 
of affected children develop hematuria in the school-­age years. Initially 
the hematuria is an isolated finding, but as the disease progresses pro­
teinuria develops. Often there is accompanying development of pro­
gressive deafness. Female members of the family who carry the gene 
usually have isolated microscopic and sometimes periodic macroscopic 
hematuria that does not progress to the other features of the syndrome. 
However, occasionally such individuals can develop progressive dis­
ease similar to male family members. The disease is caused by a patho­
genic variant in the COL4A5 gene on the X chromosome that codes for 
type IV collagen found in normal glomerular basement membranes; 
genetic testing can help confirm the diagnosis. Renal biopsy provides 
a definitive diagnosis, which shows characteristic electron microscopic 
appearance of attenuation, disruption, and lamellation of the glomeru­
lar basement membrane. However, these findings may not occur until a 
later age when the nephropathy has progressed. Early findings may sim­
ply be thin glomerular basement membranes, which can be confused 
with the more benign entity, thin basement membrane nephropathy. No 
specific therapy exists, but treatment with an angiotensin-­converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor early in the course of the disease after protein­
uria develops can slow the progression of the nephropathy.
There is also an autosomal recessive variant of hereditary nephri­
tis that has been associated with variants in genes that code for other 
TABLE 23.5  Causes of Hypercalciuria
Physiologic Stimuli to Calcium Excretion
Sodium excretion
Acidosis
Hypophosphatemia
Increased Filtered Load
Hypercalcemia (hyperparathyroidism, dietary, vitamin D excess)
Excess calcium administration
Impaired Renal Tubular Reabsorption of Calcium
Loop diuretics
Selective tubular defects
Bartter syndrome
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
Syndrome of hypercalciuria, normocalcemia, growth retardation, polyuria, 
and proteinuria (Dent disease)
Renal tubular acidosis
Fanconi syndrome
Idiopathic Hypercalciuria
Absorptive
Renal leak
Hypercalciuria of Unknown Cause
Medullary sponge kidney
Diabetes mellitus
Syndrome associated with total parenteral nutrition
From Milliner DS, Stickler GB. Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and 
renal disease. In: Edelmann CM, ed. Pediatric Kidney Disease. 2nd ed. 
Boston: Little, Brown; 1992:1661–1687.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
406
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
chains of collagen found in the glomerular basement membrane. Pro­
gression of the nephropathy is similar to that of patients with the clas­
sical form of Alport disease. Individuals who carry a disease-­causing 
variant in only one of these autosomal recessive genes may have simple, 
benign, thin basement membrane nephropathy that does not progress.
Some patients with a more common form of familial hematuria 
demonstrate persistent microscopic and recurrent gross hematuria 
without development of significant proteinuria or deterioration of 
renal function. This is called thin basement membrane nephrop­
athy (benign familial hematuria) (see Table 23.7). Evidence of this 
cause of hematuria can be obtained when urinalyses are performed on 
other family members, finding isolated microscopic hematuria in other 
members of the family. Renal biopsy demonstrates normal light and 
immunofluorescent microscopic findings. Electron micrographs show 
TABLE 23.6  Diseases Reported in Association with IgA Nephropathy: Common, Reported, 
and Rare
Disease Group
Common
Reported
Rare
Rheumatic and autoimmune disease
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Reiter syndrome
Uveitis
Behçet syndrome*
Takayasu arteritis†
Myasthenia gravis
Sicca syndrome
Gastrointestinal disease
Celiac disease
Ulcerative colitis
Crohn disease
Whipple disease
Hepatic disease
Alcoholic liver disease
Nonalcoholic cirrhosis
Schistosomal liver disease
Lung disease
Sarcoid
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Skin disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Malignancy
IgA monoclonal gammopathy
Bronchial carcinoma
Renal carcinoma
Laryngeal carcinoma
Mycosis fungoides
Sézary syndrome
Infection
HIV, hepatitis B (in endemic areas)
Brucellosis
Leprosy
Miscellaneous
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome‡
*Behçet syndrome: systemic vasculitis typified by orogenital ulceration and chronic uveitis.
†Takayasu arteritis: systemic vasculitis involving the aorta and its major branches, most often found in young women.
‡Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome: X-­linked disorder in which increased serum IgA is associated with the triad of recurrent pyogenic infection, eczema, and 
thrombocytopenia.
Rare associations have been made in one or two reported cases only. In a disease as common as immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, it is therefore 
uncertain whether these are truly related.
From Feehally J, Floege J, Tonelli M, et al., eds. Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:272, Fig. 23.1.
TABLE 23.7  Genetic and Possibly Genetic Glomerular Diseases Initially Presenting with 
Isolated Hematuria
Disease/Syndrome
Zygosity
Gene
End-­Stage Renal Disease
Estimated Lifetime Risk
X-­linked Alport (male)
Hemizygous
COL4A5
>90%
X-­linked Alport (female)
Heterozygous
COL4A5
15%
AR Alport
Homozygous
COL4A3/COL4A4
>90%
AR Alport
Heterozygous
COL4A3/COL4A4
10%
AD TBMN
Heterozygous
COL4A3/COL4A4
14%
HANAC
Heterozygous
COL4A1
n/d
Epstein/Fechtner
Heterozygous
MYH9
30%
CFHR5 nephropathy (male)
Heterozygous
CFHR5
80%
CFHR5 nephropathy (female)
Heterozygous
CFHR5
20%
IgA nephropathy (hematuria only)
–
–
Very low within 20 yr of diagnosis
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; HANAC, hereditary angiopathy, nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps; IgA, immunoglob­
ulin A; n/d, not described; TBMN, thin basement membrane nephropathy;
Modified from Gale DP. How benign is hematuria? Using genetics to predict prognosis. Pediatr Nephrol. 2013;28:1183–1193 (Table 1, p. 1184).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
407
CHAPTER 23  Hematuria
uniformly thin basement membranes. It appears to be an autosomal 
dominant disorder; it is often associated with heterozygous variants of 
collagen genes (COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5) that are associated with 
autosomal recessive hereditary nephritis. This raises the possibility 
that benign familial hematuria is the hypomorphic state of progressive 
hereditary nephritis. Indeed, some patients develop abnormal renal 
function during adolescence and adulthood.
Polycystic Kidney Disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a com­
mon disorder that mainly affects adults, but development of cysts may 
well begin in childhood, and in rare cases renal cysts may be present 
at birth. Usually, the cysts are asymptomatic in childhood unless there 
is early and substantial cystic disease. Gross hematuria may be the 
first manifestation of this disorder and occurs in 50% of patients. It 
may occur spontaneously or be brought on by minimal trauma. The 
usual manifestations of the disease in adults (hematuria, hypertension, 
abdominal mass, and uremia) are seldom seen in children. Further­
more, adults tend to have associated problems not commonly seen in 
affected children, including acute and chronic pain (60%), UTI, and 
nephrolithiasis (20%). With the widespread use of ultrasonography 
and CT for routine evaluation of acute abdominal pain, it is more com­
mon to detect early evidence of the disease as an incidental finding, 
sometimes presenting as a single renal cyst during childhood. Diag­
nosis requires finding multiple bilateral renal cysts. Because the pri­
mary gene that causes ADPKD lies near the gene that causes tuberous 
sclerosis, the two diseases occasionally coexist as a contiguous gene 
deletion syndrome. Renal involvement in patients with tuberous scle­
rosis may be isolated to renal angiomyolipomas or may also manifest 
polycystic kidney disease as well, either of which can be a source of 
gross hematuria.
In contrast to ADPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney dis­
ease (ARPKD) typically has early onset and evidence of renal disease 
is often found on prenatal ultrasound. If not discovered in the perinatal 
period, it may present later in infancy or early childhood as an abdom­
inal mass with hypertension. Typically, the kidneys are significantly 
enlarged and have a cystic appearance different from ADPKD. How­
ever, it is not always possible to distinguish early-­onset ADPKD from 
ARPKD on radiologic grounds.
Nephrolithiasis can occur at any age and may cause the symptoms 
of renal colic, manifested as intense, episodic flank pain that often radi­
ates to the groin. In young infants, nephrolithiasis and thus renal colic 
is rare, and may manifest as generalized irritability or abdominal pain. 
Gross hematuria has been reported in ∼25% of patients with nephro­
lithiasis. The physical examination may be unrevealing; the urinaly­
sis may contain crystals in addition to RBCs. A high-­resolution CT 
scan is the best study to confirm the presence of a stone. Children with 
nephrolithiasis should have an evaluation for a metabolic cause of their 
kidney stones. This begins with a 24-­hour urine collection for calcium, 
urate, citrate, oxalate, cystine, and creatinine. The determination of cre­
atinine excretion is important to ensure that an adequate collection has 
been obtained (a minimum of 10–15 mg/kg/24 hr, depending on age 
and body habitus of the child). If an abnormality is found, specific ther­
apy may prevent or delay subsequent complications, which can include 
frequently recurring stones and acute or chronic renal failure.
Hypercalciuria (defined as urinary calcium levels >4 mg/kg/day) 
is the most common metabolic abnormality found in children with 
nephrolithiasis. Furthermore, hypercalciuria without an overt stone 
can manifest as gross hematuria with abdominal or flank pain. Hyper­
calciuria can be idiopathic or secondary to another disease, such as 
renal tubular acidosis. Therapy depends on the cause of the hypercalci­
uria or the specific type of stone.
Urinary tract infection is the most common identifiable cause 
of gross hematuria, with as many as 25% of children presenting with 
gross hematuria having a documented symptomatic UTI. Urine cul­
ture is essential for a diagnosis of UTI and should be performed in 
all children with gross hematuria, especially if any urinary symptoms 
accompany.
UNCOMMON CAUSES OF HEMATURIA IN 
CHILDHOOD
Coagulation abnormalities and hemoglobinopathies are rarely found 
in patients with gross hematuria. Sickle cell disease is the most likely 
cause in this category, and gross hematuria is one of the few manifesta­
tions of the carrier state that may develop in those with sickle cell trait. 
A combination of low oxygen tension, reduced blood flow, low pH, 
and high osmolality in the renal medulla makes a hostile environment 
that induces sickling and sludging of erythrocytes there. This results in 
areas of infarction and hemorrhage and can progress to renal papillary 
necrosis. While the gross hematuria often is asymptomatic, if papillary 
necrosis ensues or hemorrhage from the renal medulla is substantial 
with passage of clots, acquired ureteral obstruction can cause signifi­
cant associated flank or abdominal pain. Therapy is hydration and rest.
Renal vascular thrombosis, particularly renal vein thrombosis, 
may present with isolated gross hematuria. Two groups of children are 
at highest risk for this problem. The first group is sick neonates. Renal 
vascular thrombosis in this group can originate from events associated 
with perinatal stress that cause hypotension and decreased perfusion 
to the kidney, umbilical vascular catheters, trauma, hypercoagulable 
states, dehydration, or disseminated intravascular coagulation. Infants 
of diabetic mothers are more prone to renal vein thrombosis, possibly 
because of polycythemia or other associated perinatal stress. The throm­
bosis in the neonate can be in the renal artery but most often is in the 
renal vein. Along with gross hematuria, accompanying clinical features 
may include a palpable enlarged kidney on the affected side, hyperten­
sion, and thrombocytopenia. The second group of children who are 
susceptible to renal vascular thrombosis are those with nephrotic syn­
drome, with the well-­described associated hypercoagulable state (see 
Chapter 22). The diagnosis of renal vein thrombosis can be suspected 
from the patient’s history and can be confirmed with a Doppler flow 
study of the renal vasculature. Several treatment approaches have been 
advocated. In many cases, careful attention to hydration and hemo­
dynamic status in the neonate, or administration of albumin in the 
patient with nephrotic syndrome, stabilizes the patient with no further 
progression of the thrombus. With large thrombi that propagate to the 
vena cava or affect both kidneys, anticoagulation is considered. Renal 
vein thrombi, even with isolated supportive care, often resolve without 
late renal sequelae. However, late sequelae of hypertension and renal 
atrophy can occur. The less common renal artery thrombi more often 
result in significant renal injury and atrophy.
Renal and bladder tumors are rare causes of gross hematuria in 
children. Wilms tumor, the most common pediatric renal malignancy, 
usually manifests as a flank or abdominal mass but on occasion can 
present with gross hematuria. Renal carcinoma is exceedingly rare in 
childhood but can occur in older children and also may present as gross 
hematuria. Each of these tumors can be readily detected radiographi­
cally through ultrasonography or CT, which is why imaging of the uri­
nary tract to include the bladder is an important part of the evaluation 
of all children with gross hematuria unless the source of the blood has 
clearly been defined to be of glomerular origin. Benign polyps in the 
urinary tract are a rare cause of hematuria and are usually small. They 
may not be found by imaging and thus may require cystoscopy and 
ureteroscopy to discover.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
408
SECTION 5  Genitourinary Disorders
Cyclophosphamide treatment can cause hemorrhagic cystitis, 
which can have accompanying severe bladder symptoms and hemor­
rhage. This results from prolonged contact of the toxic metabolites of 
cyclophosphamide with the bladder epithelium. Prevention is primar­
ily with increased hydration to ensure high urine flow, and the use of 
mesna in patients receiving high-­dose cyclophosphamide, a drug that 
prevents bladder mucosa toxicity from the metabolites.
High-­intensity or long-­duration physical exertion (marathons) can 
cause gross hematuria. Its pathophysiology is not known, but several 
mechanisms proposed include bladder or kidney trauma, hemolysis, 
dehydration, peroxidation of red cells, and renal ischemia.
Bleeding from arteriovenous malformations of the kidney, ure­
ter, or bladder can manifest as asymptomatic gross hematuria, which 
often appears bright red. The blood can be localized to the bladder, 
one kidney, or ureter with cystoscopy. Endoscopic laser treatment can 
eliminate the source of bleeding. When bleeding from a vascular mal­
formation is severe and not amenable to laser treatment, angiography 
and surgery are considered.
Nutcracker syndrome occurs when the left renal vein is com­
pressed between the superior mesenteric artery and aorta, causing a 
rise in pressure and development of collateral veins with varicosities 
in the renal pelvis, ureter, and gonadal vein. It presents with left flank 
pain, hematuria, and occasionally a varicocele in males. Diagnosis can 
be difficult, but Doppler studies of the left renal vein, magnetic reso­
nance angiography, and CT may identify this entity.
Symptoms of urethritis with gross hematuria and a negative urine 
culture in boys suggest urethrorrhagia or idiopathic urethritis. The 
most common complaint is blood-­stained underwear. Ultrasound 
including the bladder should be performed to rule out other lesions 
discussed earlier. Cystoscopy does not show a treatable lesion and may 
be contraindicated because of the possibility of producing a stricture. 
Low-­dose, long-­term antibiotic treatment may help in some cases. 
Alternately, exploring for symptoms of dysfunctional elimination syn­
drome and treating with bowel and bladder regimens may resolve the 
problem. The condition appears to be benign and self-­limited, so reas­
surance is the best approach.
Infections that are unusual in Western societies but more common 
in other parts of the world can present with gross hematuria. Schis­
tosoma haematobium causes bladder lesions, containing eggs and a 
surrounding granuloma that may hemorrhage. Urinary symptoms of 
suprapubic pain, dysuria, or urgency are common. Chronic inflamma­
tion of the ureters may result in urinary obstruction. Diagnosis is made 
by biopsy of lesions found in the liver, rectum, or bladder, or by the 
detection of characteristic eggs in feces or urine.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection can involve the kidneys, 
resulting in formation of tuberculomas that may cavitate, rupture, and 
disseminate the bacterium throughout the urinary tract. Tuberculosis 
of the genitourinary tract most often occurs in young adults and is 
characterized by tubercles at the ureteral orifices.
Adenovirus is a common respiratory infection in children, which 
can cause a hemorrhagic cystitis. This complication occurs most often 
in immunocompromised patients but on occasion can also affect nor­
mal, healthy children.
   	 R E D  F L A G S
Blood visible in the urine commonly raises great concern in a child and 
the parents, and sometimes in the physician, but rarely heralds a seri­
ous disease. Parents frequently are concerned that hematuria is a man­
ifestation of a malignancy, so this should be addressed initially with 
reassurance that it is very rare for the cause of hematuria in a child to be 
a tumor. The history of recent or current illness and the family history, 
as well as associated signs or symptoms, can usually direct the appro­
priate evaluation. The focus of testing initially should be on confirming 
the presence of hematuria, ruling out urinary infection with culture, 
assessing renal function with blood tests, and exploring urinary tract 
anatomy with ultrasound. Invasive studies, such as cystoscopy or renal 
biopsy, are rarely indicated.
Features of the evaluation that require prompt attention include 
absence of RBCs in the urine (which raises the concern for possible 
hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria), hypertension, azotemia, pain, 
weight loss, fevers, or a palpable mass. The presence of significant pro­
teinuria suggests glomerular disease, which would require further eval­
uation by a nephrologist for consideration of renal biopsy.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
408.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen CW, Alexander SI. Adenovirus associated haematuria. Arch Dis Child. 
2005;90:305–306.
Bergstein J, Leiser J, Andreoli S. The clinical significance of asymptomatic 
gross and microscopic hematuria in children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2005;159:353–355.
Bignall II ONR, Dixon BP. Management of hematuria in children. Curr Treat 
Options Pediatr. 2018;4(3):333–349.
Brown DD, Reidy KJ. Approach to the child with hematuria. Pediatr Clin N 
Am. 2019;66:15–30.
DeFoor W, Minevich E, Sheldon C. Unusual bladder masses in children. 
­Urology. 2002;60:911vii–911x.
Edvardsson VO, Goldfarb DS, Lieske JC, et al. Hereditary causes of 
­kidney stones and chronic kidney disease. Pediatr Nephrol. 2013;28:1923–
1942.
Feld LG, Meyers KEC, Kaplan MB, et al. Limited evaluation of microscopic 
hematuria in pediatrics. Pediatrics. 1998;102(4):1–5.
Fernandes ET, Manivel JC, Reinberg Y. Hematuria in a newborn infant caused 
by bladder hemangioma. Urology. 1996;47:412–415.
Fine SW, Humphrey PA, Dehner LP, et al. Urothelial neoplasms in patients 
20 years or younger; a clinicopathological analysis using the World Health 
Organization 2004 bladder consensus classification. J Urol. 2005;174:1976–
1980.
Franc-­Guimond J, Houle AM, Barrieras D. The Proteus syndrome associated 
with life threatening hematuria. J Urol. 2003;170:2418–2419.
Gale DP. How benign is hematuria? Using genetics to predict prognosis. 
­Pediatr Nephrol. 2013;28:1183–1193.
Glassock RJ. Hematuria and proteinuria. In: Greenberg A, Cheung AK, 
Coffman TM, et al., eds. Primer on Kidney Diseases. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier Saunders; 2005:36–46.
Glick RD, Hicks MJ, Nuchtern JG, et al. Renal tumors in infants less than 6 
months of age. J Pediatr Surg. 2004;39:522–525.
Herz D, Weiser A, Collette T, et al. Dysfunctional elimination syndrome as an 
etiology of idiopathic urethritis in childhood. J Urol. 2005;173:2132–2137.
Hoekelman RA. Is screening urinalysis worthwhile in asymptomatic pediatric 
patients? Pediatr Ann. 1994;23:459–460.
Houser M. Assessment of proteinuria using random urine samples. J Pediatr. 
1984;104:845–848.
Ingelfinger JR, Davis AE, Grupe WE. Frequency and etiology of gross hematu­
ria in a general pediatric setting. Pediatrics. 1977;59:557–561.
Jones GR, Newhouse I. Sport-­related hematuria: a review. Clin J Sport Med. 
1997;7:119–125.
Kaplan RE, Spring JE, Feld LG. Screening dipstick urinalysis: a time to change. 
Pediatrics. 1997;100:919–921.
Lischer GH, Sweat SD. 16-­year-­old boy with gross hematuria. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2002;77:475–478.
Matos V, van Melle G, Boulat O, et al. Urinary phosphate/creatinine, calcium/
creatinine, and magnesium/creatinine ratios in a healthy pediatric popula­
tion. J Pediatr. 1997;131:252–257.
Pahari A, Walters S, Levin M. Infectious diseases of the kidney. In: Avner E, 
Harmon W, Niaudet P, eds. Pediatric Nephrology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott, Williams & Williams; 2004:955–986.
Parekh DJ, Pope JC, Adams MC, et al. The association of an increased urinary 
calcium-­to-­creatinine ratio, and asymptomatic gross and microscopic 
hematuria in children. J Urol. 2002;167:272–274.
Rana K, Wang YY, Powell H, et al. Persistent familial hematuria in children 
and the locus for thin basement membrane nephropathy. Pediatr Nephrol. 
2005;20:1729–1737.
Rasoulpour M, Banco L, Laut JM, et al. Inability of community-­based laborato­
ries to identify pathological casts in urine samples. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 1996;150:1201–1204.
Shin J, Park JM, Lee SM, et al. Factors affecting spontaneous resolution of hema­
turia in childhood nutcracker syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol. 2005;20:609–613.
Sternberg K, Greenfield SP, Williot P, et al. Pediatric stone disease: an evolving 
experience. J Urol. 2005;174:1711–1714.
Travis LB, Brouhard BH, Kalia A. An approach to the child with hematuria. 
In: Cornfeld D, Silverman B, eds. Dialogues in Pediatrics Management. East 
Norwalk, CT: Appleton-­Century-­Crofts; 1985.
Zigman A, Yazbeck S, Emil S, et al. Renal vein thrombosis: a 10-­year review. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:1540–1542.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
