320
Jaundice, the yellow discoloration of skin and sclerae, results when the 
serum level of bilirubin, a pigmented compound, is elevated. Jaundice 
is not evident until the total serum bilirubin is at least 2–2.5 mg/dL in 
children out of the neonatal period.
Bilirubin is formed from the degradation of heme-­containing 
compounds, particularly hemoglobin (Fig. 18.1). Microsomal heme 
oxygenase, located principally in the reticuloendothelial system, catab­
olizes heme to biliverdin, which is then reduced to bilirubin by bili­
verdin reductase. This unconjugated bilirubin (UCB) is lipophilic and 
cannot be easily eliminated via the kidney because of its insolubility in 
water. It can easily cross cell membranes and the blood-­brain barrier. 
UCB is transported bound primarily to albumin. A receptor on the 
hepatocyte surface facilitates bilirubin uptake. Bilirubin is then con­
jugated with glucuronic acid by bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucu­
ronosyltransferase (UDPGT). UDPGT can be induced by a variety of 
drugs (e.g., narcotics, anticonvulsants, and oral contraceptives) and by 
bilirubin itself. Enzyme activity is decreased by restriction of calorie 
and protein intake.
Conjugated bilirubin (CB) is a polar, water-­soluble compound. It is 
excreted from the hepatocyte to the canaliculi, through the biliary tree, 
and into the duodenum. Once CB reaches the colon, bacterial hydro­
lysis converts CB to urobilinogen. A small amount of urobilinogen is 
reabsorbed and returned to the liver via enterohepatic circulation or 
excreted by the kidneys. The remainder is converted to stercobilin and 
excreted in feces. In neonates, β-­glucuronidase in the intestinal lumen 
hydrolyzes CB to UCB, which is then reabsorbed and returned to the 
liver via the enterohepatic circulation.
Hyperbilirubinemia can result from alteration of any step in this 
process. Hyperbilirubinemia can be classified as conjugated (direct) 
or unconjugated (indirect), depending on the concentration of CB in 
the serum. Conjugated and unconjugated are more accurate terms, 
because “direct” and “indirect” refer to the van den Bergh reaction, his­
torically used for measuring bilirubin. In this assay, the unconjugated 
fraction is determined by subtracting the direct fraction from the total 
and, therefore, is an indirect measurement. The direct fraction includes 
both conjugated bilirubin and Δ-­bilirubin, an albumin-­bound fraction. 
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia exists when more than 20% of the total 
bilirubin or more than 2 mg/dL is conjugated. If neither criterion is 
met, the hyperbilirubinemia is classified as unconjugated.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by any process 
that results in increased production, decreased delivery to the liver, 
decreased hepatic uptake, decreased conjugation, or increased entero­
hepatic circulation of bilirubin. The primary concern in patients with 
high levels of unconjugated bilirubin is kernicterus, resulting from the 
neurotoxicity of UCB across the blood-­brain barrier mostly in the basal 
ganglia, pons, or cerebellum. This is a concern primarily in neonates.
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia can occur due to hepatocellular 
dysfunction, biliary obstruction, and abnormal excretion of bile acids 
or bilirubin.
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGIES
The causes of jaundice in the neonate and older infant are not the same 
as the causes of jaundice in the older child or adolescent (Figs. 18.2 and 
18.3). The approach to the problem varies with age.
Bilirubin
In any patient with jaundice, the total serum bilirubin should be frac­
tionated, as the differential diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubin­
emia is distinct from that of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (see Figs. 
18.2 and 18.3). On occasion, hemolysis interferes with some assays and 
may result in a falsely elevated conjugated fraction. This can be prob­
lematic with specimens obtained by heelstick or fingerstick. If the clin­
ical picture is consistent with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, the 
assay should be repeated with a venous sample.
Aminotransferases
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) are frequently used as markers of hepatocellular injury. AST is 
expressed in mitochondria of the liver and cytosol of red blood cells 
and muscles; thus, it is not specific for liver injury. Since ALT is less 
abundant outside of the liver, an increased ALT level is more suggestive 
of liver disease. Levels of both are markedly elevated (>5-­ to 10-­fold 
normal) with hepatocellular injury caused by hepatitis, hepatotoxicity, 
ischemia, and genetic or metabolic liver disorders. Elevation of AST in 
excess of ALT suggests an extrahepatic source of injury. With acute bil­
iary obstruction, there are initial sharp increases in ALT and AST levels 
and a rapid decline in 12–72 hours as obstruction is relieved. In chronic 
cholestasis, aminotransferases are usually only mildly elevated. With 
hepatocellular injury, ALT and AST levels tend to remain more signifi­
cantly elevated longer. In acute liver failure a rapid decline in ALT and 
AST levels with worsening coagulopathy is a poor prognostic factor.
It is important to remember that aminotransferases reflect cell 
injury, not liver function. There is no correlation between the severity of 
the liver dysfunction and the degree of elevation of ALT and AST levels. 
Temporal trends in serum aminotransferase levels are useful in moni­
toring disease activity in chronic viral and autoimmune hepatitis.
Alkaline Phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase is an enzyme found in bile ducts, bone, intestine, 
placenta, and tumors. Elevations in the serum alkaline phosphatase 
level occur with hepatobiliary disease but also normal growth, healing 
fractures, vitamin D deficiency, bone disease, pregnancy, and malig­
nancy. Fractionation of the alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes can help 
to determine its site of origin. A mild increase can be seen transiently 
in normal individuals. In the evaluation of conjugated hyperbiliru­
binemia, an alkaline phosphatase level of >3 times normal indicates 
cholestasis; a milder elevation is more consistent with hepatocellular 
disease.
Jaundice
Grzegorz W. Telega
18
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
321
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
Heme-containing Compounds
(hemoglobin, myoglobin, cytochromes)
Heme
Heme oxygenase
Iron
CO
Biliverdin
Biliverdin reductase
Unconjugated bilirubin (UCB)
Conjugated 
bilirubin (CB)
Albumin
Albumin
UCB-albumin
GST
GST
UCB-GST
Receptor
UCB
Bilirubin monoglucuronide
2 bilirubin monoglucuronides
Bilirubin diglucuronide
UDP glucuronic
acid (UDPGA)
UDPGT
UDP
Endoplasmic 
reticulum
CB
CB
CB
Urobilinogen
Stercobilin
Renal excretion
UCB
Intestinal
β-glucuronidase
(neonates)
Bacterial
β-glucuronidase
Canaliculus
Enterohepatic
recirculation
Reticuloendothelial
system
Bloodstream
Liver
Duodenum
Feces
Distal small intestine 
and colon
}
Fig. 18.1  Bilirubin production and metabolism. CB, conjugated bilirubin; CO, carbon monoxide; GST, gluta­
thione S-­transferase B; UCB, unconjugated bilirubin; UDP, uridine diphosphate; UDPGA, uridine diphosphate 
glucuronic acid; UDPGT, uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase. (Modified from Gourley GR. Jaundice. 
In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disease: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Management. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1999:89.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
322
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
Jaundice in Neonate or Young Infant
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Unremarkable history
Normal physical examination
Onset after 24 hr of age
Bilirubin <13 mg/dL (<15 mg/dL if breast-fed)
Not persisting beyond 14 days of age (1 mo
  if breast-fed)
Fractionation of bilirubin
Physiologic jaundice
or
Breast-feeding/breast milk jaundice
Conjugated >20% of total
>2 mg/dL
Conjugated <20% of total
<2 mg/dL
Diagnosis = UNCONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Diagnosis = CONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Hematocrit
High (>65%)
Low or normal
PT-if elevated, administer vitamin K
Glucose-if low, give glucose enterally or parenterally
AST, ALT, GGT, alkaline phosphatase, CBC
Evaluate for treatable causes:
1. Infection - blood culture
 
               urine culture
 
               VDRL
2. Metabolic disorders -
 
urine-reducing substances
 
serum amino acids
 
urine amino acids
 
urine organic acids
 
serum bile acids
 
urine FAB-MS
 
T4, TSH
Polycythemia
Normal reticulocyte count
Elevated reticulocyte count
Abnormal findings
Reticulocyte count
Blood type
Coombs test
Platelets
PT/PTT
Evaluate smear
Look for evidence of:
1. Infection—blood culture
                   urine culture
2. Obstruction of GI tract
3. Enclosed hemorrhage
4. Congestive heart failure
5. Hypoxia or acidosis
6. Hypopituitarism or
    hypothyroidism—T4, TSH
7. Drugs or toxins
Consider:
1. Isoimmunization—Coombs positive
2. Erythrocyte membrane defect—
    characteristic smear
3. Erythrocyte enzyme defect
4. DIC—decreased platelets
           prolonged PT/PTT
Evaluate for other identifiable causes:
1. 1-Antitrypsin deficiency—phenotype
2. Cystic fibrosis—sweat chloride
3. Congenital viral infection—
    selected viral PCR testing based
    on index of suspicion
4. Neonatal iron storage disease*
5. Familial hemophagocytic syndromes
6. Biliary atresia
7. Alagille syndrome 
Specific confirmatory
    studies
Specific treatment
None found
Abnormal findings
Familial disorders:
    Gilbert syndrome
    Crigler-Najjar syndromes
    Lucey-Driscoll syndrome
Supportive therapy
Evaluate for anatomic abnormalities
and intrahepatic cholestasis:
1. Stool color
2. Ultrasonography
3. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy
4. Liver biopsy
Fig. 18.2  Diagnostic approach to the neonate or infant with hyperbilirubinemia. *Also called congenital alloim­
mune hepatitis or neonatal hemochromatosis. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; 
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; FAB-­MS, fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry; GGT, 
γ-­glutamyltransferase; GI, gastrointestinal; PT, prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; T4, thyroxine; 
TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
History—associated symptoms
 
 risk factors
 
 exposures
 
 past medical history
 
 family history
Jaundice in Child or Adolescent
Physical examination
Findings suggesting specific diagnosis
No
Fractionation of bilirubin
Yes
Confirmatory diagnostic studies
Conjugated >20% of total 
           >2 mg/dL
Conjugated <20% of total 
           <2 mg/dL
Diagnosis = UNCONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Diagnosis = CONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
CBC 
PT
Reticulocyte count 
Albumin
Coombs test 
Glucose
PT/PTT 
ALT, AST
Evaluate smear 
Alkaline phosphatase, GGT
Normal reticulocyte count
Elevated reticulocyte count
Markedly    ALT, AST
Mildly    alkaline phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase
>3 times normal
Mildly   ALT, AST
Obstructive process
Ultrasonography
MRCP, ERCP, or PTC
Definitive diagnosis
Look for evidence of:           
Consider:
1. Infection                    
1. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia                                         
2. Congestive heart failure     
2. Drug-induced hemolytic anemia                      
3. Drugs                      
3. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria                                
                     
4. Erythrocyte membrane defect                             
                   
5. Erythrocyte enzyme defect                               
None found 
6. DIC                                                                                                      
 
7. Transfusion reaction                                         
Familial disorders:               
8. Hemolytic uremic syndrome             
   Gilbert syndrome            
9. Hemoglobinopathy           
   Crigler-Najjar syndrome                                                                        
                                                  
1. Infection (viral serology)                       
 
HAV IgM               
 
HbsAg
 
anti-HBc
 
EBV
2. Wilson disease
 
serum ceruloplasmin
 
urine copper
 
liver biopsy
3. Drugs or toxins
4. Autoimmune hepatitis
 
autoantibodies (ANA, ASMA, anti-LKM)
 
serum globulin
 
liver biopsy
Specific treatment
No
Yes
Look for evidence of:
Fig. 18.3  Diagnostic approach to the child or adolescent with hyperbilirubinemia. ALT, alanine aminotrans­
ferase; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ASMA, anti–smooth muscle antibody; AST, aspartate transaminase; DIC, 
disseminated intravascular coagulation; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan­
creatography; GGT, γ-­glutamyltransferase; HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBc, hepatitis B core; HBsAg, hepatitis B 
surface antigen; IgM, immunoglobulin M; LKM, liver-­kidney microsomal; MRCP, magnetic resonance chol­
angiopancreatography; PT, prothrombin time; PTC, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography; PTT, partial 
thromboplastin time.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
324
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
γ-­Glutamyltransferase
The γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) level is more specific for biliary tract 
disease than are ALT and AST levels. GGT elevations are inducible by 
alcohol and certain drugs, including phenytoin and phenobarbital. 
GGT is found in a variety of tissues and can be elevated in chronic 
pulmonary disease, renal failure, and diabetes mellitus. The GGT con­
centration is most helpful in confirming that an elevated alkaline phos­
phatase level is a result of liver disease rather than bone disease and in 
differentiating familial cholestatic syndromes.
Bile Acids
Serum bile acids are a very sensitive measure of cholestatic disease. Bile 
acid levels may be elevated before an increase in bilirubin. Levels are 
generally very high in primary cholestasis and biliary obstruction but 
only mildly increased (more than twice normal) in hepatocellular dis­
ease. Bile acids should be measured while fasting.
Albumin
Albumin is produced in the liver, and levels can reflect hepatic syn­
thetic function. Serum albumin levels can be useful in monitoring 
progression of chronic liver disease and in discriminating an acute ill­
ness from a previously unrecognized chronic disorder. Hypoalbumin­
emia can also be secondary to nephrotic syndrome or a protein-­losing 
enteropathy. Due to a long half-­life (20 days), albumin is of limited use 
in assessing synthetic dysfunction in acute liver failure.
Prothrombin Time
Prothrombin time (PT) is the best marker of hepatic synthetic func­
tion, as most clotting factors are produced in the liver. It is important 
not only to measure the PT but also to document the response to par­
enteral administration of vitamin K because vitamin K deficiency may 
be an alternative explanation of the elevation of the PT. With severe 
hepatocellular injury, there is little improvement in the PT. Dissemi­
nated intravascular coagulation and thrombosis of a major blood vessel 
should not be overlooked as the cause of a prolonged PT.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasound studies are useful, noninvasive, relatively inexpensive diag­
nostic tools for the evaluation of liver disease. Ultrasonography pro­
vides information on the size and consistency of the liver and spleen 
and anatomic abnormalities of the biliary tree, gallstones, and hepatic 
masses such as cysts, tumors, or abscesses. Dilated intrahepatic ducts 
may indicate extrahepatic obstruction; however, the absence of dilata­
tion on ultrasonography cannot exclude obstruction, and further stud­
ies are required for definitive diagnosis. The utility of ultrasonography 
is limited in obese patients and in patients with excessive bowel gas. 
Doppler ultrasonography also demonstrates dynamic flow in hepatic 
blood vessels and the portal vein; it can identify vascular anomalies 
of the liver and suggest presence of portal hypertension. Ultrasound 
elastography can provide an indirect measure of liver fibrosis.
Scintigraphy
Hepatobiliary scintigraphy can aid in the diagnosis of biliary atresia. 
In a healthy individual, hepatic uptake and excretion of the radionu­
clide via the biliary system are prompt. When there is an injury to the 
hepatocyte, the uptake of radionuclide by the liver is diminished; how­
ever, the tracer should eventually be visualized in the intestinal tract. 
With obstructive processes, such as biliary atresia, uptake should be 
relatively normal unless the problem has been present long enough to 
have caused hepatocellular injury; however, there is no excretion into 
the intestinal tract. Administration of phenobarbital (5 mg/kg/day) for 
5 days before the study may increase bile flow and thus can increase the 
diagnostic accuracy. Unfortunately, a significant percentage of patients 
with intrahepatic cholestasis and neonatal hepatitis do not demon­
strate biliary excretion, and further evaluation is needed; thus, final 
diagnosis is delayed. In patients with high level of suspicion for biliary 
atresia (acholic stools, high GGT), liver biopsy and percutaneous chol­
angiogram provide a faster and more direct way to reach the diagnosis.
Computed Tomography
CT is useful for identifying mass lesions within the liver and when 
there are technical problems with ultrasonography. CT with contrast 
can be used to define the nature of liver tumors. CT angiography can 
define the anatomy of portal and hepatic circulation. CT has limited 
value in the evaluation of biliary anatomy.
Magnetic Resonance
Magnetic resonance (MR) studies provide valuable information regard­
ing the anatomy of the liver. Since many imaging protocols can be used 
depending on the purpose of the study, contacting a radiologist prior 
to ordering the study is recommended. Cost and frequent need for 
sedation make MR evaluation the tool for secondary evaluation after 
screening imaging with ultrasound leaves diagnostic questions. MRI 
can demonstrate storage of heavy metals, such as iron in neonatal iron 
storage disease. MR with contrast can define the nature of liver tumors. 
MR angiography is useful in studying the vascular system, including 
the vascular supply of tumors. MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
visualizes abnormalities of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary 
tree and is also quite useful in evaluating the pancreatic duct sys­
tem. At this point resolution of MRCP is inadequate to diagnose bil­
iary atresia. Unlike endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC), MRCP 
is noninvasive.
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
ERCP is performed for the evaluation of biliary anatomy in situations 
when endoscopic intervention is likely. Unlike MRCP, ERCP is both 
diagnostic and potentially therapeutic for common duct stones and 
for strictures. Complications of the procedure include cholangitis and 
pancreatitis. ERCP is recommended for evaluation of the biliary tree 
when therapeutic intervention is likely.
Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography
PTC can be used as an alternative to ERCP as a diagnostic and thera­
peutic tool in evaluating the biliary tree. Under ultrasound guidance, 
a needle is passed through the liver and into the biliary tree, and con­
trast material is injected. If obstruction is identified, biliary drainage, if 
required, can be performed at the same time. PTC is contraindicated if 
there are marked ascites or irreversible coagulopathy. The complications 
of PTC include bleeding, pneumothorax, infection, and bile leakage.
Liver Biopsy
Percutaneous liver biopsy is often necessary to determine the cause of 
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. In some instances, a specific pattern of 
injury, such as paucity of bile ducts or bile duct proliferation, may be 
evident. In other cases, specific markers of disease may be identified 
(the distinctive inclusions in α1-­antitrypsin deficiency) or measured 
(metabolic enzyme activity). Ultrasound-­guided biopsy is useful when 
a specific lesion needs to be evaluated or if there is abnormal anatomy 
of the liver. An open biopsy may be necessary when a large sample of 
tissue is needed or when there are contraindications to the percutane­
ous approach, such as ascites or severe coagulopathy. Transjugular liver 
biopsy can reduce the risk of bleeding in patients with coagulopathy. 
The complications of liver biopsy are the same as those for PTC.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
325
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
JAUNDICE IN THE NEONATE AND INFANT
History
Evaluation of the infant with jaundice starts with a thorough history, 
including age at onset and duration of jaundice (see Fig. 18.2). In the 
neonate, the causes of jaundice range from a benign, self-­limited pro­
cess associated with immaturity of bilirubin excretion (physiologic 
jaundice) to life-­threatening biliary atresia or metabolic disorders 
(galactosemia, fructosemia, tyrosinemia). In older infants, there are 
fewer benign explanations for jaundice. For example, physiologic jaun­
dice generally resolves by 1–2 weeks of age, and jaundice associated 
with breast milk usually resolves by the time the infant is 1 month old.
Acholic stools usually indicate obstruction of the biliary tree; how­
ever, nonpigmented stools can be seen with severe hepatocellular injury. 
The clinician should document the presence or absence of acholic stool 
in every infant evaluated for jaundice. The center of the stool should be 
examined because the outside may be lightly pigmented from sloughed 
jaundiced cells of the intestinal tract. Delayed passage of meconium 
may be secondary to cystic fibrosis or Hirschsprung disease. Delayed 
passage of stools, by itself, can lead to increased enterohepatic circula­
tion of bilirubin.
Clues to the diagnosis of hyperbilirubinemia are often found in the 
prenatal and perinatal history (Table 18.1). Maternal infections that can 
be transmitted to the fetus or neonate, such as syphilis, toxoplasmosis, 
cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepatitis B, enterovirus, herpes simplex, and 
HIV, are rare causes of cholestatic liver disease in the neonate. Prena­
tal growth pattern should be carefully evaluated. Perinatal infections 
such as CMV, rubella, and toxoplasmosis can present with intrauterine 
growth restriction. Premature infants are prone to higher bilirubin lev­
els and more prolonged hyperbilirubinemia; they are also more likely 
to have risk factors for hyperbilirubinemia such as delayed enteral 
feedings, require parenteral nutrition, and have perinatal insults with 
hypoxia and acidosis.
Delay of feeding can contribute to both conjugated and unconju­
gated hyperbilirubinemia; this effect is usually transient and should 
not be overinterpreted. Breast-­feeding is associated with higher levels 
of unconjugated bilirubin and a longer duration of jaundice than in 
formula-­feeding. Even when diagnosis of breast milk jaundice is likely, 
conjugated bilirubin should be checked because it provides an easy 
screening tool for liver disorders, including biliary atresia. Galactose­
mia does not manifest in the infant who receives a lactose-­free for­
mula. Hereditary fructose intolerance is not clinically apparent until 
the infant ingests fluids or solids containing fructose or sucrose. Infants 
with metabolic disorders often present with a history of vomiting, leth­
argy, and poor feeding. Vomiting may also be a symptom of intestinal 
obstruction including malrotation/volvulus.
The family history can often provide direction to the evaluation, 
particularly with some of the less common hereditary disorders. This 
can include most of the metabolic disorders, hemolytic diseases, and 
disorders associated with intrahepatic cholestasis (Tables 18.2 and 
18.3). Diseases that lead to severe liver dysfunction resulting in neona­
tal hepatic failure have some characteristic features (Table 18.4).
Physical Examination
With increasing levels of bilirubin, neonatal icterus becomes more 
extensive, spreading in a cephalopedal direction. Pallor may indicate 
hemolytic disease. Petechiae alert the clinician to thrombocytopenia, 
possible sepsis, congenital infections, or severe hemolytic disease.
Dysmorphic face can be present in Zellweger syndrome or Alagille 
syndrome (see Table 18.1). The characteristic facies of Alagille syn­
drome may not be recognizable until later in childhood. Microcephaly 
that accompanies jaundice is associated with congenital viral infections.
An ophthalmologic examination can demonstrate a variety 
of abnormalities. Cataracts are seen in galactosemia and rubella. 
Chorioretinitis accompanies congenital infections (toxoplasmosis, 
syphilis, rubella, CMV, herpes simplex virus). Nystagmus with hypo­
plasia of the optic nerve suggests hypopituitarism associated with 
septo-­optic dysplasia. Posterior embryotoxon is found in Alagille 
syndrome.
A heart murmur may be caused by an underlying congenital 
heart disease, which may be associated with Alagille syndrome, 
one of the trisomies, and syndromic forms of biliary atresia 
TABLE 18.1  Diagnostic Clues in the 
Evaluation of Infants with Jaundice
Symptom
Possible Diagnosis
Prenatal/Perinatal Findings
Polyhydramnios
Intestinal atresia
In utero growth restriction
Cytomegalovirus; rubella; toxoplas­
mosis
Vomiting/poor feeding
Metabolic disorders
Delayed passage of meconium
Cystic fibrosis; Hirschsprung disease
Constipation, hypotonia, hypothermia
Hypothyroidism
Maternal preeclampsia
HELLP: fatty acid oxidation disorders
Microphallus
Hypopituitarism associated with SOD
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
PFIC type 2 and 3
Repeated affected neonates
Alloimmune hepatitis
Characteristic Facies
Narrow cranium, prominent forehead, 
hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, 
large fontanel
Zellweger syndrome
Triangular face with broad forehead, 
hypertelorism, deep-­set eyes, long 
nose, pointed mandible
Alagille syndrome
Microcephaly
Congenital viral infections
Ophthalmologic Findings
Cataracts
Galactosemia; rubella
Chorioretinitis
Congenital infections
Nystagmus with hypoplasia of optic 
nerve
Hypopituitarism with SOD
Posterior embryotoxon
Alagille syndrome
Perinatal Infections
Syphilis
Syphilis
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis
Cytomegalovirus
Cytomegalovirus
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B
Herpes simplex
Herpes simplex
Enterovirus
Enterovirus
HIV
HIV infection
Renal Disease
RTA
Tyrosinemia
RTA
Galactosemia
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
ARPKD
Alagille syndrome
Alagille syndrome
Arthrogryposis
RTA–cholestasis syndrome
Fibrocystic disease
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; HELLP, hemo­
lysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets; PFIC, progressive familial 
intrahepatic cholestasis; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; SOD, septo-­optic 
dysplasia.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
326
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
(polysplenia syndrome). Heart disease that results in hepatic ische­
mia or congestion can be a cause of conjugated or unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia.
Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and ascites may be caused by both 
hepatic and nonhepatic etiologies, but they always require evaluation 
as they are not associated with physiologic or breast milk jaundice.
Microphallus can be associated with septo-­optic dysplasia and 
hypopituitarism.
Differential Diagnosis
When a neonate has jaundice, a thorough history, including the obstet­
ric history, and physical examination should provide most of the 
information necessary to determine whether the condition represents 
physiologic jaundice (see Fig. 18.2). A total and fractionated bilirubin 
measurement should be performed if there is any question about the 
diagnosis of physiologic jaundice.
Physiologic and Breast Milk Jaundice
In neonates, increased bilirubin production is caused by the nor­
mally increased neonatal red blood cell mass and the decreased life 
span of the red blood cells (80 vs 120 days). Albumin binding is 
decreased because of lower albumin concentrations and diminished 
binding capacity, which results in decreased transport of UCB to the 
liver with increased deposition in tissues. Uptake of bilirubin by the 
hepatocytes during the first weeks of life is defective. Low levels of 
glutathione S-­transferase B decrease intracellular binding, which 
may impede the transport of UCB to the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Conjugation is impaired by decreased activity of UDPGT. Secretion 
into the canaliculi is impaired. There is increased enterohepatic cir­
culation of unconjugated bilirubin as a result of increased activity of 
β-­glucuronidase in the intestinal lumen and as a result of intestinal 
bacterial flora with lower capacity for urobilinogen formation (see 
Fig. 18.1).
These features contribute in varying degrees to physiologic jaun­
dice, characterized by a peak bilirubin level of <13 mg/dL on postnatal 
days 3–5, a decrease to normal by 2 weeks of age, and a conjugated 
fraction of <20%. In premature, breast-­fed infants, infants of diabetic 
mothers, and Asian and Native American infants, the peak is higher 
and lasts longer. Conjugated bilirubin should be checked if there is any 
question of the nature of jaundice.
Breast-­feeding has been associated with an increased incidence of 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia outside the expected range (>13 mg/
dL). Jaundice of this level may occur in 10–25% of breast-­fed infants, 
in contrast to 4–7% of formula-­fed infants. It can occur within the first 
5 days of life and is referred to as “early” or “breast-­feeding” jaundice. 
Breast-­feeding jaundice is seen in infants who are not feeding ade­
quately and may be dehydrated or malnourished. In a second group of 
breast-­fed infants, the jaundice develops slowly, occurring after the first 
TABLE 18.2  Differential Diagnosis of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia in Neonates and Infants
Physiologic Jaundice
Breast-­Feeding/Breast Milk Jaundice
Polycythemia
Diabetic mother
Fetal transfusion (maternal, twin)
Intrauterine hypoxemia
Delayed cord clamping
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Neonatal thyrotoxicosis
Hemolysis
Isoimmune
Rh incompatibility
ABO incompatibility
Other (M, S, Kidd, Kell, Duffy)
Erythrocyte membrane defects
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Infantile pyknocytosis
Erythrocyte enzyme defects
Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
Pyruvate kinase
Hexokinase
Other
Hemoglobinopathy
Thalassemia
Sepsis
Hemangioma
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
Familial TTP (ADAM TS13)
Infection
Intestinal Obstruction
Pyloric stenosis
Intestinal atresia
Hirschsprung disease
Cystic fibrosis
Enclosed Hematoma (Cephalohematoma, Ecchymoses)
Congestive Heart Failure
Hypoxia
Acidosis
Hypothyroidism or Hypopituitarism
Drugs/Toxins
Maternal oxytocin
Vitamin K
Antibiotics
Phenol disinfectants
Herbs
Familial Disorders of Bilirubin Metabolism
Gilbert syndrome
Crigler-­Najjar syndrome types I and II
Lucey-­Driscoll syndrome
TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Modified from Balistreri WF. Liver disease in infancy and childhood. In: Schiff ER, Sorrell MF, Maddrey WC, eds. Schiff’s Diseases of the Liver. 8th 
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1999:1364.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 18.3  Mechanistic Classification of the Etiologies of Neonatal Cholestasis
Impaired bile flow
Extrahepatic ducts
Biliary atresia
Choledochal cyst
Spontaneous bile duct perforation
Choledocholithiasis, biliary sludge
Duct compression (may also be intrahepatic), e.g., hepatoblastoma, neu­
roblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neonatal leukemia, systemic juvenile 
xanthogranuloma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Bile duct stenosis
Intrahepatic duct obstruction/formation
Alagille syndrome
“Nonsyndromic paucity of interlobular bile ducts,” e.g., Williams syndrome
Cystic fibrosis
Ductal plate malformations: congenital hepatic fibrosis; ARPKD; Caroli 
disease; Ivemark, Jeune, Joubert, Bardet-­Biedl syndromes
Neonatal sclerosing cholangitis
Canalicular membrane transporters
PFIC type 1, BRIC, Nielsen syndrome (familial Greenland cholestasis)
PFIC type 2
PFIC type 3
Neonatal Dubin-­Johnson syndrome
Villin functional defect
Overload of excretory mechanism capacity: ABO blood group incompatibility 
with hemolysis
Hepatocyte tight junctions
Neonatal ichthyosis–sclerosing cholangitis syndrome–claudin-­1 protein
Familial hypercholanemia due to TJP2 (zonulin-­2) deficiency
Hepatocyte dysfunction
Bile acid synthesis
First-degree: BASD
3-­Oxo-­Δ4-­steroid 5β-­reductase deficiency
3β-­Hydroxy-­Δ5-­C27-­steroid dehydrogenase/isomerase deficiency
Oxysterol 7α-­hydroxylase deficiency
Familial hypercholanemia due to BAAT deficiency
Second-degree: organelle dysfunction
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (cholesterol formation)
Peroxisomal disorders: Zellweger, infantile Refsum, neonatal ALD
Infectious
Bacterial: sepsis (endotoxemia, e.g., UTI, gastroenteritis)
Listeria
Syphilis
TB
Viral: herpes viruses: CMV, HSV, HHV-­6
Parvovirus B19
Hepatitis A, B, C
Enterovirus: coxsackieviruses, echoviruses, “numbered” enteroviruses
Adenovirus
Rubella
HIV
Paramyxovirus
Protozoal
Toxoplasmosis
Toxic
Parenteral nutrition–associated liver disease
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Drugs: maternal amphetamines, anticonvulsants; infant antifungals
Endocrine
Panhypopituitarism
Hypothyroidism, cortisol deficiency
McCune-­Albright syndrome
Donohue syndrome (leprechaunism)
Metabolic
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Carbohydrate disorders
Galactosemia
Fructosemia (hereditary fructose intolerance)
Glycogen storage disease type IV (Andersen disease)
Amino acid disorders
Tyrosinemia type I
Lipid disorders
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
Gaucher disease
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Farber disease
β-­Oxidation defects: short-­ and long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficien­
cies
Lysosomal storage disorders
Niemann-­Pick disease, type C
Gaucher disease
Farber disease
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome)
Mucolipidosis II (I-­cell disease)
Urea cycle defects
Citrin deficiency (formerly type II citrullinemia)
Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders
Growth retardation, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acido­
sis, and early death (GRACILE)
Immune mediated:
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Neonatal lupus erythematosus
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia with giant cell hepatitis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Other:
Hypoxic/ischemic/vascular
Shock/hypoperfusion/hypoxia
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Cardiac insufficiency (congenital heart disease, arrhythmia)
Multiple hemangiomata
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
ARC syndrome (arthrogryposis–renal tubular dysfunction–cholestasis; defec­
tive vacuolar protein sorting)
Chromosomal: trisomy 18, 21
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Hardikar syndrome
Lymphedema cholestasis syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Kabuki syndrome
North American Indian childhood cirrhosis (defective cirhin protein–unknown 
function)
Pseudo-­TORCH syndrome
“Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis”
ALD, adrenoleukodystrophy; ARC, arthrogryposis-­renal-­cholestasis; ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; BAAT, bile acid coenzyme 
A: amino acid N-­acyltransferase; BASD, bile acid synthetic defects; BRIC, benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HHV-­
6, human herpesvirus type 6; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholesta­
sis; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other (syphilis, varicella-­zoster, parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes infections; UTI, urinary tract infection.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:745, Table 68.1.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
328
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 18.4  Typical Laboratory Findings in Neonatal Liver Failure
GALD
HLH
Mitochondrial
Viral
Ischemic
Transaminase levels 
(IU/L)
Normal/mild increase 
<100
Moderate/significant 
increase (>1,000)
Moderate increase 
(100–500)
Significant increase 
(>1,000)
Significant increase 
(>1,000–6,000)
INR
Significant increase
Moderate/significant 
increase
Moderate/significant 
increase
Moderate/significant 
increase
Moderate/significant 
increase
Ferritin level (ng/mL)
800–7,000
Significant increase 
(>20,000)
Variable
Significant increase 
(>20,000)
Variable depending on 
underlying cause of 
ischemia
Triglyceride levels
Normal
Increased
Normal
Normal
Normal
Hypoglycemia
Yes
Often
Yes
Often
Variable
Lactic acidosis
Normal
Normal
Increased
Normal unless shock
Often
α-­Fetoprotein level (for 
age)
Increased
Normal
Normal/increased
Normal
Normal
Cholestasis
Progressive after birth
Moderate/significant
Moderate
None/mild at presen­
tation
Mild/moderate
GALD, gestational alloimmune liver disease; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
Data from Sundaram SS, Alonso EM, Narkewicz MR, et al. Characterization and outcomes of young infants with acute liver failure. J Pediatr. 
2011;159:813–818; Taylor SA, Whitington PF. Neonatal acute liver failure. Liver Transpl. 2016;22:677–685; Bitar R, Thwaites R, Davison S, et al. 
Liver failure in early infancy: aetiology, presentation, and outcome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64:70–75; Fellman V, Kotarsky H. Mitochon­
drial hepatopathies in the newborn period. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16:222–228.
week of life, and peaks between the second and third weeks of life at 
10–20 mg/dL. This is referred to as “late” or “breast milk” jaundice. The 
precise cause of increased bilirubin levels in this latter setting has not 
been established; alternative theories include inhibition of glucurono­
syltransferase activity and increased enterohepatic circulation of UCB. 
Kernicterus appears to be very rare but has been reported in associ­
ation with breast-­feeding. No treatment is necessary for physiologic 
jaundice. Practices that support breast-­feeding, such as rooming-­in on 
the maternity ward and frequent feedings, decrease the risk for breast-­
feeding jaundice. If the bilirubin exceeds 20 mg/dL in the breast-­fed 
infant, discontinuing breast-­feeding for 24 hours and supplementing 
with formula feeds results in a decreased bilirubin level. Phototherapy 
or rarely exchange transfusion may also be needed. Diagnosis of breast 
milk jaundice should include a blood test for conjugated bilirubin and 
can be diagnosed only with appropriate clinical history in the absence 
of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
If there are any red flags or uncertainty about the diagnosis (Table 
18.5), or if treatment is being considered, the hyperbilirubinemia 
should be investigated further. Any abnormality identified by history, 
physical examination, or laboratory findings is a matter of concern.
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
The differential diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the 
neonate and infant is presented in Table 18.2. Unless abnormalities in 
the history and physical examination direct the evaluation more specif­
ically, hematologic evaluation, which may identify causes of increased 
bilirubin production, should be performed. This includes a CBC with 
examination of the smear, a reticulocyte count, a direct Coombs test, 
and blood typing (mother and infant).
Polycythemia. Neonatal polycythemia, defined as a hematocrit 
>65% by venipuncture, can be caused by maternal diabetes, twin-­
twin transfusion, intrauterine hypoxemia, endocrine disorders, and 
delayed cord clamping (see Table 18.2). Polycythemia results in 
increased bilirubin production because of the increased red blood 
cell mass.
Hemolytic disorders. Reticulocytosis, unconjugated hyperbili­
rubinemia, and an increased nucleated red blood cell count, with 
either a low or normal hematocrit, suggest hemolysis. This can 
result from isoimmunization; erythrocyte membrane, hemoglobin, or 
enzyme defects; or sepsis with disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
Some causes of isoimmunization have low reticulocyte counts because 
the antibody binds to these precursor cells. Rarer causes of hemolysis 
include hemangiomas and congenital erythropoietic porphyria.
Isoimmune hemolytic disease. In this group of disorders, maternal 
antibodies (immunoglobulin G) to the infant’s erythrocytes cross the 
placenta, resulting in red blood cell destruction. The administration of 
anti-­D gamma globulin (RhO[D] immune globulin [RhoGAM]) after 
delivery to women who are Rh-­negative has reduced the incidence 
of Rh sensitization and erythroblastosis fetalis. If a woman has been 
sensitized, the fetus can be monitored with serial amniocenteses. If 
necessary, intrauterine transfusion can then be performed to prevent 
the sequelae of severe hemolysis, which include fetal and neonatal 
anemia, edema, hepatosplenomegaly, and circulatory collapse or 
stillbirth of an infant with hydrops fetalis. If the problem has not been 
recognized prenatally, the infant with Rh incompatibility presents with 
pallor, hepatosplenomegaly, and rapidly developing jaundice.
The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating that the infant is Rh-­
positive, that the direct Coombs test result is positive, and that mater­
nal antibody is coating the infant’s red blood cells. These test results are 
modified with in utero transfusions with Rh-­negative cells. Depending 
on the degree of hemolysis, postnatal phototherapy and/or exchange 
transfusion may be required.
ABO blood type incompatibility causes a less severe form of iso­
immune hemolytic disease with a less rapid development of jaundice. 
It is more common in infants with blood type A or B who are born 
to mothers with blood type O. Hemolysis develops in 50% of sensi­
tized infants; of these infants, 50% have a bilirubin level >10 mg/dL. 
In addition to showing anemia, reticulocytosis, and spherocytes on the 
smear, the direct Coombs test result is weakly positive, and the indirect 
Coombs test result is positive. In rare cases, other minor blood group 
antibodies can also cause hemolysis.
Erythrocyte membrane defects. Red blood cell membrane defects 
are relatively uncommon causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. 
There is often a family history of hemolysis, transfusions, 
cholecystectomy for bilirubin stones, or splenectomy. Hemolysis 
results from fragility of the red blood cell membrane. When the defect 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
329
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
is present in infancy, there are anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly, and 
the smear is often characteristic (e.g., spherocytosis or elliptocytosis). 
Spherocytes are also seen with ABO incompatibility. All membrane 
defects yield negative results of the Coombs tests.
Erythrocyte enzyme defects (see Chapter 49). Glucose-­6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is common. Jaundice is seen more 
frequently in persons with a Mediterranean or Far Eastern ancestry who 
have a complete absence of the enzyme. In these individuals, hemolysis 
can occur without a precipitant. In African-­American patients, the disease 
is generally less severe, and hemolysis is rare without exposure to a drug, 
a toxin, or an infection that causes an oxidant stress. G6PD deficiency can 
manifest as neonatal jaundice on day 2 or 3 after birth; alternatively, it may 
not manifest until later in childhood, when jaundice is associated with an 
acute hemolytic crisis. The diagnosis of G6PD deficiency is confirmed 
by documenting deficiency of the enzyme in red blood cells.
Numerous deficiencies of enzymes in the glycolytic pathway 
have been identified. Pyruvate kinase deficiency is the most com­
mon of these rare disorders. Most of these disorders are thought to 
have an autosomal recessive mode of transmission and have been 
identified in only a small number of individuals. They all result 
in hemolysis. The time of manifestation depends on the degree of 
hemolysis.
Other considerations. If the hematocrit is normal and there is no 
evidence of hemolysis or a consumptive process, other explanations 
for unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia should be sought. Blood and 
urine cultures rarely identify infectious etiologic agents if the patient 
is otherwise clinically normal. Vomiting, abdominal distention, and 
delayed passage of meconium suggest obstruction of the gastrointestinal 
tract and should be further investigated by imaging. Clinical examination 
should also identify cephalohematoma, ecchymoses, heart failure, 
hypoxia, and acidosis. Thyroxine and thyroid-­stimulating hormone 
levels should be obtained or checked from the state neonatal screening 
program to look for evidence of hypothyroidism or hypopituitarism.
Drugs, administered to either mother or neonate, and toxins should 
be identified by careful record review. Examples include oxytocin, 
excess vitamin K in premature infants, some antibiotics, and phenol 
disinfectants used in nurseries. Use of herbal remedies should also be 
investigated.
In the evaluation process, it is important to remember that the divi­
sion of causes into hemolytic and nonhemolytic is an arbitrary one. 
Drugs, infection, and G6PD deficiency can contribute to both hemo­
lytic and nonhemolytic neonatal jaundice. In addition, the cause of 
jaundice can be multifactorial.
Familial disorders of bilirubin metabolism
Gilbert syndrome. Gilbert syndrome is a benign condition that 
occurs in up to 8% of the population. A familial incidence is reported 
in 15–40% of cases. Gilbert syndrome is a heterogeneous group of 
disorders that have in common at least a 50% decrease in UDPGT 
activity as a result of a defect in the gene responsible for this enzyme. In 
20–30% of individuals with Gilbert syndrome, there is also a decrease 
TABLE 18.5  Red Flags in the Evaluation of Infants with Jaundice
Onset
<24 hr of age
>2 wk of age
Bilirubin
Conjugated
>20% of total or >2 mg/dL
Total
>13 mg/dL formula-­fed
>14–­15 mg/dL breast-­fed
Course
Increases by >5 mg/dL/day
Persists beyond 14 days of age
Prenatal History
Maternal infection
Maternal diabetes mellitus
Maternal drug use
Polyhydramnios
Intrauterine growth restriction
Delivery
Prematurity
Perinatal asphyxia
Small for gestational age
Feeding
Delayed enteral feeding
Vomiting
Poor feeding
Associated with change in formula
Stools
Acholic
Delayed passage of meconium
Family History
Jaundice
Anemia
Liver disease
Splenectomy
Cholecystectomy
Physical Examination
Ill-­appearing
Pallor
Petechiae
Hematoma or ecchymoses
Chromosomal stigmata
Abnormal facies
Microcephaly
Cataracts
Chorioretinitis
Nystagmus
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Posterior embryotoxon
Heart murmur
Hepatosplenomegaly (or isolated hepatomegaly or splenomegaly)
Ascites
Acholic stools
Dark urine
Microphallus
Encephalopathy—seizures, lethargy, coma
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
330
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
in hepatocyte bilirubin uptake. Affected individuals are generally 
asymptomatic and may not present with jaundice until the second or 
third decade of life. Gilbert syndrome may be responsible for some 
cases of neonatal jaundice. Mild jaundice with a bilirubin level up to 
7 mg/dL can occur transiently with fatigue, exercise, fasting, febrile 
illness, and alcohol ingestion in older patients. Except for showing an 
increased indirect bilirubin level, all laboratory studies are normal. 
The diagnosis is generally a clinical one but can be confirmed by 
documenting a twofold to threefold rise in unconjugated bilirubin 
during a 24-­hour fast.
Crigler-­Najjar syndrome. Crigler-­Najjar syndrome types I and 
II (also known as Arias syndrome) are rare autosomal recessive 
conditions caused by variants (different alleles from those of Gilbert 
syndrome) in the gene coding for UDPGT. Crigler-­Najjar syndrome 
type I is characterized by marked hyperbilirubinemia (20–40 mg/
dL) in the neonatal period in an otherwise healthy infant. Among 
untreated infants, kernicterus is universal, and affected individuals 
usually die with severe neurologic problems. Because UDPGT is 
undetectable, there is no conjugated bilirubin in the bile or serum, 
and the bile is colorless. There is no decrease in serum UCB levels 
during phenobarbital administration. The only therapies are exchange 
transfusion, intensive phototherapy, and liver transplantation.
The onset of Crigler-­Najjar syndrome type II is usually at birth, 
although it can be in late childhood. There is <5% of the normal 
UDPGT activity. Bile contains bilirubin monoglucuronides. Bilirubin 
levels, generally 8–25 mg/dL, respond to phenobarbital administration 
with a significant decrease. Neurologic disease is rare.
Lucey-­Driscoll syndrome. Lucey-­Driscoll syndrome is a transient 
familial neonatal hyperbilirubinemia that appears in the first few days 
of life and resolves by 2–3 weeks of age. This results from inhibition 
of UDPGT by a substance that has been found in both maternal and 
infant serum. The bilirubin level can rise to >60 mg/dL in untreated 
infants, resulting in severe neurotoxicity. The condition is treated with 
exchange transfusion.
Therapy. Treatment of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia depends on 
the degree of elevation of bilirubin. Considerable controversy exists over 
which level is toxic and when treatment should be initiated. Because it is 
lipid soluble, unconjugated bilirubin can diffuse into the central nervous 
system, which results in neurologic toxicity. Most authorities agree that 
kernicterus does not occur below a bilirubin level of 20–30 mg/dL in 
the healthy, full-­term infant without evidence of hemolysis. Kernicterus 
may occur at lower bilirubin levels in premature or sick neonates.
Treatment options include phototherapy and exchange transfu­
sion. Phototherapy produces a reduction of bilirubin by 1–2 mg/dL in 
4–6 hours by causing the photoisomerization and photodegradation 
of unconjugated bilirubin to more water-­soluble forms that are more 
readily excreted in bile and urine. Potential complications include reti­
nal damage, diarrhea, and dehydration. Phototherapy is begun at levels 
below that for exchange transfusion (∼5 mg/dL less) or during prepa­
rations for an exchange transfusion.
Exchange transfusion with blood cross-­matched against that of the 
mother is indicated for severe hyperbilirubinemia. This decision must 
be based not only on the bilirubin level but also, as important, on the 
infant’s age and clinical condition. In full-­ or near-­term infants (>2,000 
g in weight) with evidence of hemolysis, exchange transfusion is indi­
cated if the serum unconjugated bilirubin level is higher than 25–30 
mg/dL or if the bilirubin level does not rapidly respond to photother­
apy. Signs of kernicterus (i.e., a high-­pitched cry, gaze paralysis, fever, 
lethargy, and opisthotonic posture) warrant exchange transfusion, no 
matter what the bilirubin level.
Neonatal conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Conjugated hyper­
bilirubinemia in the neonate and infant has an extensive differential 
diagnosis (see Table 18.3). It is important to first evaluate the infant for 
potentially treatable problems (Table 18.6) and institute specific ther­
apy that prevents significant morbidity and may be life-­saving. Figure 
18.2 outlines a diagnostic approach when the clinical presentation has 
not suggested a likely diagnosis.
Common to all of these conditions is the potential for coagulopathy. 
If the PT is prolonged, the infant should be treated with intravenous 
vitamin K to avoid spontaneous hemorrhage, particularly intracranial. 
Depending on the degree of hepatocellular damage, vitamin K may not 
correct the PT. This mandates prompt evaluation for the underlying 
cause of neonatal liver failure or extrahepatic causes of coagulopathy. 
Interpretation of PT should be based on neonatal norms, as normal 
PT is higher in newborns, particularly in premature newborns versus 
older infants. Even with a normal PT at the outset, infants with conju­
gated hyperbilirubinemia should be on oral fat-­soluble vitamin supple­
mentation until their cholestasis resolves.
Hypoglycemia is another danger that is associated with diseases 
that cause severe hepatic dysfunction but also with metabolic disorders 
as well as with hypopituitarism. The infant may be relatively asymp­
tomatic despite significant hypoglycemia. The serum glucose level can 
be measured before a feeding. If hypoglycemia is present, the infant 
should receive frequent feedings, continuous feedings, or intravenous 
dextrose infusions. Glucose level should always be the part of the eval­
uation of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Hyperammonemia can be present in severe liver dysfunction and 
metabolic liver disorders. Ammonia should be checked on infants with 
lethargy or with a change in mental status.
TABLE 18.6  Conditions Not to Miss in 
Infants with Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Priorities
Hypoprothrombinemia
Hypoglycemia
Extrahepatic biliary atresia
Infections
Sepsis
Urinary tract infection
Syphilis
Toxoplasmosis
Herpes simplex virus
Endocrine Disorders
Hypopituitarism
Hypothyroidism
Metabolic Disorders
Galactosemia
Hereditary fructose intolerance (fructosemia)
Tyrosinemia
Mitochondrial hepatocerebral subtypes
Other
Neonatal hemochromatosis
Bile acid abnormalities
Choledochal cyst
Intestinal obstruction
Familial hemophagocytic syndromes
Heart disease
Toxins
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
331
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
Serum levels of aminotransferases, GGT, and alkaline phosphatase, 
in addition to a CBC, should be included in the initial evaluation.
Obstructive/anatomic abnormalities, idiopathic cholestasis, and 
idiopathic neonatal hepatitis
Biliary atresia. Untreated biliary atresia is universally lethal, and only 
prompt diagnosis and surgical treatment can prevent mortality. Biliary 
atresia accounts for approximately 30% of cases of neonatal cholestasis 
seen at major referral centers. It occurs in 1 in 8,000–15,000 live births. It 
is the result of a progressive inflammatory process leading to obliteration 
of the lumen of the extrahepatic ducts. It is the leading indication for liver 
transplantation in the pediatric population. Infants are less often icteric 
from birth and more often develop jaundice at 2–6 weeks of age. Infants 
are usually full term and initially appear healthy except for jaundice, dark 
urine, and acholic stools. The family history usually is negative for liver 
disease. There appear to be two forms of biliary atresia:
	1.	 In the “embryonic” or “fetal form,” which occurs in 15–30% of 
cases, there is no jaundice-­free period. There are often associated 
other anatomic defects, including cardiac defects, polysplenia, mal­
rotation, and abdominal heterotaxia.
	2.	 In the “perinatal form,” there may be a jaundice-­free interval after 
resolution of the normal physiologic jaundice, and there are no 
associated anomalies.
At the time of presentation, infants with biliary atresia may have 
an enlarged, firm liver. Pruritus, splenomegaly, and ascites can develop 
later with advanced disease. The work-­up should be performed expe­
ditiously; it is important to identify biliary atresia early because the 
success of surgical establishment of drainage is correlated with early 
age at surgery. Surgery performed before the infant is 2 months old 
carries an approximately 80% rate of success in terms of obtaining 
some bile flow. This rate decreases to about 20% for surgery performed 
in patients older than 3 months. Diagnostic work-­up includes evalua­
tion of other identifiable causes of neonatal cholestasis including CMV 
or syphilis infection, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, hypothyroidism, and 
other anatomic abnormalities of the biliary tree. Combination of con­
jugated hyperbilirubinemia, acholic stools, and elevated GGT should 
trigger prompt evaluation for biliary atresia. An ultrasound study helps 
exclude other treatable anatomic abnormalities, such as a choledochal 
cyst. The gallbladder is usually absent or collapsed in infants with bil­
iary atresia. It is strongly recommended that noninvasive work-­up is 
completed by 1 month of age and the infant is referred to a pediatric 
tertiary center if biliary atresia cannot be ruled out.
Liver biopsy and percutaneous cholangiogram should follow if no 
alternative cause of jaundice is identified. Characteristic findings on 
liver biopsy are periportal edema and fibrosis, bile duct proliferation, 
and bile duct plugs. Some centers utilize hepatobiliary scintigraphy, 
which demonstrates uptake of the tracer but no excretion into the 
duodenum if biliary atresia is present. However, this study can lead to 
delay in diagnosis (requires pretreatment with phenobarbital) and can 
be inconclusive in hepatic dysfunction due to poor uptake of the tracer.
The diagnosis is confirmed by intraoperative cholangiography at 
the time of surgery. The surgical procedure, a portoenterostomy, was 
initially described by Kasai. The porta hepatis is transected, and a loop 
of intestine is brought up to drain the bile ducts. Those in whom bile 
drainage is not established require early liver transplantation. In the 
majority of patients, surgery is palliative, allowing time before liver 
transplantation is needed; overall and post-­transplant mortality are 
significantly reduced with a timely Kasai procedure.
The important, potentially life-­threatening complication of the 
Kasai procedure is bacterial ascending cholangitis. Febrile patients 
with biliary atresia need to be promptly evaluated for causes of fever. 
If no alternative source of fever is identified, they should be evaluated 
for cholangitis.
Most of the patients with biliary atresia remain cholestatic despite 
the Kasai procedure; thus, they require supplementation with medium-­
chain triglyceride (MCT) oil (or MCT-­enriched formulas) and fat-­
soluble vitamins. Pruritus can be managed with rifampin or naltrexone. 
Portal hypertension with splenomegaly, esophageal varices, and ascites 
can develop over time in many patients with biliary atresia. Due to sig­
nificant risk of complications and frequent need for liver transplant, 
patients with biliary atresia should be followed in centers with pediat­
ric transplant/hepatology expertise.
Alagille syndrome. Alagille syndrome is characterized by the 
abnormal development of multiple organs related to defective JAG-­1/
NOTCH-­2 signaling. Alagille syndrome has an autosomal dominant 
transmission with highly variable expression. Often other family 
members are recognized as being affected when an infant is brought 
to medical attention. There is a high proportion of sporadic cases (up 
to 70%) with de novo variants in the JAG-­1 gene responsible for this 
syndrome. Variants of the NOTCH-­2 receptor can result in a similar 
clinical picture, though they are less common than JAG-­1 variants.
The most important clinical feature is a marked reduction in the 
number of interlobular bile ducts. Jaundice may have its onset in 
the neonatal period or may not appear until later in childhood. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by liver biopsy. Symptoms of cholestasis often 
improve over time.
Additionally, patients with Alagille syndrome can have unusual 
facies (a triangular face with broad forehead, widely spaced and 
deep-­set eyes, a long nose, and a pointed mandible), vertebral arch 
defects (butterfly vertebrae, hemivertebrae, decreased interpedicular 
distance), posterior embryotoxon (ocular), and cardiac anomalies 
(ranging from peripheral pulmonic stenosis to complex congenital 
heart disease) (Fig. 18.4). There is a 20–25% rate of mortality from 
serious cardiac or liver disease. Renal anomalies, pancreatic insuf­
ficiency, and growth retardation are present in some patients (Table 
18.7). Cerebral vascular anomalies are the main reason for increased 
mortality later in life. Screening with MR angiography is recom­
mended in school age. By the age of 4–6 months, pruritus develops 
and can be severe. Pruritus can be managed with rifampin or nal­
trexone. Xanthomas appear in association with a markedly elevated 
cholesterol level.
There is a nonsyndromic form of bile duct paucity with cholestasis 
caused by bile duct paucity but not associated with clinical or genetic 
variants characteristic of Alagille syndrome. The prognosis for this 
form is less favorable.
Choledochal cysts. Manifestations include conjugated hyperbiliru­
binemia with jaundice, vomiting, acholic stools, and hepatomegaly in 
the neonate. Alternatively, choledochal cysts can manifest with jaun­
dice, abdominal pain, and a right upper quadrant mass in the older 
child. There are five main anatomic types of cystic dilatations of the 
extrahepatic or intrahepatic bile ducts (Fig. 18.5). The diagnosis is 
made by ultrasound studies and confirmed by MR cholangiography or 
intraoperative cholangiography. Treatment involves surgical excision. 
Cholangitis may occur postoperatively. If the cyst is not fully excised, 
cholangiocarcinoma can develop in the residual cyst tissue.
Treatable infections
Bacterial infection. An infant may, in rare cases, appear clinically 
well, with jaundice as the only sign of a bacterial infection. Blood 
and urine cultures should be obtained in infants with unexplained 
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Infection is less likely to be missed 
in the symptomatic infant who presents with poor feeding, lethargy, 
vomiting, temperature instability, apnea, bradycardia, or shock. 
Escherichia coli is the most common organism identified in either sepsis 
or urinary tract infection (often with bacteremia) when jaundice is 
present. The hyperbilirubinemia may be caused by endotoxin-­mediated 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
332
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
canalicular dysfunction. Less often, other gram-­negative bacilli or 
Listeria, Staphylococcus, or Streptococcus species may be identified as 
the causative agent. Although sepsis accounts for only a small percent 
of the cases of neonatal cholestasis, it is easily diagnosed and treated.
Herpes simplex. Herpes simplex causes a severe neonatal infection 
that usually manifests at 7–14 days of age with lethargy, poor feeding, 
a vesicular rash (in 60–70% of patients), jaundice, hepatomegaly, 
temperature instability, encephalitis, and coagulopathy. The diagnosis 
is made by identification of the virus in skin lesions through direct 
fluorescent antibody staining or PCR of herpes simplex DNA in blood 
or cerebrospinal fluid. Treatment is with intravenous acyclovir. Among 
infants with disseminated infection, the mortality rate is 15–35%.
Enteroviruses. Maternal infection at the time of delivery may result 
in severe enteroviral disease in the infant within 1–7 days of birth. 
Manifestations are similar to that of herpes simplex virus except a 
macular rash. Severe hepatitis, carditis, or encephalitis or a sepsis picture 
may develop. Diagnosis is made through PCR or viral culture. Treatment 
strategies include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and pleconaril.
Coronavirus (COVID-­19). Infection with COVID-­19 has been 
associated with liver dysfunction, although additional studies are needed 
to understand the severity and long-­term effects of this new virus.
Cytomegalovirus infection. CMV infection is common, but 90% 
of affected infants are asymptomatic at birth. In the severely affected 
infant with vertical transmission, CMV can manifest within the first 
24 hours after birth with intrauterine growth restriction, conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura, 
and hepatosplenomegaly. Often an infant with low birthweight presents 
with microcephaly, periventricular calcifications, and chorioretinitis. 
The diagnosis can be made by obtaining urine and saliva specimens 
for CMV DNA.
A
B
Fig. 18.4  Alagille syndrome. A, A 1½-­year-­old with broad forehead 
and prominent chin. B, Note the deep-­set eyes; broad forehead; long, 
straight nose with flattened tip; and prominent chin. (A, From Jones KL, 
Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:760, Fig. 1 A and B; 
B, Courtesy Dr. Ian Krantz, University of Pennsylvania.)
TABLE 18.7  Extrahepatic Manifestations of 
Alagille Syndrome
Cardiac
Peripheral pulmonary stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Aortic coarctation
Pulmonary atresia
Skeletal
Short stature
Butterfly vertebrae
Fused vertebrae
Rib anomalies
Spina bifida occulta
Thin cortical bones
Ocular
Posterior embryotoxon
Axenfeld anomaly
Optic disc drusen
Shallow anterior chamber
Microcornea
Vascular
Renal artery stenosis
Intracranial bleeding
Central nervous system malformations
Other
Renal developmental abnormalities
Renal tubulopathies
Pancreatic exocrine and endocrine insufficiency
High-­pitched voice
Microcolon
Growth restriction
From Mieli-­Vergani G, Hadzic N. Biliary atresia and neonatal disorders 
of the bile ducts. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastro­
intestinal and Liver Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders; 
2011:749.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
333
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
Treatment includes the use of ganciclovir and possibly CMV immu­
noglobulin. The liver disease resolves in most patients, but neurologic 
sequelae are common. Postnatal acquisition from CMV-­positive blood 
transfusion may produce a sepsis syndrome and hepatitis.
The findings of CMV in a cholestatic infant without other features 
of congenital CMV infection should not stop the search for other 
causes of cholestasis, particularly biliary atresia.
Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B infection manifests with jaundice in 
fewer than 5% of perinatal infections. Perinatal transmission is high 
when mothers are chronic carriers who are seropositive for hepatitis 
B e antigen (HBeAg) or when they acquire acute infection in the last 
trimester. Most infants are asymptomatic, but there is a high incidence 
of subsequent chronic infection. Perinatal infection can be prevented 
with hepatitis B immune globulin and vaccination. It is important to 
identify mothers who are seropositive for hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg); identification requires universal screening.
Syphilis. Congenital syphilis remains a problem despite maternal 
screening. With severe infection, the infant has fever, a diffuse macular-­
papular rash, hepatosplenomegaly, edema, anemia, and periostitis, in 
addition to jaundice. Nontreponemal serologic tests (Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory) may be routinely performed on cord blood. If the 
result is positive, the diagnosis should be confirmed on serum from the 
infant. Confirmation requires a positive specific test for syphilis such 
as the immunoglobulin M (IgM) or immunoglobulin G fluorescent 
treponemal antibody. Treatment is with intravenous penicillin for 
10–14 days.
Toxoplasmosis. If toxoplasmosis is suspected on clinical grounds, 
IgM titers should be obtained, or the placenta should be examined 
histologically. Most infected infants are asymptomatic. Infants with severe 
congenital infection may have hydrocephaly or microcephaly, intracranial 
calcifications, chorioretinitis, aseptic meningitis, jaundice, purpura, 
and hepatomegaly. Postnatal treatment consists of pyrimethamine and 
sulfadiazine; folinic acid is added to prevent folate deficiency.
Treatable metabolic disorders. Many metabolic disorders are part 
of the universal newborn screening program in developed countries. 
The clinician needs to be aware of which disorders are and which are 
not screened for in a particular country or state. Even in the presence 
of universal neonatal screening for metabolic disorders, the test may 
be falsely negative, particularly if the newborn was tested too early, was 
premature, or underwent transfusions before the test was performed. 
In countries with robust neonatal screening programs, repeating the 
newborn screen may be an easy and cost-­effective first step in evaluation 
for possible metabolic disease. Other useful screening modalities 
include urine-­reducing substances (galactosemia), serum amino acids, 
ammonia level, urine organic acids, quantitative serum bile acids, 
qualitative analysis of urinary bile acids by fast atom bombardment mass 
spectrometry (FAB-­MS), the thyroxine level, and the thyroid-­stimulating 
hormone level, succinyl-­acetone (tyrosinemia), triglycerides, lactate, 
pyruvate, and acyl carnitines (mitochondrial disorders).
Galactosemia. Galactosemia, a life-­threatening disorder, can easily 
be detected. It is an autosomal recessive disorder with deficiency 
of galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyltransferase, which is required for 
conversion of galactose to glucose. As a result, galactose-­1-­phosphate 
accumulates; this compound is thought to be hepatotoxic. Once lactose 
(glucose-­galactose) is introduced into the infant’s diet, vomiting, 
diarrhea, jaundice, hepatomegaly, and cataracts develop. Affected 
infants often present with E. coli sepsis in the first weeks of life.
Laboratory evaluation may demonstrate elevations of aminotrans­
ferase levels, a prolonged PT, hemolytic anemia, and aminoaciduria. 
The urine yields positive findings for reducing substances (galactose) if 
the infant is receiving a lactose-­containing formula or breast milk. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by documenting deficiency of the enzyme 
in erythrocytes or leukocytes. Transfusions may cause false-­negative 
results. Treatment consists of eliminating galactose from the diet.
Hereditary fructose intolerance (fructosemia) is an uncommon 
disorder; it can manifest with hepatic failure in an infant exposed to 
fructose or sucrose in formula, juice, fruit, or medications. A thorough 
diet history in relation to the onset of jaundice is often the key to this 
diagnosis. Prompt removal of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol from the 
diet is essential.
Tyrosinemia is diagnosed from serum amino acid levels and urine 
organic acid levels. Elevated urinary succinylacetone is pathognomonic. 
Treatment involves the dietary restriction of phenylalanine, methionine, 
and tyrosine and the use of 2-­(2-­nitro-­4-­trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-­1,
3-­cyclohexanedione to prevent the formation of toxic metabolites. 
Liver transplantation may still be required.
Disorders of bile acid metabolism typically are suggested by 
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with low or normal GGT and low or 
normal total bile acid levels. They can be detected by bile acid FAB-­MS 
analysis of urine. Treatment of some forms of bile acid synthetic disorder 
is possible with oral cholic acid supplementation.
Fatty acid oxidation defects often present with hypoketotic hypo­
glycemia, hepatomegaly, variable hyperammonemia, and cholestasis 
(Table 18.8).
IA
IB
IC
II
III
IVA
IVB
V
Fig. 18.5  Todani classification of choledochal cysts based on cholangio­
graphic morphology. Types IA and IB involve cystic dilatation of the com­
mon duct, with IB limited to the area below the insertion of the cystic duct; 
IC is cylindrical dilatation of the duct. Type II is a saccular diverticulum from 
the common bile duct. Type III is a choledochocele at the ampulla of Vater. 
Types IVA and IVB are multiple cystic dilatations of both the intra-­ and 
extrahepatic ducts and extrahepatic biliary tree only, respectively. Type 
V is equivalent to Caroli disease with numerous intrahepatic cystic dilata­
tions throughout the biliary tree and liver. (From Kim OH, Chung HJ, Choi 
BG. Imaging of the choledochal cyst. Radiographics. 1995;15:69–88.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
334
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
Mitochondrial disorders with a hepatocerebral phenotype often 
present in infancy with liver dysfunction, hepatomegaly, and liver fail­
ure or cirrhosis (Table 18.9).
Other identifiable infectious and metabolic causes of cholestasis
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency. An α1-­antitrypsin protein immunoelec­
trophoresis can detect an α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, which is the most 
common inherited cause of neonatal cholestasis. Deficiency occurs 
in 1 in 1,600–2,000 live births. α1-­Antitrypsin is a protease inhibitor 
that is synthesized in the liver and inactivates neutrophil proteases. 
The normal α1-­antitrypsin phenotype, MM, is found in 80–90% of the 
population. There are numerous allelic variants. Liver disease is asso­
ciated with the ZZ phenotype and sporadically with other variants. 
The exact mechanism of liver injury is unclear, and there is variabil­
ity in expression so that clinically significant liver disease develops 
in only 10–15% of individuals with the ZZ phenotype. There is also 
great variability in manifestation. Commonly, the disorder manifests 
in early infancy with prolonged conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, failure 
to thrive, acholic stools, hepatomegaly, and less commonly ascites. In 
some patients it manifests later in childhood or even adulthood. Man­
ifestations in older individuals include jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, 
ascites, portal hypertension with varices, chronic hepatitis, cryptogenic 
cirrhosis, or, rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma. The diagnosis is estab­
lished by serum phenotyping (ZZ). Treatment is supportive. Some 
individuals do very well with minimal liver dysfunction. Others have 
progressive liver disease, requiring transplantation. α1-­Antitrypsin 
deficiency can enhance hepatotoxicity of hepatotoxic drugs. All indi­
viduals with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency should be aware of the potential 
for lung disease when they are older.
TABLE 18.8  Individual Fatty Acid Oxidation Defects
Defect
Clinical Phenotype
Other Features
Metabolic Abnormalities
Diagnosis Confirmation
Carnitine transporter deficiency
H, C, M
Low free carnitine
EM
Carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1
H, R, M
RTA
High free carnitine
EM
Carnitine/acyl carnitine translocase
H, C, M
Early death
C16 and 18 species
EM
Carnitine palmitoyl transferase 2
H, C, M
RTA
C16 and 18
493C>T
Very long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase H, C, R, M
C14, 16, and 18
Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
H, C, R, M
C8 DCA
985A>G in 90% symptomatic 
cases
Long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydro­
genase/mitochondrial trifunctional 
protein
H, C, M
Retinopathy, neu­
ropathy
C16 and 18 species DCA
1528G>C
Short-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydro­
genase
H
Hyperinsulinism
C4-­OH urinary ethylmalonic acid
EM
Multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
H, C, M
Congenital malfor­
mations, renal 
cysts, RTA
C6, 8, 10, and 12 urinary ethyl­
malonic, glutaric, and adipic 
acids; DCA
EM
C, acylcarnitine species; C, cardiomyopathy or arrhythmia; DCA, dicarboxylic aciduria; EM, enzyme measurement in cultured fibroblast; H, acute 
hepatic presentation; M, myopathic presentation; R, rhabdomyolysis; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:787, Table 71.1.
TABLE 18.9  “Pathognomonic” Presentations of Mitochondrial Disorders with Prominent 
Hepatic Involvement
Clinical Features
Disorder
Gene(s)
Liver failure and seizures
Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome
POLG (PEO1, FARS2)
Liver failure and rotatory nystagmus ± developmental stasis/regression and elevated 
plasma tyrosine
Hepatocerebral MDDS
DGUOK
Liver failure and peripheral neuropathy
Hepatocerebral MDDS
MPV17
Liver disease with sensorimotor neuropathy, corneal anaesthesia/scarring, and acral mutilation Navajo neurohepatopathy
MPV17
Liver failure, Leigh-­like encephalopathy, SNHL, and methylmalonic aciduria
Hepatocerebral MDDS (succinyl-­CoA ligase 
deficiency)
SUCLG1
Liver failure with spontaneous recovery
“Benign reversible” mitochondrial hepa­
topathy
TRMU
Liver failure and renal tubulopathy
Complex III deficiency
BCS1L
Cholestasis with iron overload, intrauterine growth restriction, amino aciduria, lactic 
acidosis, and early death
GRACILE syndrome
BCS1L
Liver disease with SNHL, Leigh-­like encephalopathy, and 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria
MEGDEL syndrome
SERAC1
GRACILE, growth restriction, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acidosis, early death; MDDS, mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome; 
MEGDEL, 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria, deafness, encephalopathy, Leigh like; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss.
Modified from Rahman S. Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestations of mitochondrial disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2013;36:659–673.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
335
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
Cystic fibrosis. As many as one third of infants with cystic fibrosis 
may have evidence of liver involvement, frequently cholestasis. The 
incidence is increased among infants with meconium ileus. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed with a sweat chloride test or by detecting 
the abnormal gene. Although the cholestasis resolves, the infant with 
cystic fibrosis can develop problems including focal biliary cirrhosis, 
multilobular cirrhosis, fatty liver, obstruction of the common duct, 
cholelithiasis, sclerosing cholangitis, and, rarely, cholangiocarcinoma.
Hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism. Jaundice can be a 
manifestation 
of 
both 
hypothyroidism 
and 
hypopituitarism. 
Hypopituitarism may manifest with hypoglycemia, microphallus, 
and signs of hypothyroidism in addition to jaundice. Wandering 
nystagmus is present when hypopituitarism is associated with septo-­
optic dysplasia. Treatment of the underlying endocrinopathy leads to 
resolution of the liver disease.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Progressive familial 
intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is a group of disorders related to defective 
transport of bile acids (Table 18.10). PFIC is clinically suggested by the 
presence of cholestasis in the absence of physical damage to the bile 
ducts. GGT is normal except in PFIC type 3. The molecular defects 
for three PFIC types involve molecules expressed on the canalicular 
membrane of the hepatocyte. All types of PFIC are inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. PFIC results in progressive cholestasis 
and pruritus, leading to cirrhosis and end-­stage liver disease. PFIC type 
1 has low or normal serum GGT and high serum concentrations of bile 
acids. The defect of the FIC-­1 gene, which encodes a P-­type adenosine 
triphosphatase (ATP8B1), is involved in phospholipid translocation 
in the enterocytes and canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte. In 
addition to cholestasis, patients have chronic secretory diarrhea. PFIC 
type 1 can also be associated with sensorineural hearing loss and 
pancreatitis.
Patients with PFIC type 2 also exhibit cholestasis, normal serum 
GGT, and high levels of serum bile acids. A PFIC type 2 disorder is 
caused by defective function of the bile salt export pump (BSEP) pro­
tein, encoded by the ABCB11 gene. Since BSEP is expressed only in 
hepatocytes, symptoms are limited to cholestatic liver disease.
Patients with PFIC type 3 have high serum GGT and cholesterol 
levels. They demonstrate symptoms later in life and reach end-­stage 
liver disease at a later age. PFIC type 3 is caused by a defect in the 
ABCB4 gene, which encodes a phospholipid transporter (MDR3) in the 
canalicular membrane and results in low biliary phospholipid levels.
Except in cases necessitating liver transplantation, chronic biliary 
diversion and ursodeoxycholic acid therapy may reduce pruritus and 
improve liver function. In benign recurrent intrahepatic cholesta­
sis (BRIC), homozygous or compound heterozygous variants of 
respective genes (ATP8B1, ABCB11, ABCB4) develop a milder form 
of cholestatic liver disease, which generally does not progress to end-­
stage liver disease. In patients with BRIC jaundice, pruritus or fat 
malabsorption symptoms can be triggered by pregnancy, toxins, and 
medications.
Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis. Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis is a 
descriptive term rather than a specific disease entity. The diagnosis 
is made by exclusion of other causes of cholestasis, particularly 
biliary atresia. The infant with neonatal hepatitis is more likely to be 
premature or small for gestational age. Acholic stools are uncommon 
but can occur when the hepatitis is severe. In 5–15% of cases, there is 
a familial incidence. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy demonstrates delayed 
uptake, but there is usually excretion into the duodenum unless the 
hepatitis is severe. In this case, intraoperative cholangiography may 
be required. Biopsy findings include panlobular disarray indicative 
of severe hepatocellular disease, inflammatory infiltrate in the portal 
areas, focal hepatocellular necrosis, multinucleated giant cells, and 
increased extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Treatment is supportive. The outcome is variable and is better for 
infants with sporadic (nonfamilial) cases; of such infants, approxi­
mately 60% recover, 10% have chronic liver disease, and 30% die with­
out liver transplantation. The percentages for recovery and death are 
reversed (30% and 60%, respectively) in familial cases.
Treatment of cholestasis. Some interventions are essential for all 
infants with cholestasis. Malabsorption of fats and fat-­soluble vitamins 
occurs as a result of a decreased concentration of bile salts in the 
intestinal lumen. Affected infants should be given a formula containing 
TABLE 18.10  Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis
PFIC 1
PFIC 2
PFIC 3
Transmission
Autosomal recessive
Autosomal recessive
Autosomal recessive
Chromosome
18q21-­22
2q24
7q21
Gene
ATP8B1/F1C1
ABCB11/BSEP
ABCB4/MDR3
Protein
FIC1
BSEP
MDR3
Location
Hepatocyte, colon, intestine, pancreas; on apical membranes Hepatocyte canalicular membrane
Hepatocyte canalicular membrane
Function
ATP-­dependent aminophospholipid flippase; unknown 
effects on intracellular signaling
ATP-­dependent bile acid transport
ATP-­dependent phosphatidylcholine 
translocation
Phenotype
Progressive cholestasis, diarrhea, steatorrhea, growth 
failure, severe pruritus
Rapidly progressive cholestatic giant cell 
hepatitis, growth failure, pruritus
Later-­onset cholestasis, portal hyperten­
sion, minimal pruritus, intraductal and 
gallbladder lithiasis
Histology
Initial bland cholestatic; coarse, granular canalicular bile 
on EM
Neonatal giant cell hepatitis, amorphous 
canalicular bile on EM
Proliferation of bile ductules, periportal 
fibrosis, eventually biliary cirrhosis
Biochemical 
features
Normal serum GGT; high serum, low biliary bile acid 
concentrations
Normal serum GGT; high serum, low 
biliary bile acid concentrations
Elevated serum GGT; low to absent biliary 
PC; absent serum LPX; normal biliary 
bile acid concentrations
Treatment
Biliary diversion, ileal exclusion, liver transplantation, but 
post-­OLT diarrhea, steatorrhea, fatty liver
Biliary diversion, liver transplantation
UDCA if residual PC secretion; liver 
transplantation
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; BSEP, bile salt export pump; EM, electron microscopy; GGT, γ-­glutamyltransferase; LPX, lipoprotein X; OLT, orthotopic 
liver transplantation; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; UDCA, ursodeoxycholic acid.
From Suchy FJ, Sokol RJ, Balistreri WF, eds. Liver Disease in Children. 3rd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2007.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
336
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
MCTs, which are more easily digested and absorbed in the absence of 
bile acids. Even with MCT supplementation, many patients will require 
caloric intake in excess of 150 kcal/kg/day to maintain growth. Due to 
organomegaly and ascites, weight alone may overestimate nutritional 
status. Proper monitoring of growth requires a routine anthropometric 
evaluation of skinfold and mid-­arm circumference. Some affected 
infants require supplemental tube feedings. Supplemental vitamins 
A, D, E, and K are given to prevent symptoms of vitamin deficiency 
visual problems, rickets, neuropathy, and coagulopathy, respectively. 
Fat-­soluble vitamin levels need to be monitored. Pruritus is often 
severe and is not readily treatable. Several medications have been 
tried, including ursodeoxycholic acid, antihistamines, cholestyramine, 
rifampin, and naltrexone. Ursodeoxycholic acid is beneficial in some 
infants with cholestasis, and helps to improve bile excretion, thus 
reducing serum bile acid levels. Biliary diversion has been effective in 
some cases. Ascites can be managed with sodium restriction, albumin 
infusions, and diuretics.
JAUNDICE IN THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT
History
Chronic fatigue, though nonspecific, is a common symptom of liver 
disease and should trigger at least a basic evaluation including amino­
transferases even in the absence of overt jaundice. Myalgias, nausea, 
vomiting, and fever are often seen in patients with viral hepatitis or 
autoimmune hepatitis. Acute biliary obstruction is signaled by right 
upper quadrant pain, vomiting, fever, and acholic stools in addition 
to jaundice. Neurologic and psychiatric symptoms may be among the 
manifestations of Wilson disease. Autoimmune hepatitis may or may 
not be accompanied by manifestations of other autoimmune disorders.
The child’s age at the onset of symptoms may be helpful. Wilson 
disease commonly manifests in school-­aged children and adolescents. 
Similarly, autoimmune hepatitis is most prevalent in school-­aged chil­
dren and adolescents with female predominance. A thorough history 
should include past and present use of prescription, over-­the-­counter 
(e.g., acetaminophen, herbal supplements), and street drugs. Many 
medications have been associated with hepatobiliary damage; others, 
with hemolysis. Intravenous drug use is a risk factor for viral hepatitis 
and HIV. Adolescents in particular should be asked about alcohol use.
Symptoms of cholestasis such as jaundice, dark urine, steatorrhea, 
symptoms of fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency, failure to thrive, and pru­
ritus should be explored in detail.
Information about exposure to viral hepatitis, either by travel to an 
endemic area or during an outbreak, should be pursued. There is a high 
transmission rate in daycare centers.
The patient’s medical history should be reviewed because some 
chronic illnesses are associated with specific hepatobiliary complica­
tions. These should include AIDS, cystic fibrosis, heart disease, renal 
disease, hemolytic disorders, autoimmune disorders, celiac disease, 
and inflammatory bowel disease.
A family history of inheritable disorders, such as Wilson disease, 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, Alagille syndrome, or 
spherocytosis, is informative. Less specific but still useful clues are a 
history of autoimmune disorders, jaundice, anemia, cholecystectomy, 
or splenectomy in other family members.
Physical Examination
Some patients present with previously unidentified chronic liver dis­
ease. The clinician should focus on signs of portal hypertension: spi­
der angiomas, palmar erythema, dilated abdominal veins, ascites, and 
splenomegaly with a small liver. Cutaneous excoriation as evidence of 
pruritus, xanthomas, and jaundice support cholestasis. Clubbing of 
digits may suggest hepatopulmonary syndrome. A large, tender liver 
is suggestive of acute viral hepatitis or congestive heart failure. A small 
liver may be found in patients with severe hepatitis or cirrhosis. A 
tender gallbladder is indicative of choledocholithiasis or cholecystitis. 
Abnormal neurologic findings, including tremor, fine motor incoor­
dination, clumsy gait, and choleriform movements, suggest Wilson 
disease. A slit-­lamp examination should be included to look for the 
Kayser-­Fleischer rings (a brownish discoloration at the periphery of 
the cornea) of Wilson disease.
Differential Diagnosis
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Most causes of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the child and ado­
lescent are secondary to hemolysis (Table 18.11) (see Chapter 49). A 
CBC with evaluation of the smear, reticulocyte count, and Coombs test 
can differentiate hemolytic from nonhemolytic disorders.
TABLE 18.11  Differential Diagnosis 
of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia in 
Childhood and Adolescence
Increased Bilirubin Production
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
  Idiopathic
  Secondary
  Infection (viral, mycoplasma)
  Diseases with autoantibody production
  Immunodeficiency
  Malignancy
Drug-­induced hemolytic anemia
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Erythrocyte membrane defects
  Hereditary spherocytosis
  Hereditary elliptocytosis
Erythrocyte enzyme defects
  Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
  Pyruvate kinase
  Hexokinase
  Other
Hemoglobinopathy
  Sickle cell disease
  Thalassemia
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura
Sepsis with disseminated intravascular coagulation
Reabsorption of hematoma
Transfusion reaction
Decreased Uptake, Storage, or Metabolism
Congestive heart failure
Sepsis
Acidosis
Gilbert syndrome
Crigler-­Najjar syndrome type II
Prolonged fasting
Drugs
Portacaval shunt
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
337
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
Erythrocyte membrane defects (spherocytosis) and enzyme 
defects (pyruvate kinase deficiency, G6PD) may not be apparent 
until childhood or adolescence. Acquired autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia is characterized by pallor, abdominal pain, fever, and dark 
urine in addition to jaundice. Laboratory studies document anemia 
and reticulocytosis. The direct Coombs test result can be positive in 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Hemolytic anemia can be associated 
with infection, immunodeficiency, malignancy, hemolytic uremic 
syndrome, or autoimmune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythe­
matosus, rheumatoid arthritis, thyroid disorders, and autoimmune 
hepatitis.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by congestive 
heart failure and infection. In such circumstances extrahepatic symp­
toms, cardiac failure, or sepsis dominate the picture. If no other expla­
nation is found, Gilbert syndrome or Crigler-­Najjar syndrome type II 
should be considered.
Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
In the child with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, the PT, albumin, 
glucose, AST, ALT, GGT, and alkaline phosphatase levels should be 
measured. Albumin and PT reflect hepatocyte synthetic function. 
Hypoglycemia is another marker of severity of hepatocellular damage. 
This is important in considering how quickly the evaluation should 
proceed or how closely the patient should be monitored. Patients 
with coagulopathy, hyperammonemia, encephalopathy, or hypoglyce­
mia should be admitted to the hospital and observed very closely. PT 
should be repeated after a dose of parenteral vitamin K to differenti­
ate synthetic liver failure from a vitamin K deficiency. Hypoglycemia 
should be corrected with frequent meals or intravenous dextrose.
Obstruction. The relative elevation of AST/ALT and alkaline 
phosphatase levels in the context of the clinical picture determines 
the likelihood of an obstructive cause. Although obstructions occur 
less commonly in children than in adults, it is important not to miss 
correctable causes of obstruction that, if left untreated, can cause 
hepatocellular damage. These patients usually have markedly elevated 
alkaline phosphatase and minimally elevated AST and ALT levels. They 
should be evaluated promptly with ultrasonography and possibly with 
MRCP, ERCP, or PTC. The possible causes of obstruction are listed in 
Table 18.12.
Gallstones. Gallstones are particularly common in children with 
hemolytic disorders, such as sickle cell disease, thalassemia, erythrocyte 
membrane defects, erythrocyte enzyme defects, and autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia. The mean age at presentation is 12 years. Gallstones 
are also associated with anatomic abnormalities of the biliary tract, 
cystic fibrosis, ileal dysfunction, obesity, parenteral nutrition, sepsis, 
prematurity, and pregnancy. Stones may be found incidentally on 
abdominal radiographs or ultrasound studies in asymptomatic 
individuals. Alternatively, gallstones may manifest with symptoms of 
biliary colic: nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant or nonspecific 
abdominal pain, and jaundice. Ultrasonography is a very sensitive 
diagnostic test. Treatment for symptomatic patients is cholecystectomy. 
ERCP can be used to remove common bile duct stones.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(PSC) is characterized by focal dilatation and stenosis of the intrahepatic 
or extrahepatic bile ducts with surrounding fibrosis resulting from an 
inflammatory process. It can manifest from early childhood through 
adulthood. In adults, it is frequently associated with inflammatory 
bowel disease, especially ulcerative colitis. PSC may precede the 
onset of inflammatory bowel disease by many years. It can occur in 
the absence of any underlying condition. The onset may be insidious 
with fatigue and pruritus being the only symptoms. Steatorrhea, weight 
loss, and symptoms of fat-­soluble deficiency can be present in some 
patients. Abdominal pain, fever, and jaundice may signify ascending 
cholangitis with bacterial infection complicating PSC. Diagnostic 
evaluation includes ultrasound studies, which may show dilated ducts. 
MR cholangiography can provide a detailed anatomy of the biliary 
tree and is more sensitive than an ultrasound. ERCP and PTC do not 
provide an advantage in diagnosing PSC but are useful, minimally 
invasive procedures that can be performed if the dominant stricture 
is identified and biliary obstruction can be improved by dilation and/
or stent placement. PTC can progress to cirrhosis with ultimate liver 
failure. Cholangiocarcinoma complicates PTC in 10–15% of adults. 
No medical therapy has been shown to improve outcomes in PSC; 
thus, treatment is supportive, focused on management of cholestasis. 
Liver transplantation is available as curative intervention once disease 
progresses to end-­stage liver disease.
Multiple biliary strictures have also been found in association with 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, congenital hepatic fibrosis, and autoso­
mal recessive polycystic kidney disease; following ischemic/hypoxic 
injury; and in immunodeficiency states.
Overlap syndrome with features of both sclerosing cholangitis and 
autoimmune hepatitis and autoimmune cholangitis with inflammation 
focused on small bile ducts has been described as variants of the dis­
ease. In those conditions, response to immunosuppressive therapy is 
better than in PSC but worse than in autoimmune hepatitis.
Infection. Infections are a common cause of jaundice in the child 
and adolescent. The most important step is to evaluate patients for 
synthetic liver failure and for signs of chronicity (portal hypertension, 
growth failure, risk factors for blood-­borne or sexually transmitted 
disorders). Patients with synthetic liver failure should be referred for 
urgent evaluation by the liver transplant center.
Diagnostic work-­up should focus on potentially treatable disorders 
(CMV, hepatitis B and C) and disorders preventable for contacts (hepa­
titis A). Screening for common community-­acquired disorders such as 
EBV, adenovirus, or enterovirus is optional. In the absence of an identi­
fiable viral agent, idiopathic acute hepatitis can be diagnosed only after 
the complete resolution of abnormal bilirubin and aminotransferases is 
documented. If abnormalities persist, a work-­up for chronic liver dis­
eases should be initiated.
Hepatitis A. Hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection is usually anicteric 
or asymptomatic in children younger than 5 years of age. However, 
in almost 66% of infected patients between 5 and 17 years of age, a 
symptomatic illness with jaundice develops. Two to 7 days before the 
onset of jaundice, there is a flulike illness with symptoms that can 
include malaise, headache, myalgias, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, 
right upper quadrant pain, and fever. Some children present with 
cough and coryza. The urine becomes dark, and jaundice and pale 
or acholic stools develop. Aminotransferase levels are 10–100 times 
normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by an HAV IgM study. Children 
generally recover within 2 weeks. Rarely fulminant hepatitis develops 
from HAV infection. Small percentages of patients develop either a 
relapsing or protracted cholestatic illness lasting up to 8 months. There 
is no carrier state or chronic illness.
HAV is an enterovirus of the picornavirus group. Transmission is 
by the fecal-­oral route, which may include contaminated water and 
food, especially shellfish. The greatest fecal excretion is before the 
onset of jaundice when the disease has not yet been recognized (Fig. 
18.6). Transmission rates are high in daycare centers and institutions 
with developmentally delayed children. The incubation period is 15–40 
days. After exposure, infection can be prevented in 85–90% of cases by 
giving intramuscular immunoglobulin to contacts within 2 weeks of 
exposure. Hepatitis A vaccine is available for long-­term prophylaxis.
Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus that is 
transmitted through blood products, shared needles, and sexual 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
338
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
contact; vertically during childbirth; and from occupational exposure. 
Infection in the newborn can be prevented by administration of 
hepatitis B immunoglobulin within 12 hours of birth and a series of 
three hepatitis B vaccinations. HBV infection is diagnosed mostly in 
children from countries with high prevalence of hepatitis B and no 
effective immunization or perinatal screening program. In developed 
countries, hepatitis B should be suspected in children born from 
mothers with pre-­existing hepatitis B or mothers with no prenatal 
care. Hepatitis B risk factors in adolescents include intravenous drug 
use and unprotected sex. The majority of children with hepatitis B are 
asymptomatic; few develop symptoms of acute or chronic hepatitis. 
Extrahepatic symptoms of arthritis, polyarteritis, urticaria, and 
nephritis from circulating immune complexes can be present. HBsAg 
is the first antigenic marker to appear; it disappears after 1–3 months 
TABLE 18.12  Differential Diagnosis of Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia in Childhood and 
Adolescence
*Many other drugs have been implicated in the etiology of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia; these are the most commonly cited.
Autoimmune Hepatitis
Anatomic/Obstructive
Gallstones
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Choledochal cyst
Bile duct stenosis
Anomalies of the choledocho-­pancreatico-­duodenal junction
Pancreatitis
Caroli disease
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Tumor
  Hepatic
  Biliary
  Pancreatic
  Duodenal
Infection
Non-A–Non-E hepatitis
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Epstein-­Barr virus
Cytomegalovirus
Human herpesvirus 6
Coronavirus (COVID-­19)
Herpes simplex virus
Varicella-­zoster virus
Enteroviruses
Measles
Parvovirus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Leptospirosis
Sepsis/shock
Liver abscess
Metabolic Disorders
Wilson disease
Cystic fibrosis
Cholesterol ester storage disease
Alpers syndrome
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Navajo neurohepatopathy
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
Drug or Toxin
Drugs*
Chlorpromazine
Hormones (estrogens, androgens)
Antibiotics (amoxicillin-­clavulanate, dicloxacillin, erythromycin, sulfonamides, 
tetracycline)
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate)
Acetaminophen
Alcohol
Halothane
Isoniazid
Antineoplastics
Toxins
Amanita phalloides (mushroom)
Insecticides
Carbon tetrachloride
Phosphorus
Herbal teas
Total Parenteral Nutrition
Intrahepatic Cholestasis
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3
Miscellaneous
Dubin-­Johnson syndrome
Rotor syndrome
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Hepatic venoocclusive disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Indian childhood cirrhosis (ICC) and ICC-­like disorders
Cardiovascular
Ischemia
Congestive heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
Oncologic
Leukemia
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Lymphoma
Graft versus host disease
Sickle cell disease with intrahepatic sickling
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Heat stroke
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
339
CHAPTER 18  Jaundice
if HBV resolves (Fig. 18.7). Hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-­HBs) is 
a protective antibody that develops after immunization or resolution 
of infection. In patients whose infections resolve, there is a window of 
2–6 weeks between the disappearance of HBsAg and the appearance 
of anti-­HBs. During this window, anti-­HBc or HBV DNA may be 
the only evidence of infection with HBV. HBeAg correlates with viral 
replication. HBV DNA is a measure of viral replication. Screening for 
infection is made with HBsAg and anti-­HBc. Although acute HBV 
infection is rarely a severe illness, fulminant hepatic failure develops 
in up to 1% of patients. Chronic infection, defined as the persistence 
of HBsAg for at least 6 months, occurs in 90% of infected neonates, 
25–50% of infected children younger than 5 years, and 5–10% of 
infected adults. Children with chronic active hepatitis B can be treated 
with antiviral agents.
Hepatitis C. Acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is often 
mild and usually subclinical. Jaundice is unusual. Chronic infection 
develops in 40–60% of affected children, in contrast with up to 80% of 
infected adults, and can progress to cirrhosis (Fig. 18.8). Screening for 
hepatitis uses anti-­HCV antibodies, and infection is confirmed via PCR 
for HCV RNA. Transmission may be parenteral due to intravenous 
drug use or exposure to blood, or sexual or vertical transmission is 
also possible. Elimination of hepatitis C is possible with directly acting 
antiviral agents. The treatment regimen is selected based on hepatitis C 
genotype. Highly effective antiviral therapies are available and can lead 
to complete eradication of hepatitis C virus in the majority of patients 
with hepatitis C.
Hepatitis D. Hepatitis D virus (HDV) infection can occur only 
in the presence of HBV as either a co-­infection or a superinfection. 
Its route of transmission is parenteral. As with HBV, it can become 
chronic. The diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of HDV antibody.
Hepatitis E. Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is similar to HAV in 
its manifestation and mode of transmission. It is a self-­limited illness 
with no chronic state. However, fulminant hepatitis may occur in up 
to 20% of cases. Serologic diagnosis can be made by finding antibodies 
to HEV.
Epstein-­Barr virus. Epstein-­Barr virus infection can mimic HAV, 
HBV, or HCV infection. Often there is an exudative pharyngitis and 
lymphadenopathy. Fatal hepatic necrosis can occur. This is rare, but it is 
of particular concern in the immunocompromised host. The diagnosis 
is confirmed by elevation of Epstein-­Barr virus PCR.
Cytomegalovirus hepatitis can be symptomatic particularly in 
infants. Hepatitis is usually self-­limited. Ganciclovir can be used as 
treatment in severe cases.
Other viruses. Other viruses including herpes simplex, human 
herpesvirus 6, parvovirus B19, coronavirus COVID-­19, and norovirus 
can also cause hepatitis, particularly in the immunosuppressed patient.
Wilson disease. Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder 
of copper metabolism. As a result of ATP7B variant, copper cannot 
be excreted and it accumulates in the liver, which causes hepatic 
steatosis and necrosis. Copper is then released into the circulation 
Anti-HAV (lgM)
Anti-HAV (lgG)
ALT
viremia
anorexia, malaise
? jaundice
fever, headache
fecal HAV
excretion
PHASES OF HAV INFECTION
INCUBATION
“SYMPTOMATIC”
CONVALESCENCE
2
4
6
8
10
12
Weeks post exposure
Fig. 18.6  Typical course of hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection. ALT, ala­
nine aminotransferase; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglob­
ulin M. (From Balistreri WF. Viral hepatitis. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1988;35:640.)
0
Infection
HBsAg
HBV viremia
HBeAg
Clinical illness
ALT
Anti-HBe
IgM anti-HBc
Total anti-HBc
Anti-HBs
4
8
12
16
20
24
Weeks
28
32
36
52
100
Fig. 18.7  Clinical, virologic, and serologic course of acute hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HBc, hepatitis B 
core; HBe, hepatitis B envelope; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBs, 
hepatitis B surface; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; IgM, immuno­
globulin M. (From Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Doug­
las, and Bennett’s Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases. 9th 
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:1552, Fig. 117.2.)
0
1
2
HCV
Jaundice
Symptoms
RNA
Normal or negative
(PCR)
Anti-HCV
ALT
3
Months
Time after exposure
Years
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 18.8  Typical clinical, virologic, and serologic course of chronic hep­
atitis C virus (HCV). ALT, alanine aminotransferase; PCR, polymerase 
chain reaction; RNA, ribonucleic acid. (From Hoofnagle JH. Chronic hep­
atitis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Medicine. 23rd ed. Philadel­
phia: Saunders; 2008.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
340
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 18.13  Classification of Autoimmune Hepatitis
Variable
Type 1 Autoimmune Hepatitis
Type 2 Autoimmune Hepatitis
Characteristic autoantibodies
Antinuclear antibody*
Antibody against liver-­kidney microsome type 1*
Smooth-­muscle antibody*
Antibody against liver cytosol type 1*
Antiactin antibody†
Antibody against liver-­kidney microsomal type 3
Autoantibodies against soluble liver antigen and liver-­
pancreas antigen‡
Atypical perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody
Geographic variation
Worldwide
Worldwide; rare in North America
Age at presentation
Any age
Predominantly childhood and young adulthood
Gender of patients
Female in ∼75% of cases
Female in ∼95% of cases
Association with other autoimmune diseases
Common
Common§
Clinical severity
Broad range, variable
Generally severe
Histopathologic features at presentation
Broad range, mild disease to cirrhosis
Generally advanced
Treatment failure
Infrequent
Frequent
Relapse after drug withdrawal
Variable
Common
Need for long-­term maintenance
Variable
∼100%
*The conventional method of detection is immunofluorescence.
†Tests for this antibody are rarely available in commercial laboratories.
‡This antibody is detected by an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay.
§Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy is seen only in patients with type 2 disease.
From Krawitt EL. Autoimmune hepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:54–66.
and is ultimately deposited in the central nervous system, kidneys, 
and cornea. The hepatic manifestation predominates in childhood; 
a neuropsychiatric manifestation becomes more common later, in 
adolescence and adulthood. The liver involvement may manifest 
as acute hepatitis, fulminant hepatic failure, chronic hepatitis, 
cirrhosis, or asymptomatic elevation of serum aminotransferases. 
Neurologic symptoms such as dysarthria, clumsiness, tremor, and 
mood disorders may or may not be present. In the kidney, the result is 
tubular dysfunction; in the cornea, the result is Kayser-­Fleischer rings. 
Hemolysis can be present as a result of copper toxicity. The diagnosis 
is supported by documenting a low serum ceruloplasmin level, high 
urinary copper excretion, and increased hepatic copper concentrations 
on liver biopsy. d-­Penicillamine or trientine to chelate copper can 
successfully treat Wilson disease. Dietary restriction of copper can aid 
treatment. Wilson disease requires lifelong therapy. Wilson disease is a 
potentially lethal treatable disorder that should be promptly diagnosed. 
Patients presenting with synthetic liver failure should be promptly 
referred for liver transplant evaluation.
Drugs and toxins. Numerous drugs and toxins are associated 
with hepatic injury (see Table 18.12) and should be considered in 
the evaluation of jaundice. The reaction can be idiosyncratic or dose 
related. In the latter case, this may be associated with either accidental 
or purposeful overdose. The manifestation can be that of acute hepatitis, 
fulminant hepatic failure, or cholestatic disease, depending on the drug.
Autoimmune hepatitis. Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a common 
cause of chronic liver injury (Table 18.13). The most frequent course is 
insidious with fatigue as a dominant symptom. Autoimmune hepatitis 
can present acutely with malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and 
jaundice. Autoimmune disorders such as arthritis, thyroiditis, vasculitis, 
nephritis, hemolytic anemia, or diabetes mellitus are often associated 
with AIH. AIH may be associated with inflammatory bowel disease. 
Laboratory studies demonstrate elevated aminotransferase levels, 
mild hyperbilirubinemia, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Antinuclear 
antibody, actin, or anti–smooth muscle antibody is present in type 1 
AIH, whereas anti–liver-­kidney microsomal antibody is found in type 
2 AIH (see Table 18.13).
Liver biopsy is required for diagnosis. Characteristic findings are 
plasma cells and an inflammatory infiltrate expanding the portal area 
and moderate to severe piecemeal necrosis. Treatment consists of ste­
roids and azathioprine.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
When evaluating a patient with jaundice, it is important to deter­
mine whether the condition represents a hepatobiliary problem, 
a hematologic disorder, or a systemic illness. If there is conju­
gated hyperbilirubinemia, it is essential to evaluate for severe 
dysfunction, as manifest by prolonged PT, hyperammonemia, 
encephalopathy, and/or hypoglycemia. Coagulopathy, encephalopathy, 
or hypoglycemia can signify severe hepatic failure, which mandates 
early intervention.
   
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
340.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Kelly DA, ed. Diseases of the Liver and Biliary System in Children. 4th ed. 
Oxford, West Sussex: UK: John Wiley & Sons; 2017.
Suchy FJ, Sokol RJ, Balistreri WF, eds. Liver Disease in Children. 5th ed. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2021.
Diagnostic Strategies
Gubernick JA, Rosenberg HK, Ilaslan H, et al. US approach to jaundice in 
infants and children. Radiographics. 2000;20:173–195.
Jensen MK, Biank VF, Moe DC, et al. HIDA, percutaneous transhepatic 
cholecysto-­cholangiography and liver biopsy in infants with persistent 
jaundice: can a combination of PTCC and liver biopsy reduce unnecessary 
laparotomy? Pediatr Radiol. 2012;42(1):32–39.
Pal S, Curley A, Stanworth SJ. Interpretation of clotting tests in the neonate. 
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2015;100(3):F270–F274.
Rosenthal P. Assessing liver function and hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn. 
Clin Chem. 1997;43:228–234.
Neonatal Jaundice
Lane E, Murray KF. Neonatal cholestasis. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2017;64(3):621–639.
Jacquemin E, Lykavieris P, Chaoui N, et al. Transient neonatal cholestasis: 
origin and outcome. J Pediatr. 1998;133:563–567.
Watchko JF. Vigintiphobia revisited. Pediatrics. 2005;115(6):1747–1753.
Alagille Syndrome, Primary Intrahepatic Cholestasis
Alissa FT, Jaffe R, Shneider BL. Update on progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2008;46(3):241–252.
Balistreri WF. Inherited disorders of bile acid transport or synthesis. Gastroen­
terol Hepatol. 2007;3(5):343–345.
Mitchell E, Gilbert M, Loomes KM. Alagille syndrome. Clin Liver Dis. 
2018;22(4):625–641.
α1-­Antitrypsin Deficiency
Patel D, Teckman JH. Alpha-­1-­Antitrypsin deficiency liver disease. Clin Liver 
Dis. 2018;22(4):643–655.
Biliary Atresia
McKiernan PJ, Baker AJ, Kelly DA. The frequency and outcome of biliary 
atresia in the UK and Ireland. Lancet. 2000;355:25–29.
Verkade HJ, Bezerra JA, Davenport M, et al. Biliary atresia and other 
cholestatic childhood diseases: advances and future challenges. J Hepatol. 
2016;65(3):631–642.
Crigler-­Najjar Syndromes
Fox IJ, Chowdhury JR, Kaufman SS, et al. Treatment of the Crigler-­Najjar 
syndrome type I with hepatocyte transplantation. N Engl J Med. 
1998;338:1422–1426.
Hardikar W. Genes for jaundice. J Paediatr Child Health. 1999;35:522–524.
Cystic Fibrosis
Shapira R, Hadzic N, Francavilla R, et al. Retrospective review of cystic fi­
brosis presenting as infantile liver disease. Arch Dis Child. 1999;81:125–
128.
Erythrocyte Enzyme Defects
Kaplan M, Hammerman C. Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: a potential 
complication of glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Clin Peri­
natol. 1998;25:575–590.
Nathan DG, Orkin SH, eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and 
Childhood. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998.
Gilbert Syndrome
Burchell B, Hume R. Molecular genetic basis of Gilbert’s syndrome. J Gastroen­
terol Hepatol. 1999;14:960–966.
Monaghan G, McLellan A, McGeehan A, et al. Gilbert’s syndrome is a 
contributory factor in prolonged unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia of the 
newborn. J Pediatr. 1999;134:441–446.
Lucey-­Driscoll Syndrome
Arias IM, Wolfson S, Lucey JF, et al. Transient familial neonatal hyperbiliru­
binemia. J Clin Invest. 1965;44:1442–1450.
Physiologic and Breast Milk Jaundice
Gartner LM, Lee K-­S. Jaundice in the breastfed infant. Clin Perinatol. 
1999;26:431–445.
Jaundice in Older Children and Adolescents
Balistreri WF. Liver disease in infancy and childhood. In: Schiff ER, Sorrell 
MF, Maddrey WC, eds. Schiff’s Diseases of the Liver. 8th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott-­Raven; 1999:1357–1512.
Perez A, Kogan-­Liberman D, Sheflin-­Findling S, et al. Presentation of severe 
acute respiratory syndrome-­coronavirus 2 infection as cholestatic jaundice 
in two healthy adolescents. J Pediatr. 2020;226:278–280. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.07.054.
Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
Neely J, von Scheven E. Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and autoim­
mune thrombocytopenia in childhood-­onset systemic lupus erythema­
tosus: updates on pathogenesis and treatment. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 
2018;30(5):498–505.
Autoimmune Hepatitis
Doycheva I, Watt KD, Gulamhusein AF. Autoimmune hepatitis: current and 
future therapeutic options. Liver Int. 2019;39(6):1002–1013.
Sokollik C, McLin VA, Vergani D, et al. Juvenile autoimmune hepatitis: 
a comprehensive review. J Autoimmun. 2018;95:69–76.
Drugs
Tillmann HL, Suzuki A, Barnhart HX, et al. Tools for causality assessment in 
drug-­induced liver disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2019;35(3):183–190.
Zimmerman HJ. Hepatotoxicity: The Adverse Effects of Drugs and Other Chem­
icals on the Liver. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
1999.
Gallstones
Rescorla FJ. Cholelithiasis, cholecystitis, and common bile duct stones. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 1997;9:276–282.
Hepatitis
Balistreri WF. Viral hepatitis. Pediatr Clin N Am. 1988;35:637–669.
Debray D, Cullufi P, Devictor D, et al. Liver failure in children with hepatitis 
A. Hepatology. 1997;26:1018–1022.
Duchon J, Zachariah P. TORCH infections. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42(1):77–103.
Kemmer NM, Miskovsky EP. Hepatitis A. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 
2000;14:605–615.
Lombardi A, Mondelli MU, ESCMID Study Group for Viral Hepatitis 
(ESGVH). Hepatitis C: is eradication possible? Liver Int. 2019;39(3):
416–426.
Rovegno M, Vera M, Ruiz A, et al. Current concepts in acute liver failure. 
Ann Hepatol. 2019;18(4):543–552.
Ryder SD, Beckingham IJ. Acute hepatitis. BMJ. 2001;322:151–153.
Trepo C, Chan HL, Lok A. Hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet. 
2014;384(9959):2053–2063.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Mieli-­Vergani G, Vergani D. Sclerosing cholangitis in children and adolescents. 
Clin Liver Dis. 2016;20(1):99–111.
Roberts EA. Primary sclerosing cholangitis in children. J Gastroenterol Hepa­
tol. 1999;14:588–593.
Williamson KD, Chapman RW. Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Dig Dis. 
2014;32(4):438–445.
Wilson Disease
Fernando M, van Mourik I, Wassmer E, et al. Wilson disease in children 
and adolescents. Arch Dis Child. 2020;105(5):499–505.
Wilson DC, Phillips MJ, Cox DW. Severe hepatic Wilson’s disease in 
preschool-­aged children. J Pediatr. 2000;137:719–722.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
