306
Hepatomegaly can occur as a feature of primary liver disease or as a result 
of systemic disorders such as congenital anomalies, inborn errors of 
metabolism, and perinatal or postnatal infections (Tables 17.1 and 17.2). 
Common symptoms of hepatic dysfunction, such as fatigue, fever of 
unknown origin, pruritus, failure to thrive, confusion, change in mental 
status, and/or diarrhea, are nonspecific. Hepatomegaly and jaundice are 
frequently the findings that lead to an evaluation for liver disease. Causes 
of hepatomegaly associated with jaundice are discussed in Chapter 18.
ASSESSMENT OF THE LIVER
An accurate assessment of liver size is an important initial step. Con­
siderable patience may be necessary to obtain the required information. 
The patient should lie down in a supine position with the knees flexed. 
The abdominal muscles should be relaxed as much as possible. The pro­
vider should become familiar with the sensation of pressure over the 
abdominal wall in the lower abdomen in order to detect the difference 
palpating while transitioning over the liver edge. The examiner should 
also be sure that the lower border of a massively enlarged liver is not 
missed by failure to palpate below the umbilicus. The lower edge of the 
liver should be determined by palpation just lateral to the right rectus 
muscle. Careful palpation of the liver edge along the lower border is 
important as enlargement of the liver can be asymmetrical in chronic 
cirrhosis, such as in Budd-­Chiari syndrome and with liver tumors.
The lower edge of the liver is usually palpable in normal subjects 
with deep inspiration when it moves downward 1–3 cm. In the new­
born, the liver edge may be palpable 2–3 cm below the right costal mar­
gin, but that distance is usually less than 2 cm by 4–6 months of age. In 
older children, the liver edge is usually not more than 1 cm below the 
right costal margin except on deep inspiration. The liver may be nor­
mally palpable in the midline several centimeters below the xiphoid.
Palpation should always be combined with percussion of the upper 
and lower boundaries of the liver. The upper edge of the liver is deter­
mined through percussion passing downward from the nipple line. 
The examiner may also define the lower edge through light percussion, 
moving upward from the umbilicus toward the costal margin. The 
anterior span of the liver is the difference between the highest and low­
est points of hepatic dullness in the right midclavicular line.
In the scratch test, the stethoscope is placed over the right lower 
costal area. The examiner then scratches the skin of the abdomen and 
uses auscultation to detect the lower liver edge by using the difference 
in sound transmission over solid liver and hollow intestine.
It is important to remember that physical examination has limita­
tions. It may be difficult to detect the borders of the liver in patients with 
morbid obesity, ascites, pleural effusion, or extensive surgical scars, or 
resisting exam. Physical examination determines only the external 
­borders of the liver and does not truly measure liver volume. A down­
ward, tonguelike projection of the right lobe—the Riedel lobe—is a 
normal anatomic variant that is more commonly found in girls. It is 
a common error to express liver size and to define hepatomegaly on 
the basis of only the liver edge felt below the right costal margin. The 
liver may be displaced downward in patients with pulmonary disease, 
particularly with hyperaeration of the lungs. It may be difficult in some 
cases to distinguish masses arising from the right kidney or adrenal 
gland from an enlarged liver.
Liver size changes with age in proportion to the body size 
(Table 17.3). At birth, the liver constitutes approximately 4% of body 
weight and normally occupies a larger portion of the abdominal cavity 
than it does later in life. Liver weight increases twofold by the end of the 
first year of life, triples by the age of 3 years, and is increased sixfold by 
the age of 9 years. In the adult, liver weight is approximately 12 times 
that in the neonate.
The consistency and surface of the liver should be noted, includ­
ing whether the liver edge is sharp or rounded and whether the liver 
surface is soft, hard, or irregular. The liver edge is normally soft, fairly 
sharp, and nontender. Livers enlarged because of congestive heart fail­
ure or because of acute infiltration by inflammatory cells or tumor are 
firm, have a somewhat rounded edge, and have smooth surfaces. In 
cirrhosis, the liver is hard and may have an irregular surface and edge. 
Tenderness generally suggests an acute process, as rapid distention of 
the liver capsule causes pain.
Hepatomegaly may resolve rapidly when congestive heart failure is 
controlled, biliary obstruction is relieved, diabetes is better controlled, 
or massive liver cell necrosis leads to collapse of the liver tissue.
History and Physical Examination
Once the presence of hepatomegaly is established, the provider should 
focus on the aspects of the history and physical examination that 
will direct the diagnostic evaluation (Tables 17.4 and 17.5). Review 
of systems should focus on growth, achievement of developmental 
milestones, changes in mental status, vomiting, diarrhea, fevers, pru­
ritus, easy bruising, bleeding, urine output, and abdominal distention. 
Obtaining a detailed family and travel history is important, as many 
conditions leading to hepatomegaly are genetic in nature or are a result 
of infections. The possibility of intentional or accidental drug intake 
along with herbal or over-­the-­counter supplements should always be 
entertained. On physical examination, it is important to determine 
the presence or absence of jaundice, splenomegaly, ascites, change in 
mental status, tremors, neurologic abnormalities, fever, signs of mal­
nutrition, prominent vascular patterns on the anterior abdominal wall 
(caput medusae, spider angiomas), arterial hypertension, hypotension, 
bruising, petechiae, hemangiomas, pallor, obesity, renal enlargement, 
masses outside of the liver, lymphadenopathy, muscle weakness, cya­
nosis, heart murmurs, tachypnea, tachycardia, abnormal eye exam 
(cataracts, Kayser-­Fleischer ring), bone and joint abnormalities, and 
dysmorphic features. A pelvic exam in sexually active females may 
detect signs of a sexually transmitted infection, which can lead to peri-­
hepatitis (formerly Fitz-­Hugh–­Curtis) syndrome.
Hepatomegaly
Grzegorz W. Telega
17
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
307
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
TABLE 17.1  Causes of Hepatomegaly in Infants and Children
Infection and Inflammation
Viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, C, D, E; EBV; adenovirus, echovirus, TORCH)
Autoimmune hepatitis
Sepsis
Perinatal infections
Allograft rejection
Graft versus host disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Systemic granulomatous disorders with hepatic involvement
Sarcoid
Tuberculosis
Hepatic abscess (bacterial and parasitic)
Parasitic infection
Visceral larva migrans
Schistosomiasis
Leishmoniasis
Malaria
Liver flukes
Kupffer cell hyperplasia
Macrophage activation syndrome
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Biliary Obstruction
Biliary atresia
Choledochal cysts
Stricture of common bile duct
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Infiltration
Extramedullary hematopoiesis
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Thalassemias
Metastatic tumors
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Storage/Metabolic Disease
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Wilson disease
Infants of diabetic mothers
Glycogen storage disease
Galactosemia
Tyrosinemia
Cystic fibrosis
Gaucher disease
Niemann-­Pick disease
Gangliosidoses
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Mitochondrial hepatic disorders including DNA depletion syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Amyloidosis
Hepatic porphyrias
Expansion of Extracellular Matrix
Cirrhosis
Fibrocystic disease (congenital hepatic fibrosis)
Steatosis
Malnutrition
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (obesity)
Cystic fibrosis
Parenteral nutrition
Diabetes mellitus
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Galactosemia
Wolman disease
Cholesterol ester storage disease
Mitochondrial hepatopathies
β-­Oxidation defects
Medication toxicity (tetracycline, valproic acid)
Hepatic Malignancy/Tumor (see Table 17.2)
Primary or metastatic
Vascular Congestion
Congestive heart failure
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Venoocclusive disease (VOD): radiation, high-­dose chemotherapy, stem cell 
transplant, bush tea, pyrrolizidine alkaloids, familial VOD with immunode­
ficiency
Cystic Disease
Fibrocystic disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Caroli syndrome
Isolated polycystic liver disease
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
308
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 17.2  Hepatic Tumor Characteristics
Clinical 
Findings
Age
Radiology 
Findings
Laboratory 
Findings
Biopsy Findings
Therapy
Prognosis
Hepatic heman­
gioma (focal, 
multifocal, and 
diffuse)
Screening for 
cutaneous 
lesions, mass, 
or hemody­
namic effects
Generally, under 
1 yr of age, up 
to 3 yr of age
Focal, multifocal, or 
diffuse vascular 
tumor; larger mass 
with necrosis, 
hemorrhage, and/
or calcifications
Decreased T3, 
T4; normal 
AFP
Capillary-­like vascular 
proliferation lined by 
plump endothelial cells. 
No significant cytologic 
atypia, GLUT-­1 positive 
in multifocal and diffuse
Observation, 
surgery, corti­
costeroids or 
propranolol
Favorable, most 
involute, those with 
cardiac failure and 
hypothyroidism often 
require treatment
Focal nodular 
hyperplasia
Bleeding, tor­
sion, hepatic 
mass
Adolescents 
10–18 yr, post-­
chemotherapy 
for other 
­malignancy
Well-­demarcated 
mass with central 
scar
Normal AFP
Central scar with portal 
tracts and bile ductal 
proliferation, often 
damaged or abnormal 
vessel associated with 
scar, maplike pattern of 
glutamine synthetase 
staining
Observation, 
surgery
Favorable
Hepatic 
­adenoma
Hepatic mass, 
often found 
incidentally
Adolescent late 
teens
Well-­demarcated 
mass, heteroge­
neous appearance, 
intratumoral 
hemorrhage is 
common
Normal AFP
Usually solitary mass 
consisting of benign 
hepatocytes with iso­
lated (unpaired) arteries, 
serum amyloid–associ­
ated protein positive
Observation, 
surgery
Favorable, chance of 
hemorrhage
Mesenchymal 
hamartoma
Liver mass, 
more often 
right lobe
Within the first 
2 yr
Cystic mass in right 
lobe (75%)
Normal to 
slightly 
elevated 
AFP
Cystic tumor with a 
mixture of loose edema­
tous/myxoid tissue with 
entrapped bile ducts and 
hepatocytes
Surgery
Favorable. Local recur­
rence without com­
plete resection, small 
number associated 
with undifferentiated 
embryonal sarcoma 
(UES)
Hepatoblastoma
Liver mass, 
often with 
weight 
loss and 
hematologic 
paraneoplastic 
syndromes
70% by age 2 
and 90% by 
age 5
Solid and nodular 
but can show 
cystic degenera­
tion/hemorrhage 
or necrosis. Some 
with calcifications
Elevated AFP 
in 90% of 
cases
Various morphology either 
pure epithelial or mixed 
epithelial and mesen­
chymal components; 
often with necrosis and 
hemorrhage
Chemotherapy 
and surgery
Quite variable based 
on risk factors 
(staging, histology, 
and AFP level)
Hepatocellular 
carcinoma
Liver mass
In endemic HBV 
areas can be 
under 10 yr, 
most cases 
after 10 yr of 
age; HCV as 
risk factor
Can be solitary or 
multifocal solid 
lesions often with 
necrosis and hem­
orrhage. Fibrola­
mellar variant with 
central scar
Elevated AFP 
in two-­thirds 
of cases
Various pattern and 
subtypes, loss of portal 
tracts, loss of reticulin 
network, mild to marked 
cellular atypia
Surgery, 
transarterial 
chemoem­
bolization 
(TACE), che­
motherapy
Unfavorable. Overall 
5-­yr survival ∼24%. 
Better prognosis in 
fibrolamellar variant 
∼80%
Biliary tract 
rhabdomyosar­
coma
Obstructive 
jaundice
Under 5 yr of age Hilar mass with 
dilated biliary tree
Obstructive 
cholestasis, 
normal to 
slightly 
elevated 
AFP
One of two subtypes with 
intrabiliary growth and 
projections with myxoid 
stroma with cambium 
layer
Chemotherapy, 
radiation 
­therapy, and 
surgery
Favorable. Event-­free 
survival of 60–90%
Undifferentiated 
embryonal 
sarcoma
Liver mass, 
more often 
right lobe
5–10 yr of age
Solid and cystic 
areas, more often 
in the right lobe
Normal to 
slightly 
elevated 
AFP
Variable mesenchymal 
components with large 
cystic and myxoid areas 
with hemorrhage and 
necrosis
Chemotherapy 
and surgery
Historically, unfavor­
able, but recent stud­
ies suggest improved 
outcomes
AFP, α-­fetoprotein; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:727, Table 66.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
309
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying the enlargement of 
the liver are complex and heterogeneous. Hepatomegaly may reflect 
proliferation or enlargement or malfunction of one or more com­
ponent structures of the liver, including liver parenchyma (hepato­
cytes), bile ducts (cholangiocytes, cysts), the reticuloendothelial 
system (Kupffer cells), interstitial tissue (stellate cells, collagen), 
blood (including hematopoietic cells), and blood vessels (endothe­
lial cells). The liver also increases in size as a result of hepatic tumors, 
benign cysts, and infiltration of inflammatory or malignant cells.
The liver is particularly susceptible to injury not only from drugs 
and other exogenous toxins but also from endotoxins that arise after 
the activation of inflammatory cells and the production of cytokines. 
Inborn errors of metabolism can be responsible for disturbances of liver 
structure and function and can produce hepatomegaly. The liver can 
be enlarged because of storage of glycogen, lipid, or glycolipids within 
the hepatocyte. In glycogen storage disease, the cytoplasm of enlarged 
hepatocytes is filled with dense pools of glycogen particles that dis­
place other organelles. Steatosis is a frequent finding in diabetic or 
obese patients and is characterized via ultrasound showing large lipid 
inclusions, which may almost entirely fill the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. 
In lysosomal storage disorders such as Gaucher disease and Niemann-­
Pick disease, there is marked involvement of Kupffer cells with lyso­
somal inclusions characteristic of each disorder. Inclusions may also be 
present within hepatocytes; they contribute to hepatomegaly.
In many cases of biliary obstruction, such as biliary atresia, there 
may be significant hepatic enlargement, related in part to fibrosis and 
portal tract edema. As part of the liver’s response to biliary obstruc­
tion, there may also be marked proliferation of small bile ductules that 
contribute to liver mass. Other conditions in which this could occur 
include choledochal cysts and common bile duct strictures.
The liver is the largest reticuloendothelial organ, and Kupffer cells, 
which are intensely phagocytic cells that line the sinusoids, constitute 
15% of all the cells in the liver. In septicemia, hepatitis, and several 
other inflammatory conditions, hepatomegaly may result from prolif­
eration and hyperplasia of Kupffer cells. Kupffer cells also contribute to 
hepatomegaly in lysosomal storage disorders.
Resident stellate cells produce collagen, leading to fibrosis and even­
tually cirrhosis in response to injury of the liver from numerous causes, 
including infection, drug toxicity, and biliary obstruction. Hepatocel­
lular injury activates stellate cells leading to the production of collagen 
and fibrosis. Fibrosis is a long-­standing process, which may evolve over 
time leading to complete disruption of hepatic architecture and cir­
rhosis. Although an end-­stage cirrhotic liver is usually small, it may 
be enlarged during the early stages of evolution. Congenital hepatic 
fibrosis is an inherited malformation of the liver characterized by the 
presence of broad bands of fibrous tissue and numerous distorted bile 
ducts and vascular structures. All of these abnormal components con­
tribute to marked enlargement and hardening of the liver.
About 15% of the liver is occupied by sinusoidal and vascular struc­
tures. The liver is capable of rapid and massive enlargement in associ­
ation with increased venous pressure. Distention of hepatic sinusoids 
can be present in congestive heart failure, constrictive pericarditis, or 
obstruction of hepatic venous outflow resulting from thrombosis or 
endothelial damage from drug toxicity (venoocclusive disease).
Since the liver serves as a secondary site of hematopoiesis, hepato­
megaly can be caused by extramedullary hematopoiesis, particularly 
in young infants. Extramedullary hematopoiesis can be the result of 
chronic inflammation, hemolysis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocyto­
sis (HLH), or bone marrow failure.
Hepatomegaly can occur as a result of cellular infiltration by inflam­
matory cells. Lymphocytic infiltrate is present in various forms of acute 
and chronic viral hepatitis, or in autoimmune hepatitis. Plasma cells are 
a prominent part of the infiltrate in autoimmune disease. Macrophages 
may be seen, particularly in reaction to liver cell necrosis. The increase 
in liver size resulting from cellular infiltration may be balanced by loss 
of liver cell mass from liver cell necrosis or apoptosis.
Cellular infiltration of the liver may also occur in malignant disor­
ders such as leukemia. A number of intraabdominal malignancies such 
as neuroblastoma may metastasize to the liver, producing hepatomegaly.
A variety of space-­occupying lesions can lead to hepatomegaly. 
Cysts, either isolated or communicating with the biliary tract; tumors 
intrinsic to the liver; and hepatic abscesses can all be associated with 
hepatomegaly. Each must be differentiated by clinical features and 
defined more precisely by imaging studies.
EVALUATION OF THE CHILD WITH HEPATOMEGALY
Laboratory Studies
Laboratory assessment of liver function is essential (Table 17.6). 
Because of the large functional reserve of the liver, hepatomegaly may 
be the only clinical indication of liver disease. The onset of symptoms 
such as jaundice and bleeding may be delayed long after laboratory 
TABLE 17.3  Normal Liver Span in Infants 
and Children
Age
Span (cm)
Preterm infant
4–5
Full-­term infant
5–6.5
1–5 yr
6–7
5–10 yr
7–9
10–16 yr
8–10
TABLE 17.4  Historical Features in the 
Diagnostic Evaluation of Hepatomegaly or 
Hepatosplenomegaly
Symptom
Diagnosis
Failure to thrive
Glycogen storage disease (infancy) types I, III, IV, IX, X
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Organic acidemias
Wolman disease
Cystic fibrosis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Cholestatic liver disease
Fever
Acute and chronic hepatitis
Systemic illness
Hepatic abscess
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Viral infection
Diarrhea
Wolman disease
Cholestatic liver disease
Peculiar odor
Organic acidemias
Hepatic failure
Neurologic/psychi­
atric symptoms in 
older child
Wilson disease
Porphyria
Hyperammonemia (urea cycle disorders, organic 
acidemias)
Drug intoxication/toxicity
Hypoglycemia (glycogen storage disease, organic 
acidemias, β-­oxidation defects)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
310
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
TABLE 17.5  Physical Signs in the Differential Diagnosis of Hepatomegaly
Sign
Differential Diagnosis
Asymmetric hepatomegaly
Tumor, cyst, abscess
Abdominal mass
Congenital hepatic fibrosis/polycystic kidneys
Extrahepatic tumors (neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor)
Choledochal cysts
Adenoma
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatic bruit
Hemangioendothelioma
Splenomegaly
Congenital infection
Systemic infection (viral, bacterial, fungal)
Cirrhosis
Portal hypertension
Lysosomal storage disease
Lymphoma
Cutaneous hemangioma or 
telangiectasia
Hemangioendothelioma
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Cirrhosis (vascular spiders)
Coarse/dysmorphic facial 
features
Mucopolysaccharidosis
GM1 gangliosidosis
Glycoproteinoses (sialidosis, mucolipidosis II)
Disorders of protein glycosylation
Glycogen storage disease type I
Alagille syndrome
Zellweger syndrome
Episodic acute encepha­
lopathy/coma
Disorders of fatty acid β-­oxidation
Hyperammonemia (urea cycle disorders, organic 
acidemias)
Mitochondrial disorders
Some urea cycle disorders (arginosuccinate 
lyase deficiency)
Drug toxicity
Skeletal deformities
Sialidosis (dysostosis multiplex)
Mucopolysaccharidoses (dysostosis multiplex)
Gaucher disease (marrow infiltration, deformi­
ties, fractures)
Mucolipidosis II (restricted joint mobility)
Skin findings
Papular acrodermatitis
Hepatitis B
Eczematoid rash
Histiocytosis
Sign
Differential Diagnosis
Neurodegeneration
Mucopolysaccharidoses (types IH, II, III)
Gaucher disease types II and III
GM2 gangliosidosis
Niemann-­Pick disease types A, B, C
Glycoproteinoses
Mucolipidoses
Disorders of protein glycosylation
Peroxisomal disorders (Zellweger syndrome)
Mitochondrial disorders
Hypotonia
Glycogen storage disease type II
Peroxisomal disorders (Zellweger ­syndrome)
Mitochondrial disorders
Mucolipidoses
Malnutrition
Cystic fibrosis
Steatosis
Virilization
Hepatoblastoma
Nonalcoholic fatty liver
Eye findings
Cataracts
Galactosemia
Kayser-­Fleischer rings
Wilson disease
Telangiectasias
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Iritis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Chorioretinitis
Congenital or acquired infections
Cherry red spot
Lysosomal storage diseases
GM2 gangliosidosis
Niemann-­Pick disease type B
Posterior embryotoxon
Alagille syndrome
Liver tenderness
Acute hepatitis (viral, toxic, autoimmune)
Congestion (heart failure, hepatic vein obstruc­
tion)
Trauma (subcapsular hematoma, fracture, 
laceration)
Abscess (hepatic, subphrenic)
Cholangitis
Perihepatitis
evidence of disturbed liver function is evident. Patients with pro­
gressive liver disease, such as chronic viral hepatitis, Wilson disease, 
or α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, may be asymptomatic for years or even 
decades. The pattern of liver test abnormalities may be helpful in sug­
gesting whether the patient’s liver disease is primarily hepatocellular 
or biliary in nature. Laboratory studies, particularly when followed 
sequentially, may provide information about the synthetic, exocrine, 
metabolic (glucose, amino acids, lipids, detoxification), and endocrine 
(hyperaldosteronemia, vitamin D activation) liver function. Labora­
tory data provide input into several prognostic models used in assess­
ment of the mortality risk and in evaluation for liver transplant.
All patients with hepatomegaly should have a complete meta­
bolic panel (sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, creatinine, 
BUN, aspartate aminotransferase [AST], serum alanine amino­
transferase [ALT], albumin, glucose, lactate dehydrogenase [LDH], 
alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, total protein), fractionated bili­
rubin (conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin), CBC, UA, prothrom­
bin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and fibrinogen. 
D-­dimers should also be tested in patients with suspected sepsis or 
thrombosis.
Hepatocellular Injury
Serum ALT and AST are indicators of hepatocellular injury. The amino­
transferases may be elevated as a result of hepatocyte necrosis induced 
by a number of infectious, inflammatory, or metabolic disorders or by 
drug toxicity. ALT is present in much lower concentration in most tissues 
other than the liver. AST is less specific, as it is present not only in the 
liver but also in muscle and the brain. Some patients with a systemic viral 
illness such as influenza may have acute rhabdomyolysis, which leads to 
a very marked increase in serum AST. Hemolysis may also lead to an 
elevation of this enzyme. Although in most cases of liver disease there 
is some elevation of aminotransferase values, significant liver disease 
(hepatic steatosis, hepatitis C infection, congenital hepatic fibrosis, and 
many metabolic disorders) may be present even when these test results 
are normal. Aminotransferases do not necessarily reflect liver function 
and may have little correlation with the specific diagnosis or prognosis.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
311
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
Biliary Injury
Alkaline phosphatase and γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) are expressed 
in the bile ducts. Their elevation can occur in both intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic cholestasis. Alkaline phosphatase is found in bile ducts 
and also in several other tissues, including bone, small intestine, pla­
centa, and kidney. Because children have a significant proportion of 
serum alkaline phosphatase activity originating from bone, this test 
may be of less value in the assessment of pediatric liver disease. Even 
minor bone trauma or vitamin D deficiency can lead to elevation of 
alkaline phosphatase. The tissue origin of alkaline phosphatase can be 
determined by fractionation of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes. The 
normal newborn may have very high levels of GGT, up to 10 times the 
upper limit of normal for adults. Values of GGT for premature babies 
may be higher than those for term infants during the first weeks after 
birth. In comparison with other standard serum assays, GGT may be 
the most sensitive indicator of biliary disease, but it does not determine 
a specific diagnosis. The highest levels of GGT are usually found in 
biliary obstruction. GGT levels may be paradoxically normal or low in 
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis types 1 and 2 and in some 
inborn errors of bile acid metabolism.
Exocrine Function
Disposal of bilirubin requires conjugation with glucuronic acid in the 
hepatocyte, excretion across the canalicular membrane, and unob­
structed passage through the biliary tree. As a result, the serum con­
centration of conjugated bilirubin represents a test of exocrine liver 
function. Despite the diagnostic value of conjugated bilirubin, it is 
important to remember that the pathophysiologic consequences of 
cholestasis are more directly related to bile acid excretion. Insufficient 
bile acid concentration in the intestinal lumen leads to fat malabsorp­
tion, fat-­soluble vitamin deficiencies, and steatorrhea. Analysis of 
serum bile acid levels, vitamin A, 25-­hydroxy vitamin D, vitamin E, 
PT/international normalized ratio (INR), and measurement of fecal fat 
may further define the extent of exocrine dysfunction (see Chapter 18).
Synthetic Function
Albumin is the principal serum protein synthesized by the liver and 
has a half-­life in serum of approximately 20 days. A decrease in serum 
albumin concentration may result from decreased production by the 
liver. Serum albumin may also be low because of loss into the urine or 
the gastrointestinal tract.
The liver plays a central role in the production of coagulation 
factors. The PT and PTT are easily available tests of liver synthetic 
capacity once vitamin K deficiency has been excluded. All the clotting 
factors except factor VIII are exclusively made by the hepatocytes. The 
half-­life of several clotting factors is short (factor VII has a half-­life 
of 3–5 hours), and so the PT rapidly reflects changes in hepatic syn­
thetic function and serves as a prognostic indicator in patients with 
fulminant hepatic failure. Caution should be used in interpreting a pro­
longed PT or PTT in the setting of sepsis as disseminated intravascular 
coagulation may cause abnormalities.
Metabolic Function
Many tissues can break down glycogen or produce glucose-­6-­phosphate 
via the gluconeogenesis pathway for local energy production inside the 
cell. The liver is the only organ that can release glucose into circulation. 
Hypoglycemia may be a feature of hepatic failure, glycogen storage dis­
eases, mitochondrial diseases, fatty acid β-­oxidation defects, pyruvate 
metabolism defects, Krebs cycle and gluconeogenesis defects, organic 
acidurias, or hereditary fructose intolerance. Blood glucose level deter­
mination is essential in the evaluation of hepatomegaly, particularly in 
patients with alterations of mental status. In most conditions, hypogly­
cemia is associated with ketosis and lactic acidosis. Hypoglycemia in 
the absence of or with low levels of ketones in the urine strongly sug­
gests a fatty acid β-­oxidation defect or a mitochondrial disorder. Blood 
gas (and anion gap), serum amino and urinary organic acids, lactate, 
pyruvate, acylcarnitines, acylglycines, cortisol, insulin, thyroid func­
tion, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) as well as the ratios 
of total and esterified to free serum carnitine concentrations should be 
determined in follow-­up studies.
The urea cycle is a series of enzymatic reactions converting highly 
toxic ammonia into less toxic urea. Ammonia is a ubiquitous by-­
product of amino acid metabolism. The urea cycle takes place exclu­
sively in the liver. In liver disease, impairment of the urea cycle can be 
caused by destruction of hepatocytes, metabolic block at the level of the 
urea cycle, organic acid catabolism defects, or mitochondrial electron 
transport defects. Shunting of portal blood in cirrhosis or in congeni­
tal portosystemic shunts permits large amounts of ammonia and other 
toxins to bypass the liver and reach the systemic circulation directly.
Hepatomegaly with an acute change in mental status should raise the 
possibility of a serious metabolic condition. Since both hypoglycemia 
and hyperammonemia can lead to severe and irreversible brain damage, 
correction of these abnormalities should be considered an emergency.
The liver is the main site of biosynthesis and processing of cho­
lesterol, lipids, and lipoproteins. Liver disease may profoundly affect 
serum lipid and lipoprotein concentrations. In cholestatic liver disease 
there may be extreme elevations of free cholesterol and phospholipids. 
These abnormalities are accompanied by the presence of an abnormal 
low-­density lipoprotein fraction called lipoprotein X. In end-­stage liver 
disease and acute liver failure, serum cholesterol may be low.
TABLE 17.6  Helpful Laboratory 
Abnormalities in the Evaluation of 
Hepatomegaly
Vacuolated white blood cells in 
peripheral smear
Wolman disease
GM1 gangliosidosis
Neutropenia
Glycogen storage disease type I
Organic acidurias
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Sepsis
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Portal hypertension (hypersplenism)
Hemolytic anemia
Wilson disease
Autoimmune hepatitis
Hemoglobinopathy (with extramedullary 
hematopoiesis)
Hypophosphatemia
Glycogen storage disease type I
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Hypertriglyceridemia
Glycogen storage disease type I
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver
Elevated creatinine
Disorders of fatty acid β-­oxidation
Reye syndrome
Congenital hepatic fibrosis/autosomal 
recessive polycystic kidney disease
Renal tubular dysfunction
Tyrosinemia
Glycogen storage disease type I
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Wilson disease
Galactosemia
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
312
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
Enzymatic analysis of cultured lymphocytes or hepatic tissue may 
aid in the diagnosis. Genetic diagnosis is possible in many of these 
disorders.
Extrahepatic Involvement
High levels of unconjugated bilirubin suggest the possibility of a con­
current hemolytic disorder or may reflect inborn errors of conjugation 
(see Chapter 18).
Neutropenia can be associated with splenomegaly/hypersplen­
ism from portal hypertension, glycogen storage disease type Ib, 
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, HLH, sepsis, leukemia, and 
neuroblastoma.
Renal involvement can be reflected by elevated creatinine, inability 
to concentrate urine, or Fanconi syndrome. This could raise suspicion 
for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, tyrosinemia, glyco­
gen storage disease type Ib, Wilson disease, hereditary fructose intol­
erance, or galactosemia.
Imaging Studies
Ultrasonography is the most useful initial imaging modality. It can 
assess gallbladder size, detect gallstones and sludge in the bile ducts 
and gallbladder, demonstrate ascites, and define cystic or obstruc­
tive dilatation of the biliary tree. Extrahepatic anomalies may also be 
detected. Mass lesions in the liver, including tumors, cysts, abscesses, 
vascular malformations, and hematomas, can be defined. Abnormal 
echogenicity may suggest diffuse parenchymal liver disease includ­
ing fatty infiltration or fibrosis. Doppler studies may be used to dif­
ferentiate between vascular and nonvascular structures and potential 
thrombi. Portal venous flow may be decreased or reversed, which sug­
gests portal hypertension.
A plain film of the abdomen is not the study of choice for evaluation 
of hepatomegaly. If performed, it may support the diagnosis of hep­
atomegaly if seen. Air may be noted within the portal venous system, 
a late finding in bowel infarction and necrosis, intraabdominal sep­
sis, or complicated inflammatory bowel disease. Air may also be pres­
ent within the biliary tree, especially in patients who have undergone 
recent biliary tract surgery or who have an enterobiliary fistula. Coarse 
calcifications may be found in hepatoblastoma and laminated calcifica­
tions in hepatocellular carcinoma. Subacute abscesses and echinococ­
cal cysts may also contain calcium and be seen on a plain film.
CT with contrast provides useful information in differentiation of 
liver masses. CT angiograms and/or venograms are useful in defining 
the anatomy of vascular anomalies. Disadvantages of CT scans are the 
frequent need for sedation, potential renal toxicity of contrast, and 
risks from ionizing radiation.
MRI provides additional information about liver anatomy, particu­
larly in differentiation of liver tumors. Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA) may be of value in assessing the vascularity of masses within 
the liver. Magnetic resonance cholangiography is commonly used to 
assess the biliary tract with visualization of details previously possible 
only with transhepatic or endoscopic retrograde cholangiography.
Hepatic scintigraphy can be useful for assessing the liver paren­
chyma and biliary tree. The most frequently performed study is hepato­
biliary scintigraphy performed with a technetium 99m (99mTc)–labeled 
iminodiacetic acid derivative. Biliary imaging with this technique pro­
vides information about patency of the biliary tract and gallbladder. 
99mTc–sulfur colloid scanning may be used in assessing a patient with a 
mass. 99mTc–sulfur colloid accumulates in Kupffer cells. Most malignant 
tumors, hemangiomas, abscesses, and cysts lack Kupffer cells and appear 
as “cold” spots on these scans. In contrast, a nodule taking up the iso­
tope suggests a benign lesion containing Kupffer cells, such as a regen­
erative nodule of cirrhosis, fatty change, or focal nodular hyperplasia.
Liver Biopsy
Percutaneous, transjugular, or open-­liver biopsy is one of the most 
important diagnostic tests in evaluating a child with hepatomegaly. 
Liver biopsy is used to establish a diagnosis and score severity of dis­
ease in chronic viral hepatitis, drug-­induced liver disease, autoim­
mune hepatitis, and various metabolic disorders. Abnormal material 
in hepatocytes or Kupffer cells and viral inclusions suggest storage 
disorders. Electron microscopy and immunohistochemical methods 
may aid in identification and localization of these abnormalities. Liver 
tissue may also be frozen for later biochemical or molecular analysis.
SPECIFIC ISSUES IN THE DIAGNOSIS AND 
TREATMENT OF HEPATOMEGALY
The clinical challenge in the evaluation of hepatomegaly is that there 
is a very broad differential with many relatively rare conditions. Tables 
17.5 and 17.6 list some of the physical signs and laboratory abnormal­
ities that may be associated with hepatomegaly. Table 17.7 lists a step­
wise approach for devising the differential diagnosis and directing the 
investigation. The first goal is to identify potentially life-­threatening 
conditions, to focus on emergency measures to manage immediate 
threats to life, and to prevent irreversible end-­organ damage. The sec­
ond goal is to identify potentially treatable disorders requiring timely 
interventions. Ultimately, the clinician should focus on other chronic 
conditions to establish proper diagnosis and prognosis. Some disor­
ders may be corrected by liver transplantation; such patients should be 
promptly referred to a transplant center for evaluation.
Hepatomegaly in the Infant
Hepatomegaly in the neonate is commonly associated with liver 
dysfunction and jaundice (see Chapter 18). In infants, jaundice is a 
frequent presenting feature of liver disease rather than a later mani­
festation of advanced liver disease, as in the older child or adult. The 
majority of infants with cholestatic liver disease manifest the disease 
during the first month of life.
Changes in mental status, such as irritability or lethargy, poor 
feeding, and vomiting, are frequent symptoms in metabolic disorders. 
Urea cycle defects lead to hyperammonemia and acute encephalopa­
thy associated with astrocyte swelling without axonal damage. Patients 
present with a change in mental status or ataxia. Severe or prolonged 
hyperammonemia ultimately leads to progressive irreversible brain 
damage characterized by cortical and brainstem gliosis and neuronal 
atrophy. Symptomatology of galactosemia and tyrosinemia depends on 
the presence of nutritional substrates; thus irritability, lethargy, hep­
atomegaly, ascites, edema, and coagulopathy may manifest soon after 
feedings are initiated and evolve over the first weeks of life.
A profound impairment of hepatic synthetic function, often in 
excess of that expected for the degree of cholestasis, may be an early 
indication of metabolic liver disease. Hepatic failure may be present in 
mitochondrial disorders, including both mitochondrial DNA variants 
and mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes. In addition to the liver, 
other organs (brain, heart, skeletal muscle) may be involved. Affected 
patients often have lactic acidosis, hypoglycemia, hypertriglyceri­
demia, and an abnormal acylcarnitine profile.
Gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD, formerly neonatal 
hemochromatosis) may manifest with hepatic failure at birth. Patients 
with GALD benefit from early treatment with plasmapheresis and 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) but may require liver transplan­
tation if there is no resolution of synthetic liver failure. Diagnosis of 
GALD bears significance for future pregnancies. GALD will develop in 
up to 80% of infants of mothers with a previous child diagnosed with 
this condition. GALD is caused by maternal alloantibodies crossing the 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
313
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
TABLE 17.7  Evaluation of Patients with Hepatomegaly
*Disease that may result in cirrhosis.
Jaundice 
 (+)
See Chapter 18
(−)
Prominent vomiting 
 (+)
or altered sensorium 
Disorders of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation
Reye syndrome
Congenital lactic acidemias
Disorders of gluconeogenesis
Respiratory chain defects
Organic acidemias
Urea cycle defects
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
Glycogen storage disease types I and III
Hereditary fructose intolerance*
Fulminant hepatic failure
Peroxisomal disorders
Zellweger syndrome*
Lysosomal storage disease
Niemann-Pick disease, Gaucher disease
GM1 gangliosidosis
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Wilson disease*
Acute hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis B, C, and D
Chronic drug-induced hepatitis*
Autoimmune hepatitis*
Wilson disease*
α1-Antitrypsin deﬁciency*
Sclerosing cholangitis*
Cardiovascular disease, right-sided heart failure*
Inﬂammatory bowel disease
Collagen vascular disease
Hematologic disorders
Leukemia
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis*
Sickle cell disease
Post–bone marrow transplantation status
Diabetes mellitus
Systemic infection
Cystic ﬁbrosis*
Sarcoidosis
Hepatic tumors
Fatty liver*
Hepatic cysts
Hepatic abscess
Congenital hepatic ﬁbrosis*
Choledochal cyst
Hepatic outﬂow obstruction*
Glycogen storage disease type IV*
Wolman disease*
Cholesterol ester storage disease
Niemann-Pick disease type B
Gaucher disease (adult form)*
Tyrosinemia*
(−)
Progressive neurologic 
 (+) 
deterioration
(−)
Prominent elevation of 
 (+)
serum aminotransferase levels 
(−)
Evidence of associated 
 (+)
systemic disease 
(−)
Isolated hepatomegaly 
 (+)
(with or without splenomegaly) 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
314
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
placenta and damaging the liver; the severity of injury can be alleviated 
by prenatal administration of IVIG to the mother.
A number of clinical features may provide clues about the cause 
of hepatomegaly in newborns. An enlarged liver with a firm or hard 
consistency is more commonly found in infants with extrahepatic bile 
duct obstruction or neonatal hemochromatosis. Congenital infection 
may be associated with low birthweight, hepatomegaly, microcephaly, 
purpura, and chorioretinitis. Dysmorphic facial features may be seen 
in association with chromosomal abnormalities and with Alagille syn­
drome. Congenital malformations, including cardiac anomalies, poly­
splenia, intestinal malrotation, and situs inversus, may be found in the 
syndromic form of biliary atresia. Abnormal lateralization syndromes 
can be associated with a midline liver, which may be palpable in the 
hypogastrium. The spleen may also be enlarged with infection or as a 
result of portal hypertension. Hepatomegaly, as well as a mass in the 
right upper quadrant, may be felt in infants with a choledochal cyst.
Infants may present with hepatomegaly, cholestasis, and sometimes 
hepatic failure related to infection such as cytomegalovirus, herpes 
simplex virus, enteroviruses, echovirus, coxsackievirus, or parvovirus 
B19. Hepatomegaly and cholestasis can also be associated with bac­
terial sepsis, syphilis, tuberculosis, and toxoplasmosis. α1-­Antitrypsin 
deficiency can also present as hepatomegaly associated with cholestasis 
in infants.
Infants with storage diseases can present with isolated hepatomeg­
aly or hepatosplenomegaly and few other symptoms in the early stages. 
Hepatomegaly is a feature of these disorders because of a pathologic 
accumulation of undegraded or partially degraded macromolecules. 
The mucopolysaccharidoses, the lipid storage diseases, the mucolipi­
doses, and glycoprotein storage disease are examples of these disorders. 
The clinical features of lysosomal storage diseases are determined by 
where the deficient enzyme is expressed and the rate of accumulation 
of the abnormal material. Hepatomegaly in the neonate can occur in 
Gaucher disease, Niemann-­Pick disease type A, and Wolman disease. 
Neonatal hepatosplenomegaly and jaundice may occur in Niemann-­
Pick disease type C. Progressive neurologic dysfunction may occur later. 
Hepatosplenomegaly accompanied by coarse facial features and skele­
tal abnormalities is present in infants with the GM2 gangliosidoses and 
mucopolysaccharidoses. Based on clinical features and manifestations, 
specific enzymatic activities may be determined in peripheral white 
blood cell culture or in cultured skin fibroblasts to establish a precise 
diagnosis. Hepatomegaly is one of the most common findings in gly­
cogen storage disorders. A common feature of glycogen storage disor­
ders is inefficient release of glucose from glycogen stores; this can lead 
to hypoglycemia when fasting. Since brain energy metabolism heavily 
depends on the availability of glucose, severe hypoglycemia can lead to 
metabolic strokes, irreversible brain damage, and death.
Enzyme replacement therapies are available for treating patients 
with Gaucher disease type I, glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe 
disease), and mucopolysaccharidoses types I, II, and VI. Glycogen 
storage disorders can also be managed with dietary therapy maintain­
ing euglycemia. Although of limited efficacy, bone marrow transplan­
tation has been used in patients with several of these disorders.
Hepatomegaly in the Child and Adolescent
Hepatomegaly in the child or adolescent may be an isolated finding on 
a routine physical examination or may be associated with many other 
clinical features related to systemic disease or impaired liver function.
Steatohepatitis
Fatty liver disease in the child and adolescent is associated with child­
hood obesity. An increase in serum ALT value is found in 6% of over­
weight children and 10% of obese children. A large number of U.S. 
adolescents may have fatty infiltration of the liver (nonalcoholic ste­
atohepatitis or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease). Nonalcoholic steato­
hepatitis should be suspected in any obese child with hepatomegaly 
and/or abnormal liver test results. Many of these children have features 
of metabolic syndrome, such as insulin resistance, arterial hyperten­
sion, and elevated serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels. In over­
weight children presenting with hepatomegaly and liver dysfunction, 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis should be the primary diagnostic consid­
eration, but other disorders, such as autoimmune hepatitis and chronic 
viral hepatitis, must be ruled out. Imaging studies, including ultraso­
nography, MRI, and CT, may suggest altered composition of the liver 
consistent with steatosis. Liver biopsy is the definitive diagnostic test 
and should be considered in patients with persistently abnormal ami­
notransferases. The purpose of the biopsy is to establish the diagnosis 
of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, rule out other conditions, and evalu­
ate the degree of steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis. Steatohepatitis 
can progress to cirrhosis and chronic liver failure. Steatohepatitis is 
associated with increased mortality from cardiovascular disease and 
liver cancer. Obese patients with steatohepatitis should be enrolled in 
a weight management program. Medications such as vitamin E and 
metformin could be considered. Bariatric surgery can be considered 
in select individuals with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and other 
comorbidities.
Viral Hepatitis
Acute viral hepatitis should be considered in the child with hepato­
megaly and liver dysfunction. The patient may be acutely ill with sud­
den onset of fever, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Jaundice may occur, 
but many children with acute viral hepatitis are anicteric. On physical 
examination, varying degrees of tender hepatomegaly may be defined. 
Hepatitis is confirmed by an elevation in serum aminotransferase lev­
els. Hepatitis may be caused by hepatotropic viruses (hepatitis A, B, 
C, D, or E) or by other viral infections that can involve the liver, such 
as cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), adenovirus, 
enterovirus, and echovirus. Serodiagnosis of all of these infections is 
possible. The evaluation for various forms of hepatitis should include 
anti–hepatitis A virus immunoglobulin M (IgM), hepatitis B surface 
antigen, anti–hepatitis B core antibody, anti–hepatitis C antibody, 
CMV IgM or CMV PCR, and EBV serologic profile or EBV PCR. Ther­
apy is available for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and CMV hepatitis. Hep­
atitis B or C has the potential to evolve to cirrhosis over many years. 
Table 17.8 presents the main causes of chronic liver disease in children. 
Chronic hepatitis B infection is defined by persistently elevated serum 
levels of hepatitis B DNA. Hepatitis C is an indolent infection with the 
potential to evolve to cirrhosis over several decades. However, some 
children, particularly when co-­infected with HIV, may have more rap­
idly progressive liver disease. Chronic hepatitis C infection is defined 
by the persistent presence of hepatitis C RNA in serum. As new anti­
viral agents are available, eradication of hepatitis C is possible in the 
majority of patients. The novel coronavirus COVID-­19 has been asso­
ciated with elevated liver enzymes, although additional research and 
time are needed to determine any long-­term health effects.
Toxins
All patients presenting with hepatomegaly and liver dysfunction 
should be questioned about recent exposure to medications, includ­
ing over-­the-­counter and herbal supplements or environmental toxins. 
Acute and chronic hepatitis can be caused by a number of different 
medications such as isoniazid and methyldopa. Treatment of drug-­ 
or toxin-­related liver injury is mainly supportive. Contact with the 
offending agent should be avoided. Corticosteroids may have a role in 
immune-­related injury, as may occur with phenytoin. N-­acetylcysteine 
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
315
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
therapy, by stimulating glutathione synthesis, is effective in preventing 
hepatotoxicity when administered within 16 hours after an overdose 
of acetaminophen and appears to improve survival in patients with 
severe liver injury even 36 hours after toxin ingestion. Liver injury in 
most cases is completely reversible when the hepatotoxic drug is with­
drawn. With continued use of certain drugs, such as methotrexate or 
amiodarone, the effects of hepatotoxicity may proceed insidiously to 
cirrhosis.
α1-­Antitrypsin Deficiency
Children and adolescents with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency may present 
with manifestations of chronic liver disease or cirrhosis with evidence 
of portal hypertension. Liver biopsy may show a chronic hepatitis with 
varying degrees of fibrosis. The diagnosis is established by determi­
nation of the α1-­antitrypsin phenotype (phenotypes ZZ and SZ cause 
liver disease) and may be confirmed by liver biopsy. Periportal hepato­
cytes demonstrate periodic acid–Schiff–positive diastase-­resistant 
intracytoplasmic globules. Immunocytochemical studies confirm that 
this material is the abnormal α1-­antitrypsin. It is important to manage 
the complications of cirrhosis, cholestasis, and portal hypertension. 
Patients with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency are at increased risk of hepato­
cellular carcinoma. Liver transplantation is curative, though the major­
ity of the patients with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency do not require liver 
transplantation.
Wilson Disease
Wilson disease is a metabolic disorder that may manifest with hepatic 
disease in childhood, ranging from asymptomatic hepatomegaly (with 
or without splenomegaly) to subacute or chronic hepatitis or fulminant 
hepatic failure. Initial manifestations of Wilson disease may include por­
tal hypertension, ascites, edema, and esophageal hemorrhage. Wilson 
disease can also present with extrahepatic symptoms, such as hemolytic 
anemia, movement disorders, or mood disorders. Wilson disease is due 
to variants in a copper-­transporting P-­type adeno­sine triphosphatase, 
which leads to a failure of biliary copper excretion and a progressive 
accumulation of copper in the liver and other organs. Lipid peroxida­
tion, particularly of mitochondrial membranes, results from copper 
overload leading to the functional alterations in the liver and the brain. 
A low serum ceruloplasmin level suggests the diagnosis of Wilson dis­
ease. Serum copper levels may also be elevated, and urinary copper 
excretion is high, often up to 1,000 μg or more per day. The diagno­
sis is confirmed with a quantitative determination of copper in a liver 
biopsy specimen. Treatment of Wilson disease involves chelation and 
urinary excretion of the excess copper. The most frequently employed 
agents are penicillamine and trientine. In response to chelation therapy, 
urinary copper excretion increases markedly, and this is associated with 
a gradual clinical improvement. Liver transplantation may be required 
for treatment of fulminant Wilson disease or in patients with decom­
pensated cirrhosis.
Autoimmune Liver Disease
Several forms of autoimmune liver disease may also manifest with 
hepatomegaly during childhood and adolescence. Autoimmune hep­
atitis is defined as a continuing inflammatory process manifested by 
elevated aminotransferases, immunoglobulin G, and autoantibodies 
(antinuclear antibodies, smooth muscle, actin, microsomal antibod­
ies). The severity at presentation is highly variable, ranging from lab­
oratory abnormalities to cirrhosis and hepatic failure. In 25–30% of 
patients with autoimmune hepatitis, particularly children, the illness 
may have acute onset; however, in most patients, the onset is insidious 
with few nonspecific symptoms. The patient may be asymptomatic or 
have fatigue, malaise, behavioral changes, anorexia, and amenorrhea. 
Months or even years may pass before a liver problem is recognized 
with onset of jaundice or bleeding. Autoimmune hepatitis is frequently 
associated with other autoimmune disorders, including arthritis, vas­
culitis, nephritis, thyroiditis, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel dis­
ease, and Coombs-­positive anemia.
Laboratory studies in autoimmune hepatitis reveal a moderate ele­
vation, usually <1,000 IU/L, of serum aminotransferases. Serum biliru­
bin levels can be mildly elevated but can also be normal. Serum alkaline 
phosphatase activity is normal or only slightly increased. A diagnosis 
of autoimmune hepatitis may initially be suggested by marked eleva­
tion of serum gamma globulin levels. Characteristic patterns of serum 
autoantibodies may be present. Type 1 autoimmune hepatitis is asso­
ciated with antiactin (smooth muscle) and antinuclear antibodies, and 
type 2 with microsomal antibodies. In type 1 autoimmune hepatitis, 
most patients present between 10 and 20 years of age. Type 2 usually 
affects children between the ages of 2 and 14 years. Liver biopsy is use­
ful in confirming the diagnosis and assessing the degree of liver dam­
age. Cirrhosis may be present at the time of diagnosis.
Immunosuppressive medications are necessary to treat autoim­
mune hepatitis. Corticosteroid therapy, in combination with azathi­
oprine, improves the clinical, biochemical, and histologic features in 
most patients and prolongs transplant-­free survival in most patients 
with severe disease.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is an autoimmune disorder with the 
focus of injury being the biliary tract. The disorder may be difficult 
to distinguish from autoimmune hepatitis, and some patients have an 
overlap syndrome with features of both disorders. Hepatomegaly is fre­
quently present. Patients may be asymptomatic or have jaundice, pru­
ritus, or abdominal pain. Although serum aminotransferase levels are 
elevated, there is more striking elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase 
and GGT activities. Inflammatory bowel disease occurs in 50–75% of 
patients and may manifest at any time in the course of the liver disease. 
Magnetic resonance cholangiography reveals beading and irregularity 
of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. There is no definitive 
treatment. The course of the disorder is slowly progressive and eventu­
ally necessitates liver transplantation.
AIDS
Hepatobiliary manifestations are common in patients with AIDS. Hep­
atomegaly may be present, caused by a heterogeneous group of issues 
that includes viral hepatitis, opportunistic infections, medication-­
induced hepatic injury, malnutrition, peliosis hepatis, AIDS chol­
angiopathy, and neoplasms. Pathologic features that are most 
typical of pediatric AIDS include giant cell transformation and diffuse 
TABLE 17.8  Causes of Chronic Liver 
Disease in Children
Autoimmune hepatitis
Type 1 (anti–smooth muscle antibody, antinuclear antibody positive)
Type 2 (anti–liver-­kidney microsomal antibody)
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Wilson disease
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (overlap syndrome with autoimmune hepatitis)
Viral hepatitis
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Drugs
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
316
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
parenchymal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates, the latter being associated 
with lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis.
Other Infections
Hepatosplenomegaly and anicteric hepatitis have been reported with 
cat-­scratch disease, typhoid, brucellosis, tularemia, syphilis, Lyme dis­
ease, leptospirosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever, tuberculo­
sis, and actinomycosis.
Perihepatitis Syndrome
Perihepatitis (formerly Fitz-­Hugh–Curtis) syndrome is associated with 
acute salpingitis. Symptoms and signs include acute onset of severe 
right upper quadrant abdominal pain, friction rub over the anterior 
liver surface, and physical signs of pelvic inflammatory disease on pel­
vic examination (see Chapter 21).
Hepatic Abscess
A pyogenic, fungal, or parasitic hepatic abscess is an unusual infection 
in children. Common clinical findings are fever, abdominal pain, and 
hepatomegaly, with or without tenderness.
Pyogenic abscesses occur most frequently in infants who have had 
sepsis or umbilical infections (Fig. 17.1). Cases in older children are 
usually associated with underlying host-­defense defects, particularly 
HIV, chronic granulomatous disease, and leukemia, or with occurrence 
of previous blunt trauma to the liver. Pyogenic abscess may follow an 
episode of appendicitis. Liver abscess may also occur in previously 
healthy children. Staphylococcus aureus and enteric and anaerobic bac­
teria are common etiologic agents. Liver function test results are com­
monly normal. Ultrasonography or CT scan confirms the presence and 
number of lesions. Echogenic debris or gas may be seen.
Amebiasis occurs in clusters in the southern United States, with 
person-­to-­person transmission in association with poor sanitation and 
crowding. Amebic abscess follows portal invasion by the parasite (Fig. 
17.2). The diagnosis is established by demonstrating a positive result on 
enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay for antibody to Entamoeba histo­
lytica or by finding trophozoites or cysts in the stool. Toxocariasis and 
echinococcosis are caused by abortive infection of the liver in humans 
with the natural parasite of dogs or cats (Fig. 17.3). The diagnosis is 
confirmed by specific serologic profiles.
Endocrine Disorders
Hepatomegaly and mild elevations of aminotransferase levels and bil­
irubin are common in hypothyroidism and are occasionally observed 
in hyperthyroidism. An enlarged liver is often found in patients with 
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, mainly as a result of excessive 
glycogen deposition. An extreme, rare case of this process is repre­
sented by Mauriac syndrome, which is characterized by dwarfism, 
obesity, moon facies, hypercholesterolemia, and marked hepatomeg­
aly. Patients with acromegaly can also have mild to severe hepatomeg­
aly as part of a generalized visceromegaly associated with the disease.
Liver Tumors
Liver tumors are the third most common solid abdominal tumors, after 
neuroblastoma and Wilms tumor (see Chapter 20, Table 17.2). Hepatic 
metastatic disease can also occur with many childhood neoplasms, 
most frequently neuroblastoma, leukemia, and lymphoma (Fig. 17.4). 
The primary tumor location is usually known.
Benign liver tumors account for 33% of cases of primary hepatic 
tumors. Benign liver tumors include hemangioendotheliomas, mes­
enchymal hamartomas, focal nodular hyperplasia (Fig. 17.5), and 
adenomas. Malignant tumors include hepatoblastoma (Fig. 17.6), 
hepatocellular carcinoma, and undifferentiated embryonal cell sar­
coma. Of all hepatic neoplasms, hepatoblastoma, hepatocellular car­
cinoma, and infantile hemangioendothelioma are the three most 
common, accounting for 65% of cases. Most hepatic tumors are asymp­
tomatic or may manifest with abdominal distention, abdominal pain, 
weight loss, vomiting, or diarrhea. Any hepatic mass can present with 
acute abdominal pain caused by hemorrhage into the tumor or perito­
neal cavity.
Hemangioendotheliomas are the most common benign hepatic 
tumors. Nearly 95% of all hemangioendotheliomas manifest in the first 
Fig. 17.1  Escherichia coli abscess in a 3-­week-­old with sepsis. A trans­
verse color Doppler ultrasound image through the right hepatic lobe 
shows a complex, septated cystic lesion with intense peripheral vas­
cularity and no blood flow centrally. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, 
eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2017:124, Fig. 5.11.)
Fig. 17.2  Amebic abscess. Axial contrast-­enhanced CT image shows 
a large, exophytic low-­attenuation cyst with hyperdense central debris 
(arrow). (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 
13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019:835, Fig. 90.8.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
317
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
year of life. Congestive heart failure due to hyperdynamic circulation 
may be present in 10–15% of cases. In addition to the liver, heman­
giomas may be present in the skin, lungs, lymph nodes, pancreas, 
retroperitoneum, intestine, or bone and be seen with hepatic heman­
gioendotheliomas. Liver ultrasound shows a hyperechogenic mass fre­
quently associated with increased vascular flow on Doppler evaluation. 
MRI or CT with intravenous contrast can be useful to further define 
the mass if sonographic evaluation is not conclusive.
Mesenchymal hamartomas, which consist of multiple cysts filled 
with serous fluid separated by myxomatous stroma, have no capsule. 
Of mesenchymal hamartomas, 70% manifest in the first 2 years of life. 
Hepatic adenoma is a rare benign tumor of the liver. Oral contracep­
tives, diabetes mellitus, glycogen storage disease, portosystemic shunts, 
and androgen therapy increase the risk of adenoma.
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is caused by nodular regener­
ation of the liver around a focal scar of the liver parenchyma. FNH 
is seen predominantly in females and may occur at all ages. FNH is 
more common in patients who have congenital portosystemic shunts 
(Abernethy anomaly).
The majority of patients with hepatoblastoma present before 2 
years of age and 90% by the age of 4. Hepatocellular carcinoma 
and, less commonly, undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma occur 
primarily in older children. Tyrosinemia, ataxia-­telangiectasia, 
glycogen storage disease type I, chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C, 
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, autoimmune hepatitis, and cholestatic 
cirrhosis are associated with higher risk of hepatocellular carci­
noma. Serial screening with periodic liver sonograms is indicated 
for patients with these diseases. If nodules are identified, the nature 
of the mass can be clarified with CT with contrast (triphasic CT) or 
MRI with contrast.
Serum α-­fetoprotein (AFP) is the useful marker of malignant liver 
tumors; 80–90% of hepatoblastomas and 60–90% of hepatocellular car­
cinomas are positive. The serum AFP level is normal in mesenchymal 
hamartoma, focal nodular hyperplasia, and adenoma. The diagnosis of 
liver tumors is confirmed by needle biopsy, usually with ultrasound or 
CT guidance.
Hepatic Cysts
The origin of solitary cysts is unknown. They are probably the sequelae 
of focal intrahepatic hemorrhage. Peliosis hepatis, characterized by 
multiple blood-­filled spaces of varying sizes within the liver paren­
chyma, can be a complication of long-­term treatment with anabolic 
steroids. Hepatomegaly, often with tenderness, may be present before 
any evidence of liver biochemical abnormality is evident.
Choledochal cysts are defined as congenital dilation or outpouch­
ing of large bile ducts. Though the majority of choledochal cysts are 
Fig. 17.3  An axial computed tomography image shows a liver abscess 
(arrow) in a child with Echinococcus infection. A large, complex cystic 
lesion is seen, with multiple daughter cysts noted. (From Walters MM, 
Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier; 2017:125, Fig. 5.14.)
Fig. 17.4  Metastatic neuroblastoma in a 6-­week-­old infant with hep­
atomegaly. An axial T2-­weighted image with fat saturation through the 
upper abdomen shows multiple T2 bright metastatic hepatic nodules, 
with a large metastatic lesion in the left hepatic lobe (asterisk). A right 
adrenal primary tumor is shown (arrow). (From Walters MM, Robertson 
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Else­
vier; 2017:130, Fig. 5.21.)
A
B
C
Fig. 17.5  Focal nodular hyperplasia incidentally found in a 15-­year-­old girl. A, An axial contrast-­enhanced 
CT image shows a lobulated, heterogeneously enhancing mass. B, An axial T2-­weighted MRI with fat sat­
uration shows a heterogeneously hyperintense mass with a hyperintense central scar (arrow). C, An axial 
T1-­weighted MRI with fat saturation obtained 20 minutes after the intravenous injection of gadoxetic acid 
disodium shows accumulation of contrast in hepatocytes within the lesion. (From Walters MM, Robertson 
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:128, Fig. 5.18.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
318
SECTION 4  Gastrointestinal Disorders
diagnosed in the first year of life, later presentation is possible. Cho­
ledochal cysts are associated with an increased risk of ascending 
cholangitis and cholangiocarcinoma; thus, they should be surgically 
removed.
Congenital hepatic fibrosis is almost universally associated with 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Approximately 
40% of patients with congenital hepatic fibrosis have involvement of 
large bile ducts, which can be visualized by magnetic resonance cholan­
giogram as multiple cystic dilations of the intrahepatic bile ducts (Caroli 
disease). Caroli disease is associated with an increased risk of ascend­
ing cholangitis and sepsis, particularly in patients who underwent kid­
ney transplantation for ARPKD. Recurrent cholangitis in patients with 
ARPKD can be an indication for combined liver/kidney transplantation.
Hepatic Venous Outflow Obstruction
Hepatic venous outflow obstruction is classified into three categories 
by the level of obstruction. Obstruction can occur at the level of hepatic 
venules (sinusoidal obstruction syndrome: venoocclusive disease), 
hepatic veins (Budd-­Chiari syndrome), or suprahepatic vena cava. 
Hepatic venous outflow obstruction manifests with acute ascites and 
tender hepatomegaly. Abdominal pain, distention, and splenic enlarge­
ment may be prominent. Elevation of the aminotransferases or serum 
bilirubin level is present in the acute stage.
The pathologic hallmark of venoocclusive disease (VOD) is occlu­
sion of central and sublobular hepatic veins by intimal edema and 
fibrosis. The illness classically follows ingestion of plants that contain 
a toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloid, which can be present in bush teas and 
herbal medicines. Venoocclusive disease may also occur as a hepatic 
response to irradiation and induction for bone marrow transplanta­
tion. A familial autosomal recessive form of venoocclusive disease 
associated with immunodeficiency usually presents at or before 1 year 
of life. Immunodeficiency is manifest by combined hypogammaglobu­
linemia and T-­cell defects; identifying SP11O pathologic gene variants 
establishes the diagnosis.
The clinical diagnosis of VOD is based on either the McDonald 
(modified Seattle) or Jones (Baltimore) criteria. The McDonald crite­
ria require the presence of two features from hepatomegaly with right 
upper quadrant pain, total bilirubin of 34.2 μmol/L or more (normal 
range <20 μmol/L), and ascites or unexplained weight gain >2% of 
baseline. The Jones criteria require a total bilirubin of 34.2 μmol/L or 
more and presence of at least two of the following: hepatomegaly, asci­
tes, and weight gain >5% of baseline.
Budd-­Chiari syndrome develops in a variety of conditions that 
predispose to thrombosis, including intake of oral contraceptives, 
pregnancy, trauma, tumor invasion, cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel 
disease, collagen vascular disease, protein C deficiency, sickle cell 
anemia, polycythemia vera, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 
and lymphoproliferative disorders. Membranous obstruction of the 
suprahepatic vena cava is the most common cause of suprahepatic 
outflow obstruction. However, thrombosis of the suprahepatic vena 
cava can occur in any condition that may precipitate Budd-­Chiari 
syndrome. Diagnostic evaluation begins with pulsed Doppler sonog­
raphy of the hepatic vessels. CT angiogram can further define the 
anatomy of the outflow obstruction. Liver biopsy in hepatic outflow 
obstruction reveals a characteristic pattern of sinusoidal dilatation 
with centrilobular congestion. Cirrhosis is a poor prognostic sign.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
Hepatomegaly that is persistent suggests a chronic illness, which with 
time may produce serious morbidity or mortality, despite an initial well 
appearance of the patient. It is important to determine whether the 
hepatomegaly is a result of a specific liver disease or whether it is part of 
a generalized systemic illness. Red flags include signs of acute hepatic 
failure (coma, hemorrhage), developmental delay, failure to thrive, and 
those noted in Table 17.9.
A
B
Fig. 17.6  Hepatoblastoma in a 5-­month-­old infant with an abdominal mass. A, A composite sagittal ultrasound 
image of the right hepatic lobe shows a complex, heterogeneously hypoechoic solid mass compressing sur­
rounding liver parenchyma. B, A coronal T2-­weighted MRI with fat saturation shows a heterogeneous, hyper­
intense mass extending into the porta hepatis and causing intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation. (From Walters 
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:129, Fig. 
5.19.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
319
CHAPTER 17  Hepatomegaly
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
TABLE 17.9  Red Flags Suggesting Serious Liver Disease in a Patient with Hepatomegaly
History
History of prolonged hyperbilirubinemia in infancy
History of neurologic or psychiatric disease
Previous blood transfusion, intravenous drug use
Past history of hepatitis
Delayed puberty
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Family history of chronic liver or kidney disease
Physical Examination
Hard or nodular liver
Splenomegaly
Ascites
Prominent abdominal venous pattern
Growth retardation
Muscle wasting
Physical Examination—cont’d
Digital clubbing
Palmar erythema
Spider angiomata
Arthritis
Papular acrodermatitis
Kayser-­Fleischer rings
Encephalopathy
Asterixis
Laboratory Test Results
Prolonged prothrombin time
Hypoglycemia
Hyperammonemia
Decreased serum albumin
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
319.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General Review
Wolf AD, Lavine JE. Hepatomegaly in neonates and children. Pediatr Rev. 
2000;21:303–310.
Clinical Assessment of Liver Size
Konus OL, Ozdemir A, Akkaya A, et al. Normal liver, spleen, and kidney 
dimensions in neonates, infants, and children: evaluation with sonography. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1998;171:1693–1698.
Naveh Y, Berant M. Assessment of liver size in normal infants and children. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1984;3:346–348.
Noda T, Todani T, Watanabe Y, et al. Liver volume in children measured by 
computed tomography. Pediatr Radiol. 1997;27:250–252.
Weisman LE, Cagle N, Mathis R, et al. Clinical estimation of liver size in the 
normal neonate. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1982;21:596–598.
Younoszai MK, Mueller S. Clinical assessment of liver size in normal children. 
Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1975;14:378–380.
Biochemical Studies of Liver Function and Injury
D’Agata ID, Balistreri WF. Evaluation of liver disease in the pediatric patient. 
Pediatr Rev. 1999;20:376–390.
Rosenthal P. Assessing liver function and hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn. 
Natl Acad Clin Biochem Clin Chem. 1997;43:228–234.
Neonatal Cholestasis
Bezerra JA, Balistreri WF. Cholestatic syndromes of infancy and childhood. 
Semin Gastrointest Dis. 2001;12:54–65.
Fischler B, Papadogiannakis N, Nemeth A. Aetiological factors in neonatal 
cholestasis. Acta Paediatr. 2001;90:88–92.
Jacquemin E, Hadchouel M. Genetic basis of progressive familial intra hepatic 
cholestasis. J Hepatol. 1999;31:377–381.
Nio M, Ohi R, Hochman JA, et al. Biliary atresia. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2000;9:177–186.
Suchy FJ. Approach to the infant with cholestasis. In: Suchy FJ, Sokol RJ, 
­Balistreri WB, eds. Liver Disease in Children. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2001:187–194.
Thompson RJ, Azevedo RA, Galoppo C, et al. European Society for Paediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition. Cholestatic and metabolic 
liver diseases: Working Group Report of the Second World Congress of 
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroen­
terol Nutr. 2004;39(2):S611–S615.
Wolf AD, Levine JE. Hepatomegaly in neonates and children. Pediatr rev. 
2000;21(9):303–310.
Zerbini MC, Gallucci SD, Maezono R, et al. Liver biopsy in neonatal cholesta­
sis: A review on statistical grounds. Mod Pathol. 1997;10:793–799.
Viral Hepatitis
Chang MH. Natural history of hepatitis B virus infection in children. J Gastro­
enterol Hepatol. 2000;15(suppl):E16–E19.
Gollan JL, Gollan TJ. Wilson disease in 1998: genetic, diagnostic and therapeu­
tic aspects. J Hepatol. 1998;1:28–36.
HCV Guidance. Recommendations for testing, managing, and treating hepati­
tis C, AASLD and IDSA. Updated August 27, 2020. Available from: https://
www.hcvguidelines.org/unique-­populations/children.
Hochman JA, Balistreri WF. Viral hepatitis: Expanding the alphabet. Adv 
Pediatr. 1999;46:207–243.
Jonas MM. Viral hepatitis. From prevention to antivirals. Clin Liver Dis. 
2000;4:849–877.
Metabolic Liver Disease
McGovern MM, Mistry PK. The lysosomal storage diseases. In: Suchy FJ, Sokol 
RJ, Balistreri WB, eds. Liver Disease in Children. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:687–700.
Mitchell EL, Khan Z. Liver disease in alpha-­1 antitrypsin deficiency: current 
approaches and future directions. Curr Pathobiol Rep. 2017;5(3):243–252.
Rashid M, Roberts EA. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in children. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2000;30:48–­53.
Ratko TA, Marbella A, Godfrey S, et al. Enzyme-­Replacement Therapies for 
Lysosomal Storage Diseases. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(US); 2013 Jan. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK117223/.
Roy A, Finegold MJ. Hepatic neoplasia and metabolic diseases in children. Clin 
Liver Dis. 2010;14(4):731–746.
Saudubray JM, Martin D, de Lonlay P, et al. Recognition and management of 
fatty acid oxidation defects: a series of 107 patients. J Inherit Metab Dis. 
1999;22:488–502.
Sokol RJ, Treem WR. Mitochondria and childhood liver diseases. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 1999;28:416.
Vos MB, Abrams SH, Barlow SE, et al. NASPGHAN clinical practice guideline 
for the diagnosis and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in chil­
dren: recommendations from the Expert Committee on NAFLD (ECON) 
and the North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology. 
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64:319–334.
Autoimmune Liver Disease
Gregorio GV, Portmann B, Karani J, et al. Autoimmune hepatitis/sclerosing 
cholangitis overlap syndrome in childhood: a 16-­year prospective study. 
Hepatology. 2001;33:544–553.
Roberts EA. Primary sclerosing cholangitis in children. J Gastroenterol Hepa­
tol. 1999;14:588–593.
Mieli-­Vergani G, Vergani D, Baumann U, et al. Diagnosis and management 
of pediatric autoimmune liver disease: ESPGHAN hepatology committee 
position statement. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66(2):345–360.
Liver Tumors
Ng K, Mogul DB. Pediatric liver tumors. Clin Liver Dis. 2018;22(4):753–772.
Miscellaneous Disorders Causing Hepatomegaly
Gentil-­Kocher S, Bernard O, Brunelle F, et al. Budd-­Chiari syndrome in chil­
dren: report of 22 cases. J Pediatr. 1988;113:30–38.
Rubbia-­Brandt L. Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome. Clin Liver Dis. 
2010;14(4):651–668.
Shneider BL, Magid MS. Liver disease in autosomal recessive polycystic kidney 
disease. Pediatr Transplant. 2005;9(5):634–639.
Hepatic Venoocclusive Disease
Fan CQ, Crawford JM. Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (hepatic veno-­
occlusive disease). J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2014;4(4):332–346.
Wadleigh M, Ho V, Momtaz P, et al. Hepatic veno-­occlusive disease: patho­
genesis, diagnosis and treatment. Curr Opin Hematol. 2003;10:451–462.
Wang T, Ong P, Roscioli T, et al. Hepatic veno-­occlusive disease with immu­
nodeficiency (VODI): first reported case in the U.S. and identification of a 
unique mutation in Sp110. Clin Immunol. 2012;145:102–107.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
