545
CHRONIC PAIN
Chronic pain is often defined as recurrent or persistent pain lasting ≥3 
months. The child may have a definable medical condition but often 
does not have a specific disease diagnosis or identifiable etiology for 
the pain other than the pain symptoms (often called chronic primary 
pain or central pain syndrome), and the central pain syndrome is often 
associated with other overlapping pain conditions. Chronic primary 
pain is associated with functional and emotional disabilities but is 
independent of identifiable biologic or psychologic contributors. The 
central nature of the pain may occur when the central nervous sys­
tem’s response to pain is hypersensitive. Simple touch that should not 
be painful is perceived as pain (allodynia), or minor noxious stim­
uli produce an exaggerated pain perception (hyperalgesia). This pain 
amplification and hypersensitivity to pain create a cascade of events 
resulting in localized (migraine, low back, jaw) or generalized pain 
perception. In most patients, the pain is constant but may be intermit­
tent and manifest in a broad spectrum of severity and characterizations 
(burning, stabbing, dull, paresthesias, sharp). Comorbidities are com­
mon and include fatigue, sleep impairment, poor concentration, and 
disturbances in affect.
Chronic Overlapping Pain Condition
Many pain conditions tend to co-­aggregate, coexist, or overlap. 
Approximately 20% of adults in the United States who report chronic 
generalized pain will also report having pain in the face or jaw, back, 
or neck, as well as headache. The National Institutes of Health desig­
nated 10 conditions that often co-­occur with chronic pain as part of 
the chronic overlapping pain conditions (COPCs). These conditions 
include temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorder, myalgic encephalo­
myelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), fibromyalgia (FM), irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS), vulvodynia, painful bladder syndrome/inter­
stitial cystitis (PBS/IC), headaches and migraines, chronic lower back 
syndrome, and endometriosis. The prevalence of COPCs in adults is 
∼4–44 million persons. Fifteen percent of the adult population will 
report neck pain and migraine or severe headache and almost 29% 
report back pain. Interestingly, when assessing the other comorbid 
pain conditions, it is important to understand that they will depend 
on which is the index symptom that is being evaluated. Furthermore, 
although the cardinal symptom of COPC is pain, other nonpainful 
symptoms coexist with the COPC such as fatigue, anxiety, depression, 
sleep disorders, difficulty concentrating, and reduced ability to per­
form physical activities.
Comorbid Conditions
The term chronic overlapping pain conditions implies that these are 
associated with and comorbid with one another. The concept of comor­
bidity implies a second condition that either was present or develops 
during the course of a subject’s disease that was a primary initial index 
disorder. In contrast, multimorbidity describes the occurrence of two 
or more conditions without assigning one condition as the index dis­
ease. Understanding the pathophysiology of a disorder can be aided 
by grasping the chronology of disorder development after the index 
disease. A patient with depression who develops FM should be distin­
guished from a patient with FM who then develops depression. This 
distinction is important particularly given traditional beliefs that a psy­
chiatric condition predisposes to a chronic pain condition; however, 
the evidence does not support this concept. Depression and chronic 
pain do coexist in 30–50% of patients but may also occur without the 
other syndrome being present. More than 50% of subjects may have 
either depression without chronic pain or chronic pain without depres­
sion. But in subjects with both conditions, depression and chronic pain 
have an adverse effect on the other disorder. An antecedent change in 
either pain or depression predicts subsequent worsening of the other 
symptom. Depression itself does not cause chronic pain.
A common chronic pain location in adults is the low back, followed 
in decreasing order by the shoulder, neck or throat, head, hips, abdom­
inal pain, chest/lungs, face/gums, and genital or pelvic pain. Among 
diagnosed pain conditions, such as FM or migraines, ∼60% of adult 
patients will report multiple pain conditions. The average number of 
other pain conditions co-­occurring with a specific diagnosis varies; 
cluster headaches, FM, chronic pelvic pain, migraine headaches, and 
chronic lower back pain have the most other pain conditions. The num­
ber of pain conditions and sites involved are predictors of emotional 
distress. Pain severity itself is not consistently a predictor of depressive 
or anxiety symptoms. In addition, the number of comorbid disorders 
is higher with a prior history of post-­traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiologic factors for individuals who develop a COPC 
include certain predispositions such as genetic or epigenetic factors 
and early-­life pain, stress, or traumatic experiences. Later specific 
environmental changes such as psychologic or physical trauma, infec­
tion, or injury may trigger the development of COPC. Patients with 
COPC have a disordered pain amplification state that is either central 
or peripherally mediated. A biopsychosocial model may explain the 
development of and response to a COPC. Most pain syndromes are 
thought to depend on a neurobiologic mechanism that includes cen­
tral hyperalgesia, pain amplification, and psychosocial factors that 
feed back to further amplify pain (Fig. 33.1). These factors include 
anxiety, depression, history of trauma, current or past stress, previous 
pain experience, and attitudes and beliefs about pain. In addition, the 
patient’s fear of a significant undiagnosed problem, catastrophizing 
behaviors or beliefs, loss of control and self-­efficacy, and fear avoidance 
all contribute. Coping strategies play a critical role in managing chal­
lenges that the person views as difficult or impossible to deal with based 
Chronic Pain
Gisela G. Chelimsky and Thomas C. Chelimsky
33
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
546
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
on self-­perception and pain beliefs. These strategies require an active 
effort to overcome thoughts and behaviors that reinforce negative pain 
beliefs. The pain beliefs constitute the core factor that modulates how 
the patient will respond to a pain exacerbation (“I am disabled from the 
pain”; “I will never get back to normal”). Catastrophizing reflects the 
cognitive bias of a negative pain belief, with the expectation that pain 
will produce a bad outcome in any setting. It contains the three compo­
nents of rumination (“I can’t get my mind off the pain”), amplification 
(“My pain is always getting worse”), and hopelessness (“Nothing will 
help my pain”); catastrophizing is associated with a more difficult pain 
experience, decreased physical and psychosocial function, and more 
disability.
Pain beliefs are independently associated with physical disability 
and depression. Poor coping is associated with physical disability, and 
catastrophizing is associated with depression. It is important to note 
that coping style can be trained and has a major role in the belief sys­
tem. Passive coping strategies reinforce the negative pain construct and 
learned passivity of the chronic pain syndrome (“When my pain gets 
bad, I take a pill”), whereas active coping strategies constitute an excel­
lent long-­term strategy toward chronic pain recovery (“When my pain 
gets bad, I relax my low back muscles through this exercise”). Pain may 
also lead to depressed mood probably through fatigue and decreased 
functionality. Fatigue also contributes to decreased activity and func­
tion, worse pain, and poor sleep. Poor sleep, which may be related to 
pain, in turn leads to decreased pain threshold and more fatigue.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of chronic pain between adult males and females is 
similar. In adolescents with chronic pain ∼30% had both headache 
and stomachache, ∼12% had backache and headache, and ∼35% had 
all three pains (headache, stomachache, and backache), demonstrating 
the prevalence of these disorders in teens with chronic pain and their 
overlap. The prevalence of FM in pediatrics is ∼6–12% and is associated 
with generalized aches in >90%, headaches in ∼75%, sleep complaints 
in 70%, reports of joint swelling in 24%, fatigue in 20%, abdominal 
pain in 17%, and joint hypermobility in 14% (Fig. 33.2). Functional 
abdominal pain has a high prevalence in pediatrics (2–30%) and is 
often associated with other chronic pain disorders such as headaches 
and pain in the extremities, back, and neck.
Management
When evaluating a patient with chronic pain, a careful family and per­
sonal history and then a detailed physical exam must occur. Identifying 
red flags (Table 33.1) should lead to a diagnostic evaluation to uncover 
their cause. Even when such red flags are not present, the disorders 
presented in Table 33.2 should always be considered as possible under­
lying contributors to a chronic pain syndrome.
The practitioner needs to recognize that pain has two critical com­
ponents: (1) nociception, or sensory pain, the input, and (2) suffering 
pain, the emotional component. When the patient can distinguish the 
two components (although the patient may not be able to modify the 
sensory aspect), they can often learn to modify the emotional response 
through active coping strategies. The approach to the management 
of chronic pain needs to include an interdisciplinary team. The team 
typically includes a practitioner who manages medications, a physical 
a Ascending afferent nociceptive pathways for pain perception
b Descending pain modulatory pathways 
Disease
Treatment of
primary medical
etiology
Cognition
Modulation of pain
Perception
Anxiety
Stress
Fear
Anticipation
Persistence or
recurrence of
pain
Pain relief
Injury
Lesion
Medical etiology
a
b
Perception of pain
Fig. 33.1  Analytic framework or logic model: a possible analytic frame­
work for the effect of the intervention to modulate pain. (From WHO 
Guideline for the Management of Chronic Pain in ­Children, https://
www.who.int/publications/m/item/guideline-­for-­the-­manage­ment-­of-­
chronic-­pain-­in-­children.)
Headache
Neck pain
Jaw/face pain
2.4x
1.8x
5.6x
1.1x
1.4x
3.3x
Jaw/face pain
Low back
pain
2 or more
painful joints
Fig. 33.2  Venn diagram depicting overlap of jaw/face pain and other painful conditions, U.S., adults. Patients 
with neck pain or headache have about twice the risk of associated jaw/face pain. The association of back pain 
or joint pain with jaw/face pain was less robust. In both diagrams, the combination of two pain syndromes 
greatly increased the risk of jaw/face pain (5.6x and 3.3x). (From Maixner W, Fillingham RB, Williams DA, 
et al. Overlapping chronic pain conditions: implications for diagnosis and classification. J Pain. 2016;17[Sup­
pl]:T93–T107 [Fig. 2, p. T96].)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
547
CHAPTER 33  Chronic Pain
therapist who modifies the motor patterns and behaviors associated 
with pain, and a psychologist who helps to defuse the negative cogni­
tive set and reduce catastrophizing. Together these specialists set goals 
to address the easy-­to-­manage issues based on the patient’s goals and 
motivation. When treating pediatric chronic pain, the practitioner also 
needs to understand the role parents and patients play in accepting the 
medical treatment. The factors involved in that decision include the 
specific pain beliefs and the readiness to take ownership of the disease 
and engage in the treatment. Chronic pain needs to be understood as 
a disorder of the brain that requires brain retraining, using the concept 
of the biopsychosocial model, which includes the social, psychologic, 
biologic, and behavioral factors that contribute to the manifestation 
of both health and disease. This model helps the patient move from 
a pure sensory understanding of pain to a broader understanding 
that includes the emotional, motor, and stress factors responsible for 
suffering.
Regardless of whether organic causes are identified that contribute 
to the chronic pain syndrome, the critical role of the practitioner is to 
believe the patient. Patients with COPC usually have been told that their 
pain is in their head, that they have school avoidance, that everything is 
anxiety driven, and to go back to school and stop complaining. To make 
any progress, a foundation of trust must be built upon the practitioner 
listening to and validating the complaints. The history should include 
enough of a review of systems to understand the extent of the COPC 
comorbid disorders. The history should also include sleep complaints 
and fatigue, as well as anxiety, depression, and history of PTSD.
It is useful to ask the patient to keep a diary of their pain and what 
exacerbates the pain. Often, the patients will report that the pain is 
exacerbated by stress, bad news, or school activities, or on Sunday 
night.
The practitioner also needs to elicit the feelings of catastrophizing. 
The clues to catastrophizing may be some variation of the following 
statements: (1) “I will never get better”; (2) “With this pain, I will never 
be able to play basketball again”; (3) “ I am so tired that I will never be 
able to get up and start rehab”; and (4) “I will never be able to go to 
college.”
Parents may also express feelings of catastrophizing, which may 
sound like “We’ve been to so many doctors without any clear answer 
they feel hopeless that they will never get better.”
Fear avoidance is another factor that interferes with improvement. 
This can be expressed by the child or by the parent. The child may 
report that they cannot exercise because of the pain, or the parent may 
express similar feelings that the abdominal pain is so severe the child 
cannot start physical therapy.
Readiness for change, measured in pediatrics by the Pain Stages of 
Change Questionnaire for Adolescents (PSOCQ-­A) and for the par­
ents (PSOCQ-­P), helps the practitioner understand where the patient 
and family stand in relation to taking ownership of the disease. These 
questionnaires have 30 items rated on a 5-­point scale. Based on the 
results, the parents and adolescents can be in the precontemplation, 
contemplation, and action/maintenance stages (Fig. 33.3). Greater 
catastrophizing in the parents is correlated with precontemplation. In 
adolescents, higher catastrophizing is inversely correlated with action 
and maintenance. The perception that “pain always means a part of 
the body is damaged” is associated with precontemplation. In contrast, 
“pain is affected by feeling and emotions” is inversely correlated with 
TABLE 33.1  Red Flags
Focal neurologic findings
Abnormal or asymmetric deep tendon reflexes
Papilledema
Age <5 yr
Morning joint stiffness
Pain awakens from sleep
Anemia
Persistent emesis
Chronic diarrhea
Fever, night sweats
Failure to thrive or new weight loss
Bowel, bladder dysfunction
Muscle wasting
Localized pain particularly in distribution of a cranial or peripheral nerve
Positive family history of pain syndromes or chronic medical disorders
TABLE 33.2  Disorders to Consider
Channelopathies
Erythromelalgia: primary (associated with the SCN9A gene) or secondary
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (SCN9A gene)
Small-­fiber neuropathy (SCN9A, SCN1OA genes)
Familial episodic pain syndrome (SCN11A, TRPA1 genes)
Connective Tissue Disorders
Ehlers-­Danlos
Marfan
Immune/Autoimmune
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sarcoidosis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever and other autoinflammatory recurrent fever 
syndromes
Hereditary angioedema
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
Mononeuritis multiplex associated with vasculitis
Metabolic/Nutrition
Fabry disease
Gaucher disease
Porphyria
Mitochondrial neuropathies
Vitamin deficiency (thiamine, B12, C, D)
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy
Other
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Toxic: lead, arsenic, chemotherapy
HIV
Familial amyloid neuropathy
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Sickle cell anemia
Thalamic stroke
Primary, metastatic, or recurrent malignancy (acute lymphocytic leukemia, 
neuroblastoma)
Neurofibromatosis
Radiculopathy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
	 1.	Peroneal
	 2.	Suprascapular
	 3.	Anterior, posterior hip
	 4.	Anterior cutaneous nerve (abdominal)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
548
SECTION 6  Developmental and Psychiatric Disorders
precontemplation. The stages of change are described as follows: (1) 
Precontemplation: The patient and/or parent feel that they have little 
responsibility for the pain management or control and are not inter­
ested in behavioral changes. They feel it is the practitioner’s role to man­
age the pain, therefore still thinking in the biopharmacologic model; 
they employ a passive coping strategy, which will further amplify the 
neurobiologic mechanism behind the chronic pain syndrome. (2) 
Contemplation: The patient and/or the parents start realizing that they 
have some personal responsibility for the pain management/control, 
and they are considering the biobehavioral role and need to implement 
behavioral changes. They are still of two minds, one that is resisting and 
one that is considering the need for behavioral change; their phrases 
typically include the conjunction “but”: “Yes I know I should exercise, 
but I just don’t think I will tolerate it.” (3) Action: The patient and/or 
parent are ready to start making behavioral changes.
Knowing in what stage the patient and the parents are determines 
how the practitioner will manage the patient. If the adolescent or the 
parents are in the precontemplative stage, the visit should be short, 
agree to disagree, and build the trust relationship with the patient. 
Pushing the patient to adopt the biobehavioral model will accomplish 
nothing or, worse, push them away. With the patient who is a contem­
plator, educate them about the biobehavioral model and let them think 
about it, and with the patient who is ready for action, the role of the 
practitioner is to coach them, monitor how they are doing, guide them, 
and schedule frequent follow-­ups to keep them from falling back.
Therapeutic Approach
The pharmacologic strategy should be viewed as temporary tools (win­
dows of opportunity with lower pain) to help patients start exercising 
(activation) and advance other behavioral changes through cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT). The efficacy of pharmacotherapy for the 
management of chronic pain is limited with a short-­lived role. Empha­
sis should be toward treatments centered on the biopsychosocial or 
biobehavioral model. Therapy may reduce the perception of pain and 
enhance positive coping responses, but in general the patient may 
always have some degree of pain.
Exercise: Often patients have the erroneous concept that exer­
cise will worsen their condition (a common and highly limiting pain 
belief). Exercise may produce some muscle soreness that resolves over 
several weeks. The data on improved pain (rather than function or 
well-­being) with exercise are more controversial, with some studies 
showing improvement and others not, particularly in the shorter term. 
More importantly, exercise does not worsen pain in the long term, 
and critically, it improves patient function, leading to greater activa­
tion, the definitive treatment of the chronic pain syndrome. Physical 
activity often improves the psychological well-­being of the subjects, 
leading to less fatigue and depression. When looking at FM in adults, 
moderate aerobic exercise or tai-­chi is helpful. Tai-­chi may produce 
more improvement in pain than aerobic exercise, probably due to 
the added mind-­body therapeutic effect. When comparing resistance 
training and aerobic activity, both groups have improvement, but the 
group that performs aerobic activity has a greater reduction in pain. 
Water or land aerobic exercises offer similar improvement. Sleep may 
not necessarily improve with exercise.
Given that hypermobile Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (h-­EDS) often is 
comorbid with FM and other COPCs, it is important to discuss exercise 
in patients with h-­EDS. Children with muscular-­skeletal symptoms 
with h-­EDS often complain of pain and have decreased maximal exer­
cise capacity. This is thought to be related to deconditioning. Often 
patients with h-­EDS fear movement or activity (fear-­avoidance), which 
leads to increased pain, decreased quality of life, and increased fatigue. 
Physical therapy improves the pain and quality of life in children with 
h-­EDS and pain; physical therapy is recommended in this setting.
The effectiveness of CBT is often explained by the “neuromatrix 
theory” of Melzack suggesting that sensory, emotional, and cognitive 
inputs affect the brain’s homeostasis, producing a prolonged stress 
response with high and continuous cortisol secretion, setting the stage 
for the development of a chronic pain syndrome. CBT identifies mal­
adaptive thoughts and beliefs and hidden fears and then reframes the 
thinking process to adapt behaviors that will increase function and 
activation. CBT sessions are aimed at problem solving, goal setting 
mainly related to doing activities that produce pleasure, exercising and 
pacing, and some relaxation techniques that the patient can apply at 
home. An important part of CBT is the assignment of patient home­
work to practice the new skills and report back.
Patients may be reluctant to see a psychologist because of prior 
invalidating experiences with practitioners whose message was received 
as the dismissal “everything is in your head.” To avoid this resistance, 
it is suggested to describe the current biobehavioral model of pain to 
the patient along with the emotional and sensory components of pain. 
Patients usually accept this model, and with an appropriate interview 
and asking what exacerbates their pain and symptoms, they realize that 
stress is a component and agree to do CBT. Furthermore, the concept 
of CBT should be introduced early in the relationship to set the foun­
dation for the biobehavioral model. The psychologists should not be 
introduced late in the relationship when “nothing was found,” mak­
ing the patient feel rejected and dismissed. Rather, the behaviorist is 
viewed as an active and key member of the team who provides a skill­
set critical to the recovery process. It should be emphasized that the 
referral is for the purpose of acquiring a new skillset, and not for any 
psychiatric diagnosis.
Pharmacologic Management: Opioids should never be used in 
chronic pain syndromes. Prescription of daily opioids, use of extended-­
release opioids, and combination of opioids with benzodiazepines 
Assess readiness to change
Precontemplative
Contemplative
Action
Agree to disagree
Keep the relationship
Visit should be short,
no need to try to
convince patient
Educate about the
biobehavioral model
Coach the patient and family
Monitor how they are doing
and guide them
Schedule frequent follow-ups
to keep them from falling back
Fig. 33.3  Approach the practitioner should take in each stage of readiness to change.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
549
CHAPTER 33  Chronic Pain
increase the risk of opioid overdose. Furthermore, every increase in 
opioid dosage is associated with an 18% increased chance of the pedi­
atric patient overdosing. This risk persists even 6 months after stopping 
the prescribed opioid medication.
Acceptable pharmacologic interventions include acetaminophen, 
antidepressants such as amitriptyline or citalopram, antiepileptics such 
as gabapentin or pregabalin, and serotonin antagonists like pizotifen. 
One systematic review of the pediatric data did not show convincing 
evidence that any of these medications was superior to placebo in the 
very few randomized controlled trial studies in pediatrics. The data 
available in pediatrics are very limited. In contrast, there is a large 
body of literature for adult chronic pain. The problem in the pediat­
ric literature is not only the scarcity of publications but also the very 
low doses of medications used to assess whether tricyclics (amitrip­
tyline), citalopram, and gabapentin were efficacious. Amitriptyline 
dosage ranged from 10 to 30 mg/day, citalopram from 10 to 20 mg/
day, and gabapentin 300 mg t.i.d. Similar data were found with prega­
balin (75–450 mg/day) vs placebo in the management of FM, although 
in this study the doses of pregabalin were higher. When looking at 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, the only reliable studies were 
done comparing them to other medications. There was no difference 
in pain improvement between naproxen and meloxicam, celecoxib, or 
rofecoxib.
In clinical practice when treating adolescents, start with amitripty­
line 10 mg at bedtime after checking an ECG for QTc and increase the 
dosage by 10 mg every 3–4 days to about 1 mg/kg/day if needed. The 
ECG should be monitored when getting to about 1 mg/kg/day; blood 
levels can also be monitored. Often if the patient is a rapid metabolizer, 
doses may need to be increased further while monitoring blood levels 
and the ECG for prolonged QTc. Similarly, one may use higher doses of 
gabapentin, sometimes of up to 900 mg t.i.d. Due to fatigue, sometimes 
we only increase the bedtime dose to 600 or 900 mg.
   	 S U MMA RY  A N D  R E D  F L A G S
COPC is common in pediatrics. The pathophysiology is not well under­
stood, but there is a clear understanding that the chronic pain in COPC 
is not playing the protective role that it does in acute pain, but rather 
reinforcing the learned passive role of the patient and reinforcing the 
neurobiologic basis of the pain syndrome. As a treating physician, it 
is critical to determine the stage of readiness to change (precontem­
plative, contemplative, or action) for both the patient and the family, 
which will dictate the management approach and decrease the time 
spent in visits when patients or families are not ready to accept the 
biobehavioral approach. Knowing that the biopharmacologic approach 
has shown little benefit, practitioners should emphasize gradually 
increasing activity, exercise, and referral to behavioral health for CBT, 
with medications playing primarily an adjuvant role when there is need 
for a “window of opportunity” to pass beyond a physical or behavioral 
barrier. Red flags (Table 33.1) and disorders not to miss (Table 33.2) are 
noted in the respective tables.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
549.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arnold LM, et al. Safety and efficacy of pregabalin in adolescents with fibromy­
algia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial and a 6-month 
open-label extension study. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2016;14(1):46.
Bahar RJ, et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of amitriptyline for 
the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome in adolescents. J Pediatr. 
2008;152(5):685–689.
Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neu­
rol. 2014;13:587–599.
Brown S, et al. A randomized controlled trial of amitriptyline versus gabapen­
tin for complex regional pain syndrome type I and neuropathic pain in 
children. Scand J Pain. 2016;13:156–163.
Busch AJ, et al. Resistance exercise training for fibromyalgia. Cochrane Data­
base Syst Rev. 2013;(12):CD010884.
Buskila D. Pediatric fibromyalgia. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2009;35(2):253–
261.
Celletti C, et al. Evaluation of kinesiophobia and its correlations with pain and 
fatigue in joint hypermobility syndrome/Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hyper­
mobility type. BioMed Res Int. 2013;2013:580460.
Chelimsky G, et al. Autonomic neurophysiologic implications of disorders 
comorbid with bladder pain syndrome vs myofascial pelvic pain. Neurourol 
Urodyn. 2019;38:1370–1377.
Chelimsky G, Safder S, Chelimsky T. FGIDs in children are associated with 
many nonpsychiatric comorbidities: the tip of an iceberg? J Pediatr Gastro­
enterol Nutr. 2012;54(5):690–691.
Chua KP, et al. Association of opioid prescribing patterns with prescrip­
tion opioid overdose in adolescents and young adults. JAMA Pediatr. 
2020;174(2):141–148.
Cooper TE, et al. Antiepileptic drugs for chronic non-cancer pain in children 
and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;8:CD012536.
Dydyk AM, Givler A. Central pain syndrome. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Vol 
2021. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2021.
Eccleston C, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for chron­
ic non-cancer pain in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2017;8:CD012537.
Eccleston C, et al. Pharmacological interventions for chronic pain in children: 
an overview of systematic reviews. Pain. 2019;160(8):1698–1707.
Ehde DM, Dillworth TM, Turner JA. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for individ­
uals with chronic pain: efficacy, innovations, and directions for research. 
Am Psychol. 2014;69(2):153–166.
Engelbert RH, et al. Exercise tolerance in children and adolescents with mus­
culoskeletal pain in joint hypermobility and joint hypomobility syndrome. 
Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):e690–e696.
Gedalia A, et al. Fibromyalgia syndrome: experience in a pediatric rheumatol­
ogy clinic. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2000;18(3):415–419.
Geneen LJ, et al. Physical activity and exercise for chronic pain in adults: 
an overview of Cochrane Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;4:CD011279.
Guite JW, et al. Pain beliefs and readiness to change among adolescents with 
chronic musculoskeletal pain and their parents before an initial pain clinic 
evaluation. Clin J Pain. 2014;30(1):27–35.
Guite JW, et al. Readiness to change in pediatric chronic pain: initial validation 
of adolescent and parent versions of the Pain Stages of Change Question­
naire. Pain. 2011;152(10):2301–2311.
Hauser W, et al. Efficacy of different types of aerobic exercise in fibromyalgia 
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled 
trials. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(3):R79.
Hawker GA, et al. A longitudinal study to explain the pain-depression link in 
older adults with osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res. 2011;63(10):1382–1390.
Hoeijmakers JGJ, Faber CG, Miedema CJ, et al. Small fiber neuropathy in 
children: two case reports illustrating the importance of recognition. 
­Pediatrics. 2016;138(4):e20161215.
Hoffmann B, Mayatepek E. Fabry disease—often seen, rarely diagnosed. Dtsch 
Arztebl Int. 2009;106(26):440–447.
Hovaguimian A, Gibbons CH. Diagnosis and treatment of pain in small fiber 
neuropathy. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2011;15(3):193–200.
Hyams JS, et al. Dyspepsia in children and adolescents: a prospective study. J 
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2000;30(4):413–418.
Kemp S, et al. A randomized comparative trial of generalized vs targeted phys­
iotherapy in the management of childhood hypermobility. Rheumatology. 
2010;49(2):315–325.
Knoerl R, Lavoie Smith EM, Weisberg J. Chronic pain and cognitive behavioral 
therapy: an integrative review. West J Nurs Res. 2016;38(5):596–628.
Kroenke K, et al. Reciprocal relationship between pain and depression: a 
12-month longitudinal analysis in primary care. J Pain. 2011;12(9):964–
973.
Lewis ML, et al. Prevalence of functional gastrointestinal disorders in children 
and adolescents. J Pediatr. 2016;177:39–43.e3.
Maixner W, et al. Overlapping chronic pain conditions: implications for diag­
nosis and classification. J Pain. 2016;17(9 suppl):T93–T107.
Marchettini P, Lacerenza M, Mauri E, et al. Painful peripheral -neuropathies. 
Curr Neuropharmacol. 2006;4:175–181.
Melzack R. From the gate to the neuromatrix. Pain. 1999;82(suppl 6):S121–
S126.
Mogil JS. Pain genetics: past, present, and future. Trends Genet. 
2010;28(6):258–266.
Mun CJ, Ruehlman L, Karoly P. Examining the adjustment patterns of adults 
with multiple chronic pain conditions and multiple pain sites: more pain, 
no gain. J Pain. 2020;21:108–120.
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). Central pain syndrome. 
https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/central-pain-syndrome/.
Peralta-Palmezano JJ, Guerrero-Lozano R. Prevalence of functional gastroin­
testinal disorders in school children and adolescents. Korean J Gastroenter­
ol. 2019;73(4):207–212.
Revivo G, et al. Interdisciplinary pain management improves pain and func­
tion in pediatric patients with chronic pain associated with joint hypermo­
bility syndrome. PM R. 2019;11(2):150–157.
Roohafza H, et al. Citalopram for pediatric functional abdominal pain: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Neuro Gastroenterol Motil. 
2014;26(11):1642–1650.
Saps M, et al. A prospective school-based study of abdominal pain and other 
common somatic complaints in children. J Pediatr. 2009;154(3):322–326.
Saps M, et al. Prevalence of functional gastrointestinal disorders in Colombian 
school children. J Pediatr. 2014;164(3):542–545.e1.
Swain MS, et al. An international survey of pain in adolescents. BMC Publ 
Health. 2014;14:447.
Turner JA, Jensen MP, Romano JM. Do beliefs, coping, and catastrophizing 
independently predict functioning in patients with chronic pain? Pain. 
2000;85(1–2):115–125.
Valderas JM, et al. Defining comorbidity: implications for understanding 
health and health services. Ann Fam Med. 2009;7(4):357–363.
van den Ameele J, Fuge J, Pitceathly RDS, et al. Chronic pain is common in 
mitochondrial disease. Neuromuscul Disord. 2020;30:413–419.
Veasley CCD, Clauw D, Cowley T, et al. In: Alliance CPR, ed. Impact of Chron­
ic Overlapping Pain Conditions on Public Health and the Urgent Need for 
Safe and Effective Treatment: 2015 Analysis and Policy Recommendations. 
Milwaukee, WI: The TMJ Association; 2015.
Walker SM. Neuropathic pain in children: steps towards improved recognition 
and management. EBioMedicine. 2020;62:103124.
Wang C, et al. A randomized trial of tai chi for fibromyalgia. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363(8):743–754.
Wang C, et al. Effect of tai chi versus aerobic exercise for fibromyalgia: compar­
ative effectiveness randomized controlled trial. BMJ. 2018;360:k851.
Williams FMK, Spector TD, MacGregor AJ. Pain reporting at different body 
sites is explained by a single underlying genetic factor. Rheumatology. 
2010;49:1753–1755.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
