927
Pancytopenia is defined by a decrease in all peripheral blood cell lines, 
including leukocytes, red blood cells (RBCs), and platelets. All of these 
cells are produced by the bone marrow, and therefore an evaluation 
of the bone marrow is often required (Table 50.1). Aplastic anemia is 
a serious cause of pancytopenia with multiple etiologies (Tables 50.2 
and 50.3).
Patients often present with fevers and infections related to leukocy­
topenia and/or neutropenia, anemia (pallor, tachycardia), and throm­
bocytopenia (bleeding, bruising, petechiae). In pediatrics, one must 
consider the age of the patient for normal ranges of cell lines, as these 
change with age (Table 50.4).
HISTORY
The predisposing risk factors for pancytopenia may help guide the 
diagnostic approach (Tables 50.5 and 50.6).
In addition to a thorough personal history review, a family history 
should also include questions related to congenital anomalies, syn­
dromes associated with leukemias, thalassemias, sickle cell disease, and 
early or unusual childhood illnesses or death in relatives.
Physical Findings
Patients with isolated pancytopenia might present with evidence of 
anemia and thrombocytopenia including pallor, petechiae, and pur­
pura or with more severe hemorrhages. Additionally, if leukopenia or 
neutropenia is present, they might present with mild or severe infec­
tions. Symptoms such as fever, rhinorrhea, cough, congestion, conjunc­
tivitis, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and rash can be seen in 
common viral illnesses, cytomegalovirus (CMV) or Epstein-­Barr virus 
(EBV) infections, and acute leukemia. One should also look for signs of 
jaundice or scleral icterus. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly might be 
present and can be found in liver disease or in malignant causes, such 
as acute leukemias.
Because there are several syndromes associated with pancytopenia, 
a careful review for congenital anomalies is important (Tables 50.7 and 
50.8 and Figs. 50.1 and 50.2).
Laboratory Evaluation
(Tables 50.3, 50.8, 50.9, and 50.10 and Fig. 50.3)
HYPOCELLULAR MARROW
Inherited
Fanconi Anemia
Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder associ­
ated with congenital anomalies, cancer predisposition, and pancytope­
nia due to bone marrow failure (see Fig. 50.1). The classic physical exam 
findings include short stature, skin hyperpigmentation, and upper limb 
anomalies (such as absent, hypoplasia, or bifid thumb). Because ∼50% 
of patients with FA have normal physical findings, they are often undi­
agnosed until they present with hematologic abnormalities. This is typ­
ically in the first decade of life.
The test of choice for FA detects chromosomal breakage in cells 
exposed to diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C (MMC), cross-­
linking agents. There are multiple genes in the FA pathway and their 
protein products are involved in the DNA damage recognition and 
repair pathways; these lead to the chromosome fragility seen in FA (see 
Tables 50.3 and 50.10).
Marrow failure classically begins with thrombocytopenia followed 
by granulocytopenia, macrocytosis, and then macrocytic anemia. The 
marrow will often show decreased or absent megakaryocytes, hypocel­
lularity, and fatty replacement. About 10% of patients will present with 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Because of the fragility to alkylating 
agents, these patients cannot be treated with the typical intensive ther­
apy used in AML.
The curative therapy for FA is hematopoietic stem cell transplanta­
tion (HSCT). The HSCT therapy must avoid the associated chromo­
some fragility seen in FA, and the timing of transplant is often delayed 
as long as safely possible. Long-­term survival outcomes following a 
matched sibling transplant is ∼80%.
Dyskeratosis Congenita
Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an inherited (X-­linked, autosomal 
recessive or dominant) bone marrow failure syndrome (see Tables 50.3 
and 50.10). Patients first present with lacy skin pigmentation on the 
face, neck, chest, and arms and nail dystrophy followed by oral mucosal 
leukoplakia (see Fig. 50.2). Marrow failure will become apparent by 
their teen years.
Telomeres protect the ends of chromosomes; their length decreases 
with each cell cycle. Stem cells are able to activate telomerase, which 
allows for self-­renewal. Gene variants seen in DC lead to inheritance of 
short telomeres and defects in the maintenance of telomeres, leading to 
stem cell exhaustion and eventually producing pancytopenia.
Patients will initially present with isolated thrombocytopenia, 
which will then evolve into pancytopenia. There is also macrocytosis 
and elevated fetal hemoglobin levels. In addition to hypocellularity of 
marrow, there can be signs of myelodysplasia or leukemia.
The anabolic steroid oxymetholone can improve marrow func­
tion. About 60% of patients will respond to this therapy, which can 
have a long-­lasting effect. HSCT can be used in DC; however, the 
survival rate remains poor at 50%. There is significant morbidity 
and mortality following HSCT specific to DC including pulmonary 
fibrosis and gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding secondary to vascular 
anomalies.
Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/
Bone Marrow Failure
Amy Moskop and Julie Talano
50
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
928
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
Shwachman-­Diamond Syndrome
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an autosomal recessive 
inherited disorder. The typical clinical characteristics include exocrine 
pancreas insufficiency, which presents as fat malabsorption; skeletal 
changes including delayed bone maturation, metaphyseal dysostosis, 
short or flared ribs, and bifid thumbs; and bone marrow failure (Table 
50.11).
The pathologic gene SBDS seen in SDS is involved in ribosomal 
biogenesis, which is associated with pancytopenia, although the exact 
mechanism is not completely understood. Failure of pancreatic acinar 
development leads to fatty infiltration of the pancreas and associated 
exocrine dysfunction. Marrow failure is a result of dysfunctional stem 
cells, apoptosis of progenitor cells, and inability of the microenviron­
ment to support hematopoiesis. Diagnosis is made based on clinical 
findings and genetic variant analysis for SBDS.
The most common hematologic finding in SDS is neutropenia, 
which predisposes to bacterial and fungal infections. About 10–65% 
of patients will present with pancytopenia; the majority of patients 
will have elevated fetal hemoglobin levels. Marrow cellularity can be 
variable; there is also a risk for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and 
AML.
Management of SDS includes granulocyte colony-­stimulating fac­
tor (G-­CSF) for patients with severe neutropenia as well as transfusions 
for anemia and thrombocytopenia. The management of exocrine pan­
creatic insufficiency involves oral pancreatic enzyme replacement and 
fat-­soluble vitamin supplements. HSCT is used in SDS with improved 
outcomes if performed prior to the development of leukemia, but data 
are limited and outcomes remain poor.
Congenital Amegakaryocytic Thrombocytopenia
Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) is an autoso­
mal recessive disorder that begins in infancy with isolated thrombocy­
topenia. Patients with CAMT present with signs of thrombocytopenia, 
cerebellar and cerebral atrophy, developmental delay, and various con­
genital heart defects. MPL is a gene for the receptor of thrombopoietin 
that impacts megakaryocytic proliferation as well as apoptotic regula­
tion and survival of stem cells. Pathologic gene variants of MPL have 
different effects on thrombopoietin receptor function, which produces 
a wide spectrum of severity.
The marrow findings will initially demonstrate amegakaryocytosis 
with normal cellularity. Among patients who progress to pancytopenia, 
the marrow cellularity decreases, and fatty infiltration is noted. These 
patients are also at risk for development of MDS and AML. Androgens 
TABLE 50.1  Differential Diagnosis of 
Pancytopenia
Pancytopenia with Hypocellular Bone Marrow
Acquired aplastic anemia
Inherited aplastic anemia (Fanconi anemia and others)
Some myelodysplasia syndromes
Rare aleukemic leukemia (acute myelogenous leukemia)
Some acute lymphoblastic leukemias
Some lymphomas of bone marrow
Pancytopenia with Cellular Bone Marrow
Primary bone marrow diseases
Myelodysplasia syndromes
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Myelofibrosis
Some aleukemic leukemias
Myelophthisis
Bone marrow lymphoma
Secondary to systemic diseases
Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome
Primary immunodeficiency diseases
Hypersplenism
Vitamin B12, folate deficiency (familial defect)
Overwhelming infection
Alcohol
Brucellosis
Ehrlichiosis
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria
Hypocellular Bone Marrow ± Cytopenia
Q fever
Legionnaires disease
Mycobacteria
Tuberculosis*
Anorexia nervosa, starvation
Hypothyroidism
*Pancytopenia in tuberculosis only rarely is associated with a hypocel­
lular bone marrow at biopsy or autopsy. Marrow failure in the setting of 
tuberculosis is almost always fatal; exceptional patients probably had 
underlying myelodysplasia or acute leukemia.
From Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology: 
Basic Principles and Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:395, 
Table 30.1.
TABLE 50.2  Etiology of Aplastic Anemia
Irradiation
Drugs and Chemicals
Cytotoxic agents
Benzene
Idiosyncratic reactions
Chloramphenicol
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Antiepileptics
Gold
Other drugs and chemicals
Viruses
Epstein-­Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis)
Hepatitis virus (non-­A, non-­B, non-­C, non-­G hepatitis)
Parvovirus (transient aplastic crisis, some pure red cell aplasia)
HIV (AIDS)
Immune Diseases
Immune mediated (idiopathic)
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Hyperimmunoglobulinemia
Thymoma and thymic carcinoma
Graft versus host disease in immunodeficiency
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Other
Pregnancy
Modified from Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. 
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2018:395, Table 30.2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
929
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
TABLE 50.3  Genetic Conditions Commonly Associated with Bone Marrow Failure
Gene
Inheritance Condition
ABCB7
X-linked
Sideroblastic anemia with ataxia
ACD
AR and AD
Dyskeratosis congenita
ADA2 (CECR1)
AR
Vasculitis, autoinflammation, 
immunodeficiency, and 
hematologic defects syndrome
AK2
AR
Reticular dysgenesis
AP3B1
AR
Hermansky-Pudlak type 2
ATM
AR
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
ATR
AR
Seckel syndrome
BLM
AR
Bloom syndrome
BRCA1, BRCA2 (FANCD1), 
BRIP1 (FANCJ), ERCC4 
(FANCQ), FANCA, 
FANCB. FANCC, FANCD2, 
FANCE, FANCF. FANCG. 
FANCI, FANCL, FANCM, 
MAD2L2. PALB2 (FANCN), 
RAD51, RAD51C (FANCO), 
RFWD3, SLX4 (FANCP), 
UBE2T, XRCC2
AR; except: 
FANCB –­ 
X-linked
RAD51 –­ AD
Fanconi anemia
CD40LG
X-linked
X-­linked hyper-­IgM syndrome
CLPB
AR
3-­methylglutaconic aciduria type 
VII, with cataracts, neurologic 
involvement, and neutropenia
CSF3R
AD, AR, and 
somatic
Severe congenital neutropenia 7 
(SCN7) (germline); predisposition 
to myelodysplastic syndrome 
(somatic)
CTC1
AR
Coats plus syndrome
CXCR2
AR
Myelokathexis
CXCR4
AD
WHIM syndrome
DKC1
XR
Dyskeratosis congenita or Hoyeraal-
Hreidarsson syndrome
DNAJC21
AR
Familial bone marrow failure 
syndrome type 3
EFL1
AR
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
EIF2AK3
AR
Wolcott-­Rallison syndrome
ELANE (ELA2)
AD
SCN1
EPO
AR, AD
Diamond-Blackfan anemia; 
erythrocytosis
ERCC6L2
AR
Familial bone marrow failure 
syndrome type 2
G6PC3
AR
SCN4, nonsyndromic SCN, Dursun 
syndrome
GATA1
X-linked
GATA1-­related X-­linked cytopenia
GATA2
AD
GATA2 deficiency
GFI1
AD
SCN2
HAX1
AR
SCN3, Kostmann syndrome
HYOU1
AR
Immunodeficiency and 
hypoglycemia
MRTFA (MKL1)
AR
Neutropenia with combined 
immune deficiency
MYSM1
AR
Familial bone marrow failure 
syndrome type 4
NAF1
AD
Pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema
NBN
AR
Nijmegen breakage syndrome
NHEJ1
AR
Severe combined 
immunodeficiency with 
microcephaly, growth 
retardation, and sensitivity to 
ionizing radiation
NHP2 (NOLA2)
AR
Dyskeratosis congenita
NOPIO (NOLA3)
AR
Dyskeratosis congenita
NSMCE3
AR
Lung disease, immunodeficiency, 
and chromosome breakage 
syndrome
PARN
AD and AR
Dyskeratosis congenita; pulmonary 
fibrosis and/or bone marrow 
failure
POT1
AD
Familial chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia
RAB27A
AR
Griscelli syndrome type 2
RAC2
AR
Neutrophil immunodeficiency 
syndrome
RBM8A
AR
Thrombocytopenia-­absent radius 
syndrome
RMRP
AR
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia
RNF168
AR
RIDDLE syndrome
RPL5, RPL9, RPL11, RPL15, 
RPL18, RPL26, RPL27, 
RPL31, RPL35, RPL35A, 
RPS7, RPS10, RPS15, 
RPS15A, RPS17, RPS19, 
RPS24, RPS26, RPS27, 
RPS27A, RPS28, RPS29, 
TSR2
AD; except:
TSR2 –­ 
X-linked
Diamond-Blackfan anemia
RTEL1
AD and AR
Dyskeratosis congenita
RUNX1
AD and 
somatic
Familial platelet disorders 
(germline); acute myeloid 
leukemia (germline); 
predisposition to myelodysplastic 
syndrome/acute myeloid 
leukemia (somatic)
SAMD9
AD
MIRAGE syndrome
SAMD9L
AD
Ataxia-­pancytopenia 
syndrome
Gene
Inheritance Condition
JAGN1
AR
SCN6
LAMTOR2 (ROBLD3)
AR
p14 deficiency
LIG4
AR
LIG4 syndrome
LYST
AR
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
MPL
AR
Congenital amegakaryocytic 
thrombocytopenia
Continued
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
930
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
TABLE 50.4  Age-­Specific Blood Cell Indices
Age
Hb (g/dL)*
HCT (%)*
MCV (fL)*
MCHC (g/dL RBC)*
Reticulocytes
WBCs (×103/mL)† Platelets (103/mL)†
26–30 wk 
gestation‡
13.4 (11)
41.5 (34.9)
118.2 (106.7)
37.9 (30.6)
—
4.4 (2.7)
254 (180–327)
28 wk
14.5
45
120
31.0
(5–10)
—
275
32 wk
15.0
47
118
32.0
(3–10)
—
290
Term§ (cord)
16.5 (13.5)
51 (42)
108 (98)
33.0 (30.0)
(3–7)
18.1 (9–30)||
290
1–3 days
18.5 (14.5)
56 (45)
108 (95)
33.0 (29.0)
(1.8–4.6)
18.9 (9.4–34)
192
2 wk
16.6 (13.4)
53 (41)
105 (88)
31.4 (28.1)
—
11.4 (5–20)
252
1 mo
13.9 (10.7)
44 (33)
101 (91)
31.8 (28.1)
(0.1–1.7)
10.8 (4–19.5)
—
2 mo
11.2 (9.4)
35 (28)
95 (84)
31.8 (28.3)
—
—
—
6 mo
12.6 (11.1)
36 (31)
76 (68)
35.0 (32.7)
(0.7–2.3)
11.9 (6–17.5)
—
6 mo–2 yr
12.0 (10.5)
36 (33)
78 (70)
33.0 (30.0)
—
10.6 (6–17)
(150–350)
2–6 yr
12.5 (11.5)
37 (34)
81 (75)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.5–1.0)
8.5 (5–15.5)
(150–350)
6–12 yr
13.5 (11.5)
40 (35)
86 (77)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.5–1.0)
8.1 (4.5–13.5)
(150–350)
12–18 yr
Male
14.5 (13)
43 (36)
88 (78)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.5–1.0)
7.8 (4.5–13.5)
(150–350)
Female
14.0 (12)
41 (37)
90 (78)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.5–1.0)
7.8 (4.5–13.5)
(150–350)
Adult
Male
15.5 (13.5)
47 (41)
90 (80)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.8–2.5)
7.4 (4.5–11)
(150–350)
Female
14.0 (12)
41 (36)
90 (80)
34.0 (31.0)
(0.8–4.1)
7.4 (4.5–11)
(150–350)
*Data are mean (− 2 SD).
†Data are mean (± 2 SD).
‡Values are from fetal samplings.
§1 mo, capillary hemoglobin exceeds venous: 1 hr: 3.6-­g difference; 5 day: 2.2-­g difference; 3 wk: 1.1-­g difference.
||Mean (95% confidence limits).
Hb, hemoglobin; HCT, hematocrit; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
From Gajjar R, Jalazo E. Hematology, Table 14-­1 Age-­Specific Blood Cell Indices. In: Harriet Lane Handbook: A Manual for Pediatric Housestaff. 
20th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2014:305–306.
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; RIDDLE, radiosensitivity, immunodeficiency, dysmorphic features, and learning difficulties; 
WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency, myelokathexis.
Courtesy of the Laboratory of Genetics and Genomics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, https://www.
cincinnatichildrens.org/service/b/bone-­marrow/therapies/bone-­marrow-­failure-­syndromes.
TABLE 50.3  Genetic Conditions Commonly Associated with Bone Marrow Failure—cont’d
SBDS
AR
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS)
SLC37A4
AR
Glycogen storage disease type IB
SMARCD2
AR
Specific granule deficiency 2
SRP54
AD
Congenital neutropenia
SRP72
AD
Familial bone marrow failure 
syndrome type 1
STK4
AR
STK4 deficiency
STN1
AR
Coats plus syndrome with 
telomere defects
TAZ
X-linked
Barth syndrome
TCIRG1
AR, AD
Osteopetrosis (AR), congenital 
neutropenia (AD)
TCN2
AR
Transcobalamin II deficiency
TERC (hTR)
AD
Dyskeratosis congenita
TERF2IP
AD
Familial melanoma
Gene
Inheritance Condition
Gene
Inheritance Condition
TP53
AD and 
somatic
Familial bone marrow failure 
syndrome 5 (germline); 
transformation to 
myelodysplastic syndrome/
acute myeloid leukemia in 
patients with Shwachman-
Diamond syndrome (somatic)
USB1
AR
Clericuzio-­type poikiloderma with 
neutropenia
VPS13B
AR
Cohen syndrome; congenital 
neutropenia with retinopathy
VPS45
AR
SCN5
WAS
X-linked
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 
X-­linked
WDR1
AR
WDR1 deficiency
WIPF1
AR
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
WRAP53 (TCAB1, WDR79)
AR
Dyskeratosis congenita, 
Revesz syndrome, 
Hoyeraal-Hreidarrson 
syndrome
TERT
AD and AR
Dyskeratosis congenita
TINF2
AD
Classic or severe DC, Revesz 
syndrome, Hoyeraal-­Hreidarrson 
syndrome; AD 3
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
931
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
and corticosteroids have been used to treat pancytopenia with some 
improvement, but HSCT remains the only curative option.
Other Genetic Syndromes
There are several other genetic syndromes that can develop pancytope­
nia. These include Down syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Dubowitz syn­
drome, Seckel syndrome, reticular dysgenesis, Schimke immunoosseous 
dysplasia, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, and familial aplastic anemia (Table 
50.12). In addition, cytopenias including pancytopenia may occur in 
primary immunodeficiency diseases (Fig. 50.4). These include common 
variable immunodeficiency (CVID), autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome (ALPS), and immune disregulation polyendocrinopathy 
enteropathy X-­linked (IPEX) and IPEX-­like syndromes.
ACQUIRED
Acquired aplastic anemia, a rare but severe hematologic disorder, is 
different from inherited bone marrow failure syndromes and can be a 
result of drugs, chemicals, radiation, infections, or immune disorders 
(see Tables 50.1 and 50.2). A bone marrow evaluation reveals hypocel­
lularity; severity is graded based on the Camitta criteria (Table 50.13).
There must be a thorough review of drug and chemical exposures 
(see Table 50.6). Medications can result in pancytopenia either by direct 
toxicity, metabolite-­driven toxicity, or antibody-­mediated destruction. 
Chemotherapeutic agents, radiation, benzene, chloramphenicol, anti­
epileptics, gold, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and 
several antibiotics are notable exposures.
Infections
Several viruses may result in acquired aplastic anemia. These include 
parvovirus B19, EBV, CMV, hepatitis viruses, herpesviruses, and HIV. 
Other infections such as mycobacterial infections can also lead to 
pancytopenia.
Immune Diseases
It is thought that immune-­mediated, previously identified as idiopathic 
aplastic, anemia is a result of immune-­mediated destruction of bone 
marrow stem cells. This is often a diagnosis of exclusion following a 
broad work-­up for other acquired causes and must be distinguished 
from inherited bone marrow failure syndromes before treatment can 
begin. Autoimmune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus 
or rheumatoid arthritis, can have hematologic abnormalities including 
pancytopenia.
Pregnancy
Aplastic anemia is a rare complication of pregnancy; the cause remains 
unknown. Management must be weighed with the risk to the fetus and 
TABLE 50.5  History Clues for the Etiology 
of Pancytopenia
General Cause
History Clues to Review
Viral
Fever, viral symptoms, sick contacts, rashes, 
conjunctivitis, jaundice
Malignant
Fevers, bony pain, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, 
hepatosplenomegaly, night sweats
Liver failure
Jaundice, abdominal pain, encephalopathy
Environmental
History of radiation or chemotherapy, environmental 
toxins
Medication
See Table 50.6
Immunodeficiency
Recurrent or opportunistic infections, skin 
infections, mouth sores, eczema, failure to thrive, 
positive newborn screen
Dietary
Vegan diet, goat milk ingestion, short bowel 
syndrome
Genetic
Bone marrow failure syndromes; see Table 50.3
TABLE 50.6  Classification of Drugs and 
Chemicals Associated with Aplastic Anemia
I. Agents That Regularly Produce Marrow Depression as a 
Major Toxic Effect When Used in Commonly Used Doses 
or Normal Exposures
 • Cytotoxic drugs used in cancer chemotherapy
 • Alkylating agents (busulfan, melphalan, cyclophosphamide)
 • Antimetabolites (antifolic compounds, nucleotide analogs), antimitotics 
(vincristine, vinblastine, colchicine)
 • Some antibiotics (daunorubicin, doxorubicin [Adriamycin])
 • Benzene (and less often benzene-­containing chemicals: kerosene, carbon 
tetrachloride, Stoddard solvent, chlorophenols)
II. Agents Probably Associated with Aplastic Anemia but 
with a Relatively Low Probability Relative to Their Use
 • Chloramphenicol
 • Insecticides
 • Antiprotozoals (quinacrine and chloroquine)
 • Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (including phenylbutazone, 
indomethacin, ibuprofen, sulindac, diclofenac, naproxen, piroxicam, 
fenoprofen, fenbufen, aspirin)
 • Anticonvulsants (hydantoins, carbamazepine, phenacemide, ethosuximide)
 • Gold, arsenic, and other heavy metals such as bismuth and mercury
 • Sulfonamides as a class
 • Antithyroid medications (methimazole, methylthiouracil, propylthiouracil)
 • Antidiabetes drugs (tolbutamide, carbutamide, chlorpropamide)
 • Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide, methazolamide, mesalazine)
 • d-­Penicillamine
 • 2-­Chlorodeoxyadenosine
III. Agents More Rarely Associated with Aplastic Anemia
 • Antibiotics (streptomycin, tetracycline, methicillin, ampicillin, mebendazole 
and albendazole, sulfonamides, flucytosine, mefloquine, dapsone)
 • Antihistamines (cimetidine, ranitidine, chlorpheniramine)
 • Sedatives and tranquilizers (chlorpromazine, prochlorperazine, 
piperacetazine, chlordiazepoxide, meprobamate, methyprylon, remoxipride)
 • Antiarrhythmics (tocainide, amiodarone)
 • Allopurinol (can potentiate marrow suppression by cytotoxic drugs)
 • Ticlopidine
 • Methyldopa
 • Quinidine
 • Lithium
 • Guanidine
 • Canthaxanthin
 • Thiocyanate
 • Carbimazole
 • Cyanamide
 • Deferoxamine
 • Amphetamines
From Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology: Basic 
Principles and Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:399, Table 30.3.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
932
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
TABLE 50.7  Specific Types of Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia*
Skin (40%)
Generalized hyperpigmentation on the trunk, neck, and intertriginous areas; 
café-­au-­lait spots; hypopigmented areas
Body (40%)
Short stature, delicate features, small size, underweight
Upper Limbs (35%)
Thumbs (35%): absent or hypoplastic; supernumerary, bifid, or duplicated; 
rudimentary; short, low set, attached by a thread; triphalangeal, tubular, stiff, 
hyperextensible
Radii (7%): absent or hypoplastic (only with abnormal thumbs); absent or weak 
pulse
Hands (5%): clinodactyly; hypoplastic thenar eminence; six fingers; absent first 
metacarpal; enlarged, abnormal fingers; short fingers; transverse crease ulnae 
(1%): dysplastic or absent
Lower Limbs (5%)
Feet: toe syndactyly, abnormal toes, flat feet, short toes, clubfeet, six toes, 
supernumerary toe
Legs: congenital hip dislocation, Perthes disease, coxa vara, abnormal femur, 
thigh osteoma, abnormal legs
Gonads
Males (25%): hypogenitalia, undescended testes, hypospadias, abnormal 
genitalia, absent testis, atrophic testes, azoospermia, phimosis, abnormal 
urethra, micropenis, delayed development
Females (2%): hypogenitalia; bicornuate uterus; abnormal genitalia; aplasia of 
uterus and vagina; atresia of uterus, vagina, and ovary
Other Skeletal Anomalies
Head (20%) and face (2%): microcephaly, hydrocephalus, micrognathia, peculiar 
face, birdlike face, flat head, frontal bossing, scaphocephaly, sloped forehead, 
choanal atresia, dental abnormalities
Neck (1%): Sprengel deformity; short, low hairline; webbed spine (2%): spina 
bifida (thoracic, lumbar, cervical, occult sacral)
Spine (2%): spina bifida (thoracic, lumbar, cervical, occult sacral), scoliosis, 
abnormal ribs, sacral agenesis, sacrococcygeal sinus, Klippel-­Feil syndrome, 
vertebral anomalies, extra vertebrae
Eyes (20%)
Small eyes, strabismus, epicanthal folds, short or almond-­shaped palpebral 
fissures, hypertelorism, ptosis, slanting, cataracts, astigmatism, blindness, 
epiphora, nystagmus, proptosis, small iris
Ears (10%)
Deafness (usually conductive); abnormal shape; atresia; dysplasia; low set, large, 
or small; infections; abnormal middle ear; absent eardrum; dimples; rotated; 
canal stenosis
Kidney (20%)
Ectopic or pelvic; abnormal, horseshoe, hypoplastic, or dysplastic; absent; 
hydronephrosis or hydroureter; infections; duplicated; rotated; reflux; 
hyperplasia; no function; abnormal artery
Gastrointestinal System (5%)
High-­arched palate, atresia (esophagus, duodenum, jejunum), imperforate anus, 
tracheoesophageal fistula, Meckel diverticulum, umbilical hernia, hypoplastic 
uvula, abnormal biliary ducts. megacolon, abdominal diastasis, Budd-­Chiari 
syndrome
Urogenital
Males (25%): micropenis, penile-­scrotal fusion, undescended or atrophic or 
absent testes, hypospadias, chordae, phimosis, azoospermia
Females (2%): bicornuate uterus, aplasia or hypoplasia of vagina and uterus, 
atresia of vagina, hypoplastic uterus, hypoplastic or absent ovary, hypoplastic 
fused labia
Cardiopulmonary System (6%)
Patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, abnormal heart, peripheral 
pulmonic stenosis, aortic stenosis, coarctation, absent lung lobes, vascular 
malformation, aortic atheromas, atrial septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, 
pseudotruncus, hypoplastic aorta, abnormal pulmonary drainage, double aortic 
arch, cardiac myopathy
Central Nervous System (3%)
Hyperreflexia, Bell palsy, CNS arterial malformation, moyamoya syndrome, 
Arnold-­Chiari malformation, stenosis of internal carotid artery, small pituitary 
gland, absent corpus callosum, slow development (10%)
*Abnormalities are listed in the approximate order of frequency within each category.
Adapted from Shimamura A, Aher BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122.
From Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:2571, Table 495.2.
TABLE 50.8  Inherited Causes of Bone Marrow Failure
Disease
Supportive Clinical Findings
Supportive Laboratory Findings
Inheritance Pattern
Fanconi anemia
Skeletal abnormalities (radius, thumb); small 
stature; urogenital abnormalities; 40% with 
no physical findings
Increased chromosomal breakage in response to mitomycin 
C or diepoxybutane
AR (most) or XLR
Dyskeratosis congenita
Leukoplakia; nail dystrophy; lacy skin 
pigmentation; pulmonary fibrosis
Genetic testing (a negative result does not rule out disease)
AR, XLR, or AD
Shwachman-­Diamond 
syndrome
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Genetic testing (a negative result does not rule out disease); 
normal sweat chloride
AR
Congenital amegakaryocytic 
thrombocytopenia
Sequelae of severe thrombocytopenia
Genetic testing (a negative result does not rule out disease); 
elevated thrombopoietin levels
AR
Hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis
Fever; splenomegaly; hepatitis; neurologic 
symptoms; rash
Hemophagocytosis; hypertriglyceridemia; 
hypofibrinogenemia; low/absent NK-­cell activity; elevated 
serum ferritin; soluble CD25 >2,400 U/mL
AR or XLR
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; NK, natural killer; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Weinzierl EP, Arber DA. The differential diagnosis and bone marrow evaluation of new-­onset pancytopenia. Am J Clin Pathol. 
2013;139:9–29 (Table 1, p. 10).
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
933
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
mother and often requires transfusion support to minimize the risk of 
hemorrhage.
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is another cause of 
acquired aplastic anemia. A pathologic gene variant leads to a clonal pop­
ulation of stem cells that are more susceptible to complement-­mediated 
destruction. The majority of pediatric patients with PNH will have 
marrow failure. Associated symptoms include thrombosis (classically 
abdominal venous thrombosis), nocturnal hemoglobinuria, chronic 
hemolysis, and cytopenias. The diagnostic method includes flow cytom­
etry looking for decreased expression of both CD55 and CD59 markers.
Marrow Replacement
A marrow evaluation for pancytopenia may reveal abnormal develop­
ment of stem cells or replacement of normal marrow elements. This 
requires a careful morphologic review of the bone marrow aspirate and 
biopsy as well as cytogenetic studies.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 50.1  A 3-­year-­old boy with Fanconi anemia who exhibits several classic phenotypic features. A, Front 
view. B, Face. C, Hands. D, Back right shoulder. The features to be noted include short stature, dislocated 
hips, microcephaly, a broad nasal base, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, thumbs attached by a thread, and café-­
au-­lait spots with hypopigmented areas beneath. (From Nathan DC, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan 
and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Vol. I. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:285.)
A
C
E
B
D
F
Fig. 50.2  Features of the diagnostic triad in dyskeratosis congenita. A, B, Dystrophic nails on hands and 
feet. C, D, Lacy reticular pigmentation on neck and upper thorax. E, F, Oral leukoplakia on tongue and buccal 
mucosa. (A–C and E, From Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone mar­
row failure syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122, Fig. 8; D and F, from Savage SA, Alter BP. Dyskeratosis 
congenita. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2009;23:215–231.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
TABLE 50.9  Laboratory Evaluation for 
Pancytopenia
CBC, differential, peripheral blood smear review
Reticulocyte count
Cell destruction
Direct Coombs test, haptoglobin, LDH, hemoglobinuria, 
total bilirubin
Cell consumption
PT, PTT, fibrinogen, creatinine
Viral marrow 
suppression
CMV, EBV, HIV, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19), 
brucellosis, TB, Q fever, Legionnaires disease, 
hepatitis, parvovirus, dengue, measles, mumps, 
rubella, varicella, influenza A
Bone marrow evaluation
Stains, chromosomal and flow cytometry
Cellularity, myelofibrosis, infiltrative process, storage diseases
CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; LDH, lactate dehydro­
genase; PT, prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; TB, 
tuberculosis.
TABLE 50.10  Inherited Bone Marrow 
Failure Syndromes and Associated Genes
Syndrome
Genes
FA
FANC: A, B, C, D1/BRCA2, D2, E, F, G, I, J, L, M, N, O
DC
X-­linked: DKC1
AD: TINF2, TERC, TERT
AD: NOP10, NHP2
SDS
SBDS
CAMT
MPL
CAMT, congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; DC, dyskera­
tosis congenita; FA, Fanconi anemia; SDS, Shwachman-­Diamond syn­
drome.
Laboratory studies
CBC with differential
Peripheral smear
Reticulocyte count
Decreased reticulocytes (<2-3%)
At least two of the following are present:
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <500/µL
Platelets <20,000/µL
Reticulocytes <1%
Mild/moderate
aplastic anemia
(hypoplastic anemia)
Persistent
pancytopenia
No
Yes
Hypocellular marrow
Congenital
Acquired
Normal CBC
Viral infection
   (parvovirus,
   hepatitis, Epstein-
   Barr virus,
   human immuno-
   deficiency virus)
Transient aplastic
   crisis
Fanconi anemia
Dyskeratosis
   congenita
Shwachman
   Diamond
   syndrome
Familial aplastic
   anemias
Congenital
   amegakaryocytic
   thrombocytopenia
Myelodysplasia
Down syndrome
Noonan syndrome
Dubowitz syndrome
Seckel syndrome
Idiopathic
Radiation
Drugs/chemicals
Viruses       (Epstein-
   Barr virus, hepatitis,
   parvovirus, human
   immunodeficiency virus)
Immune diseases (hypo-
   gammaglobulinemia,
   thymoma)
Pregnancy
Paroxysmal nocturnal
   hemoglobinuria
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
Systemic diseases
Malignancy
   (leukemia,
   lymphoma,
   neuroblastoma)
Osteopetrosis
Storage disorders
Myelofibrosis
Myelodysplasia
Autoimmune
pancytopenia
(Systemic lupus
erythematosus)
Primary
immunodeficiency
diseases
Megaloblastic
   anemia
Fanconi
   anemia
Dyskeratosis
   congenita
Referral for:
Bone marrow aspirate
± Viral serology
Repeat CBC in 2-3 weeks
± Viral serology
± Referral to hematology
Severe aplastic
anemia
Coombs
test –
Coombs
test +
Blasts on
peripheral smear
Or
Evidence of
   hemolysis
Increased
   reticulocytes
   >2-3%
Macrocytic anemia
   (↑ MCV)
   ↓ reticulocytes
   ± Hypersegmented
      neutrophils
H and P 1
2
4
5
6
4
9
6
7
7
8
Bone marrow
infiltration/
replacement 12
10
11
13
15
Sepsis/shock
Splenic sequestration
Paroxysmal nocturnal
   hemoglobinuria 10
14
3
Pancytopenia
  Leukoeryth-
   roblastosis
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
935
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
Malignant Infiltration
Acute leukemias are the most common cause of marrow replace­
ment secondary to malignancies in children. Acute lymphoblastic 
and myeloid leukemias often present with pancytopenia with periph­
eral lymphoblasts or myeloblasts as well as a marrow filled with blasts 
leading to pancytopenia. Some patients have no blasts in their periph­
eral blood smears. The diagnosis can be confirmed with morphologic 
review of the marrow, flow cytometry, and cytogenetics to confirm the 
cells of origin. There are other malignancies that can infiltrate the mar­
row including lymphomas, neuroblastoma, and Langerhans cell histio­
cytosis, as well as other solid tumors.
Myelodysplasia
MDS typically presents with isolated cytopenias but also pancytopenia. 
MDS is a disorder of ineffective hematopoiesis. There is also a risk for 
MDS to develop into AML. Pediatric MDS classification is described 
in Table 50.14. Patients with inherited bone marrow syndromes or 
other genetic predisposition syndromes are at high risk for develop­
ing MDS. Treatment-­related MDS can also be seen after exposure to 
alkylating agents and topoisomerase II inhibitors during treatment 
for other malignancies. Because of the aggressive nature of MDS in 
children, most patients require HSCT shortly after diagnosis. Options 
that have been used for patients without a matched donor include 
Fig. 50.3  Pancytopenia diagnostic algorithm. 1, History should include exposure to agents that are poten­
tially myelosuppressive. These include radiation and chemotherapy (e.g., 6-­mercaptopurine, methotrexate, 
nitrogen mustard). Other drugs include chloramphenicol, sulfonamides, phenylbutazone, and anticonvulsants. 
Chemicals and toxins include benzene and other aromatic hydrocarbons present in insecticides and her­
bicides. A history and physical examination compatible with certain viral infections should be sought. An 
increased susceptibility to infection may suggest an immunodeficiency syndrome. A family history of con­
genital anomalies, aplastic syndromes, and leukemias may indicate syndromes associated with constitutional 
aplastic pancytopenias. Physical examination may reveal the effects of the cytopenias, including anemia, 
which results in tachycardia and pallor; thrombocytopenia, which may cause bleeding, bruising, epistaxis, 
petechiae, or ecchymoses; and neutropenia, which may be associated with oral ulcerations and fevers. Exam­
ination should include identification of congenital anomalies associated with Fanconi and other syndromes 
(e.g., Down syndrome). 2, When blasts are seen on peripheral smear, it indicates leukemia requiring referral 
for bone marrow examination. Leukoerythroblastosis (myelophthisic anemia) is usually due to invasion of 
the bone marrow and resulting release of immature cells including erythroblasts (nucleated erythrocytes), 
immature neutrophils, and giant platelets. 3, Laboratory findings suggesting hemolysis include abnormal cell 
morphology, increased reticulocyte count, increased red blood cell distribution width, indirect bilirubin, urine 
urobilinogen, lactate dehydrogenase, decreased serum haptoglobin, and hemoglobinuria. 4, The most com­
mon cause of mild or moderate pancytopenias in healthy patients is suppression due to infectious agents. 
Specific viruses include human parvovirus B19, hepatitis viruses (B, C, non-­A, non-­B, and non-­C), dengue 
virus, cytomegalovirus, human herpesvirus 6, and Epstein-­Barr virus. Patients with HIV may have pancyto­
penia for a number of reasons, including opportunistic infections, drugs used in treatment, and neoplasms 
associated with the disease. Other viruses that may cause cytopenias include measles, mumps, rubella, var­
icella, and influenza A. If a viral etiology is suggested, it is reasonable to recheck the CBC in a few weeks. If 
the pancytopenia persists or becomes more severe, referral to a hematologist for further evaluation is recom­
mended. 5, Patients with hemolytic anemia who have shortened red blood cell survival time are at risk of tran­
sient aplastic crisis. This is most commonly associated with parvovirus and may occur in children with sickle 
cell disease, thalassemia, hereditary spherocytosis, and other types of erythroid stress. 6, Fanconi anemia is 
an autosomal recessive condition. Two-­thirds of affected children have congenital anomalies. These include 
microcephaly, microphthalmia, absent radii and thumbs, and heart and kidney abnormalities. There may be 
hypopigmentation of the skin and short stature. 7, Dyskeratosis congenita is a rare form of ectodermal dys­
plasia associated with pancytopenia. Dermatologic manifestations include hyperpigmented skin, dystrophic 
nails, and mucous membrane leukoplakia. 8, Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome is characterized by neutro­
penia with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (e.g., malabsorption, steatorrhea, failure to thrive). About 50% 
develop aplastic anemia. 9, Pregnancy may be associated with aplastic anemia; estrogens may play a role. 
10, Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is characterized by intravascular hemolysis and hemoglobinuria as 
well as venous thrombosis. There is a strong association with aplastic anemia. 11, Systemic diseases may 
be associated with pancytopenias. These may include systemic lupus erythematosus, metabolic diseases, 
brucellosis, sarcoidosis, and tuberculosis. 12, Replacement of the marrow by malignant or nonhematopoietic 
cells may cause pancytopenias. Conditions include leukemia, lymphomas, and neuroblastoma metastases to 
the bone marrow. Osteopetrosis may cause obliteration of the marrow. Myelofibrosis may also be a cause. 
Myelodysplastic syndrome is rare in children; there is an increased risk of development with Down syn­
drome, Kostmann syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Fanconi anemia, trisomy 8 mosaicism, neurofibromatosis, 
and Shwachman syndrome. 13, In autoimmune pancytopenia the Coombs (direct antiglobulin) test is usually 
positive. There is evidence of hemolysis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia. It is known as Evans syndrome 
when the patient has autoimmune hemolytic anemia and immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). There 
may also be an associated autoimmune neutropenia. It may be associated with disorders such as systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). 14, Megaloblastic anemia (large RBCs with abnormal hypersegmented neutro­
phils due to vitamin B12 or folate deficiency) is rare in children. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia may be 
present, particularly in patients with long-­standing and severe deficiencies. 15, Including autoimmune lymph­
oproliferative syndrome (ALPS), common variable immune deficiency (CVID), and immune disregulation, poly­
endocrinopathy, endocrinopathy, X-­linked (IPEX). MCV, mean corpuscular volume. (From Pomeranz A, Busey 
S, Sabnis S, et al. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:361. Data from Sills R. 
Practical Algorithms in Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 2003:114.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
936
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
immunosuppressive therapy, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), and 
DNA hypomethylating agents.
Syndromes associated with increased risk of developing MDS 
include:
 • CAMT
 • Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
 • Dyskeratosis congenita
 • Fanconi anemia
 • Severe congenital neutropenia
 • Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
 • Bloom syndrome
 • Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
 • Neurofibromatosis type 1
 • Noonan syndrome
 • Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
GATA2 deficiency is another genetic cause of MDS. Half of the 
patients with GATA2 deficiency have de novo gene variants that effect 
proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. It is associated with immuno­
deficiencies, aplastic anemia, MDS, and progression to AML. A history 
of warts, lymphedema, hearing loss, or thrombosis might be clues to 
this underlying diagnosis. The natural history is variable but typically 
begins with cytopenias, including aplastic anemia and immune dis­
regulation in the first decade of life followed by increased infections 
and transformation to MDS in the second decade of life. Infectious 
complications include nontuberculosis mycobacterial, bacterial, fun­
gal (aspergillosis), and viral infections, including human papilloma­
virus (HPV) and EBV. A bone marrow evaluation will initially show 
hypocellularity but then progress to hypercellular marrow, which is 
typically associated with MDS. Nearly 75% of patients will develop a 
myeloid neoplasm by age 40 years. The curative therapy is HSCT, but 
it is unknown when best to proceed with transplant. It is thought that 
undergoing HSCT prior to developing the severe complications seen 
later in life will improve outcomes.
Nonmalignant Causes of Infiltration That Lead to 
Pancytopenia
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a group of life-­
threatening syndromes that results from an overactivation of the 
immune system (Table 50.15). HLH is characterized by proliferation of 
macrophages that produce excessive cytokines leading to widespread 
organ dysfunction. HLH is manifest with fever, hepatosplenomegaly, 
rash, high ferritin levels, pancytopenia, liver dysfunction, and hypo­
fibrinogenemia. The diagnostic criteria can be seen in Table 50.16. 
HLH can be familial or acquired, with the latter being more common. 
TABLE 50.11  Major Clinical Features of 
Shwachman-­Diamond Syndrome
Clinical Feature
% Present
Hematologic*
Neutropenia
90%
Severe (≤500/μL)
46%
Anemia
46%
Thrombocytopenia
42%
Pancytopenia
21%
Gastrointestinal
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency*
98%
Liver (elevated transaminases)
61%
Skeletal abnormalities
70%
Metaphyseal dysostosis
53%
Rib cage abnormalities
35%
Short stature (<3rd percentile)
66%
*Hematologic abnormalities and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency are 
defining features of SDS, thus the near-­100% incidence of these findings.
Data from Ginzberg H, Shin J, Ellis L, et al. Shwachman syndrome: 
phenotypic manifestations of sibling sets and isolated cases 
in a large patient cohort are similar. J Pediatr. 1999;135:81–88; 
Cipolli M, D’Orazio C, Delmarco A, et al. Shwachman’s syndrome: 
pathomorphosis and long-­term outcome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 1999;29:265–272; and Kuijpers TW, Alders M, Tool AT, et al. 
Hematologic abnormalities in Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome: lack of 
genotype-­phenotype relationship. Blood. 2005;106:356–361.
From Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2020:2573, Table 495.3.
TABLE 50.12  Additional Genetic 
Syndromes Associated with Pancytopenia
Syndrome
Classic Clinical 
Features
Possible Bone 
Marrow Findings
Down syndrome
Up-­slanted palpebral 
fissures, flattened nasal 
bridge, nuchal folds, single 
palmar flexion crease, 
clinodactyly of the fifth 
finger, hypotonia
Aplastic anemia
MDS
Acute leukemias
Noonan syndrome
Hypertelorism, ptosis, short 
neck, low-­set ears, short 
stature, congenital heart 
disease, and multiple 
skeletal and hematologic 
abnormalities
JMML
Amegakaryocytic 
thrombocytopenia
Pancytopenia
Dubowitz 
syndrome
Eczema, small stature, mild 
microcephaly, micrognathia
Pancytopenia
Hypoplastic anemia
Bone marrow hypoplasia
Aplastic anemia
Seckel syndrome
Growth failure, 
developmental delay, 
microcephaly, hypoplastic 
face with prominent nose
Aplastic anemia
Malignancies
Reticular 
dysgenesis
Severe combined 
immunodeficiency with 
congenital agranulocytosis
Lymphopenia and 
neutropenia
Variable anemia and 
thrombocytopenia
Aplastic anemia
Schimke 
immunoosseous 
dysplasia
Pigmentary skin changes, 
discolored and configured 
teeth, renal dysfunction, 
nephrotic syndrome
Pancytopenia
Cartilage-­hair 
hypoplasia
Metaphyseal dysostosis and 
other skeletal findings; 
short-­limbed dwarfism; 
fine, sparse hair; GI 
abnormalities
Macrocytic anemia
Neutropenia, 
lymphopenia, 
lymphoma
GI, gastrointestinal; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; MDS, 
myelodysplastic syndrome.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
937
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
Familial HLH is a result of genetic defects and secondary HLH can be 
a result of underlying malignancy or infection.
Leukoerythroblastosis is the presence of leukocytosis and eryth­
roid and myeloid blasts in the peripheral blood. This is typically indic­
ative of marrow stress leading to immature cells being pushed out to 
peripheral blood. It can be seen with underlying malignancies, infec­
tions, storage diseases, medications, myelofibrosis, and osteopetrosis. 
The bone marrow can be replaced with underlying pathology leading 
to pancytopenia, but often many of the cell lines are preserved.
There are reports of leukoerythroblastosis in infants with underly­
ing intrauterine parvovirus B19 infection. It has also been reported in 
a patient with a severe malaria episode with bacterial superinfection 
as well as a child with a bacterial abscess. Infections can lead to diffuse 
infiltrates or granulomata (necrotizing or non-­necrotizing).
Glycogen storage and lysosomal storage disorders are inherited 
metabolic disorders caused by specific enzyme deficiencies. Glycogen 
storage disorders lack the enzyme responsible for glycogen metabolism 
and lead to accumulation of glycogen within liver or muscle. Type 1a 
glycogen storage disease, a deficiency in glucose-­6-­phophatase, leads 
to hepatosplenomegaly and hypoglycemia in infancy and can develop 
hypertension, renal insufficiency, and hepatic adenomas. Type 1b is 
associated with neutropenia and inflammatory bowel disease later in 
life. Patients can also have severe anemia, often related to underlying 
adenoma (type 1a) or inflammatory bowel disease (type 1b); type 1b 
can have neutropenia, increased risk of bacterial infection, and the risk 
of developing AML.
Lysosomal storage disorders, due to the inability to degrade mac­
romolecules, lead to the accumulation of these macromolecules within 
multiple organs including the bone marrow. Mucopolysaccharidoses, 
Tay-­Sachs disease, Fabry disease, Gaucher disease, Krabbe disease, 
and Pompe disease are all examples of these disorders. The associated 
symptoms vary, but in general there is accumulation of macromole­
cules in the liver, spleen, brain, and bones leading to physical features 
cellular
Cytopenias
in PID
CID*
WAS, WIP
22q11
[SAA, MDS-RCC]
autoimmunity
myelosuppression
(virus) infection-mediated
drug-induced; nutritional
malignoma
myelokathexis, WHIM
myelodysplasia
GATA2
SCN1
PNH
DKC
CHH, Schimke
RD, SDS
IKAROS deficiency
& other syndromes
bone marrow
failure
immune-
disregulation
antibody-mediated
CVID
ALPS
[SLE]
CID*
Good
LRBA
[ITP, AIHA, AIN, ES]
phagocytosis
hemo-
IPEX(-like)
FHL1-5
Griscelli
CHS, HPS-2
lympho-
proliferation
XLP-1,2
CD27
ITK
ALPS
Fig. 50.4  Synopsis of cytopenias in primary immunodeficiency (PID). Conceptual overview, excluding primary 
defects of phagocyte number or function, inherited non-­PID bone marrow failure syndromes, and disorders of iso­
lated lymphopenia (without other cytopenia). *Includes hypomorphic gene variants in SCID genes, CD40, CD40L, 
and other combined immunodeficiencies such as radiosensitive disorders, defects in the Ca2+ channel, and acti­
vating PI3K syndrome. AIHA, autoimmune hemolytic anemia; AIN, autoimmune neutropenia; ALPS, autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome; CHH, cartilage hair hypoplasia; CHS, Chediak-­Higashi syndrome; CID, combined 
immunodeficiency; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; DKC, dyskeratosis congenita; ES, Evans syn­
drome; FHL1-­5, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 1-­5; HPS-­2, Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome 2; IPEX, 
immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy X-linked syndrome; ITK, IL-­2–inducible T-­cell kinase 
deficiency; ITP, immune thrombocytopenia; LRBA, lipopolysaccharide-­responsive beigelike anchor deficiency; 
MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; PNH, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria; RCC, refractory cytopenia of 
childhood; RD, reticular dysgenesis; SAA, severe aplastic anemia; SCN1, severe congenital neutropenia 1; SDS, 
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, 
immunodeficiency, myelokathexis; WIP, WAS protein–interacting protein; XLP-­1,2, X-­linked lymphoproliferative 
disease 1,2. (From Seidel MG. Autoimmune and other cytopenias in primary immunodeficiencies: pathomecha­
nisms, novel differential diagnoses, and treatment. Blood. 2014;124(15):2337–2344 [Fig. 1, p. 2338].)
TABLE 50.13  Camitta Criteria for Severity 
of Aplastic Anemia
Moderate or Nonsevere
Decreased Bone Marrow 
Cellularity and Cytopenias but 
not Fulfilling Severe Criteria
Severe
Bone marrow cellularity <25%
AND at least two of the following:
 • ANC <500
 • Platelet count <20,000
 • Reticulocyte count <60,000
Very severe
Severe criteria
AND
 • ANC <200
ANC, absolute neutrophil count.
Adapted from Hartung H, Olson, T, Bessler M. Acquired aplastic anemia 
in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60(6):1311–1336, Box 1, p. 2.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
938
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
characteristic of each. There can also be accumulation within the bone 
marrow leading to replacement of normal hematopoietic stem cells 
and cytopenias as well as leukoerythroblastosis; Gaucher disease is the 
prototype of these disorders affecting the marrow.
Medications have been reported to cause leukoerythroblastosis, 
also known as leukemoid reaction. These include G-­CSF, corticoste­
roids, tetracycline, streptokinase, and antiepileptic drugs.
Myelofibrosis is a clonal disorder of stem cells that can lead to 
cytopenias, hepatosplenomegaly, and bone marrow fibrosis. Primary 
myelofibrosis is rare in pediatrics but can be aggressive and often 
requires HSCT.
Osteopetrosis is characterized by arrest or dysfunction of osteo­
clast formation, which leads to increased bone mass. Patients are also 
prone to fractures. The classic radiographic finding is a “bone-­in-­bone” 
appearance (Fig. 50.5). The increased bone mass prevents normal 
development of bone marrow leading to extramedullary hematopoie­
sis. Patients can present with anemia, thrombocytopenia, or even pan­
cytopenia. Bone growth around cranial nerve foramina may produce 
vision and hearing impairment.
Megaloblastic Anemia
Megaloblastic anemia is characterized by macrocytic anemia but can 
often present with pancytopenia. Peripheral blood smear may show 
hypersegmented neutrophils; marrow evaluation reveals megaloblastic 
morphology affecting erythroid, myeloid, and platelet precursors. This 
is often a result of nutritional deficiencies, such as vitamin B12 or folate.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12, or cobalamin, must be obtained through dietary intake; 
deficiency often occurs in patients with unsupplemented vegan diets or 
minimal meat intake. Cobalamin is absorbed in the ileum so patients 
with poor absorption, such as celiac disease, inflammatory bowel dis­
ease, or diseases requiring bowel resection, are also at risk. Intrinsic 
factor is responsible for the absorption of cobalamin. Pernicious ane­
mia, an acquired deficiency of intrinsic factor, is the most common 
cause of severe cobalamin in adults. Rarely, infants can have a con­
genital intrinsic factor deficiency; there are several rare inborn errors 
of cobalamin uptake and transport. In addition to the hematologic 
manifestations of cobalamin deficiency, patients can also present with 
neurologic (central or peripheral) symptoms; heart failure may develop 
when there is severe anemia. Neurologic symptoms can be irrevers­
ible without treatment and include developmental delay; posterior 
column deficits, such as loss of vibration and proprioception; pares­
thesia; peripheral neuropathy; weakness; ataxia; and seizures. Signifi­
cant cobalamin deficiency can occur without hematologic changes; the 
neurologic findings can precede the megaloblastic anemia. Diagnostic 
testing includes low serum cobalamin as well the cobalamin precursors 
because some patients can have vitamin B12 levels in the normal range, 
TABLE 50.14  World Health Organization Classification of Pediatric Myelodysplastic Syndrome 
(MDS)
Peripheral
Marrow
MDS with single-­lineage dysplasia
<1% blasts
<5% blasts
≥10% unilineage dysplasia
<15% ringed sideroblasts
MDS with ring sideroblasts
No blasts
<5% blasts
≥15% ring sideroblasts
MDS with multilineage dysplasia
<1% blasts
No Auer rods
<1 × 109 monocytes
<5% blasts
≥10% dysplasia in two or more myeloid lineages
±15% sideroblasts
No Auer rods
MDS with excess blasts-­1
<5% blasts
No Auer rods
<1 × 109 monocytes
5–9% blasts
Single or multilineage dysplasia
No Auer rods
MDS with excess blasts-­2
5–19% blasts
Auer rods
<1 × 109 monocytes
10–19% blasts
Single or multilineage dysplasia
Auer rods
MDS with isolated del(5q)
Anemia
<1% blasts
Normal to increased platelet count
<5% blasts
No Auer rods
Normal to increased megakaryocytes (hypolobulated nuclei)
Isolated del(5q)
MDS-­unclassifiable
Cytopenias
≤1% blasts
<5% blasts
<10% dysplasia in one or more myeloid lineages
Cytogenetic abnormality associated with MDS (i.e., unbalanced: +8, −7 or del(7q), 
−5 or del(5q), del(20q), −Y, i(17q) or t(17p), −13 or del(13q), del(11q), del(12p) or 
t(12p), del(9q), idic(X)(q13); balanced: t(11;16)(q23;p13.3), t(3;21)(q26.2;q22.1), 
t(1;3)(p36.3;q21.2), t(2;11)(p21;q23), inv(3)(q21q26.2), t(6;9)(p23;q34))
Adapted from Arber et al. The 2016 revision to the World Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood. 
2016;127(2):2391–2405, Table 1, p. 2392; National Cancer Institute. Childhood acute myeloid leukemia/other myeloid malignancies treatment, 
Table 3, “World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Bone Marrow and Peripheral Blood Findings for Myelodysplastic Syndromes 
(MDS),” https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/child-­aml-­treatment-­pdq#link/_74; and Arceci R, Meshinchi S. Acute myeloid leukemia and 
myelodysplastic syndromes. In: Pizzo P, Poplack D, Adamson P, et al., eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Wolters Kluwer; 2016:498–505.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
939
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
TABLE 50.15  Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Disease
Gene
Protein
Percentage of 
fHLH
Immune Impairment
Unique Clinical Characteristics
fHLH-­1
Unknown 
9q21.3–22
Rare
fHLH-­2
PRF1
Perforin
∼20–37, 789 50delT 
mainly in African 
American/African 
descent
Cytotoxicity; forms pores in APCs
fHLH-­3
UNC13D
Munc13–4
20–33
Cytotoxicity; vesicle priming
Increased incidence of CNS HLH
fHLH-­4
STX11
Syntaxin 11
<5
Cytotoxicity; vesicle fusion
Mild, recurrent HLH and colitis
fHLH-­5
STXBP2
Syntaxin binding 
protein 2
5–20
Cytotoxicity; vesicle fusion
Colitis and hypogammaglobulinemia
Syndromes with Partial Oculocutaneous Albinism
Griscelli syndrome
RAB27A
Rab27A
∼5
Cytotoxicity; vesicle docking
Partial albinism and silver-­gray hair
Chediak-­Higashi 
syndrome
LYST
Lyst
∼2
Cytotoxicity; heterogeneous defects 
in NK cells
Partial albinism, bleeding tendency, and 
recurrent infections
Hermansky-­Pudlak 
syndrome type II
AP3B1
AP-­3 complex 
subunit β1
Rare
Cytotoxicity; vesicle trafficking
Partial albinism and bleeding tendency
EBV-­Driven and Rare Causes
XLP1
SH2D1A
SAP
∼7
Signaling in cytotoxic NK and T cells
Hypogammaglobulinemia and lymphoma
XLP2
BIRC4
XIAP
∼2
NK T-­cell survival and NF-­κB 
signaling
Mild, recurrent HLH and colitis
ITK deficiency
ITK
ITK
Rare
IL-­2 signaling in T cells
Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity, and 
Hodgkin lymphoma
CD27 deficiency
CD27
CD27
Rare
Signal transduction in lymphocytes
Combined immunodeficiency and lymphoma
XMEN syndrome
MAGT1
MAGT1
Rare
Magnesium transporter, induced by 
TCR stimulation
Lymphoma, recurrent infections, and CD4 
T-­cell lymphopenia
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; ITK, interleukin-­2–inducible T-­cell kinase; NF-­κB, nuclear factor kappa-­B; TCR, T-­cell receptor.
Data from Bondarenko EI. Experiences in the medical service for miners [article in Russian]. Med Sestra. 1978 Nov;37(11):47–49; and Kliegman 
RM, Bordini BJ, eds. Undiagnosed and rare diseases in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64(1):91–109 (Table 1, p. 95).
TABLE 50.16  Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) Diagnostic Criteria
HLH Can Be Established if Either A or B Is Fulfilled
A
A molecular diagnosis is consistent with HLH (see Table 50.15)
B
Diagnostic criteria (five out of the eight criteria below)
Cause
1
Fever
Increased IL-­1 and IL-­6 levels
2
Splenomegaly
Organ infiltration by lymphocytes and histiocytes
3
 • Cytopenias (affecting two of three lineages on peripheral blood)
 • Hemoglobin <9 g/dL (or infants <4 wk old, use <10 g/dL)
 • Platelets <100 × 109/L
 • Neutrophils <1 × 109/L
Increased TNF-­α and IFN-­γ
4
 • Hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia
 • Fasting triglycerides ≥265 mg/dL
 • Fibrinogen ≤1.5 g/L
Increased TNF-­α inhibits lipoprotein lipase
Activated macrophages secrete plasminogen activator, 
which results in high plasmin levels and hyperfibrinolysis
5
Hemophagocytosis in bone marrow or spleen or lymph nodes
Activated macrophages
6
Low or absent NK-­cell activity (using local laboratory reference)
7
Ferritin ≥500 mg/L*a
Activated macrophages secrete ferritin
8
Soluble CD25 (i.e., soluble IL-­2 receptor) ≥2,400 U/mL
From activated lymphocytes (sIL-­2R)
*A ferritin level of >500 ng/mL is nonspecific and can be seen in a variety of diseases, including shock, chronic transfusions, immunodeficiency, 
liver disease, cystic fibrosis, malignancy, after transplant, and autoimmune diseases. Experts often use a ferritin level of >2,000 ng/mL as concerning 
and >10,000 ng/mL as highly suspicious for HLH. The sensitivity and specificity for HLH with a ferritin level >10,000 ng/mL are ∼90% and >95%, 
respectively.
IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Data from Allen CE, McClain KL. Pathophysiology and epidemiology of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ 
Program. 2015;2015:177–182; Janka GE. Hemophagocytic syndromes. Blood Rev. 2007;21:245–253. Henter J, Horne A, Aricó M, et al. HLH-2004: 
diagnostic and therapeutic guidelines for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007;48:124–131.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
940
SECTION 9  Hematologic Disorders
but because methylmalonic acid and homocysteine accumulate in 
cobalamin deficiency, these levels are helpful in making this diagnosis. 
Patients are treated with supplemental cobalamin often in intramuscu­
lar replacements until response with simultaneous dietary changes or 
indefinitely for patients with absorption etiologies.
Folate Deficiency
Folate is widely available in many foods, and since folate fortification of 
foods in the United States, this nutritional deficiency remains rare. It is 
seen in severe malnutrition and alcohol use. Patients with poor folate 
absorption due to inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal resection, or 
certain medications (antiepileptic drugs, methotrexate, trimethoprim) 
are also at risk of folate deficiency. Goat’s milk is low in folate, so a 
careful review of infants’ and young children’s milk intake is necessary. 
Patients present similarly to those with cobalamin deficiency and have 
the same hematologic and bone marrow findings. Serum folate levels 
are low within 2 weeks of deficiency and the RBC folate level decreases 
slowly over 3–4 months. Homocysteine will also be increased, but 
unlike cobalamin deficiency, there is no accumulation of methylmalo­
nic acid. Supplemental folic acid and improvement in dietary intake are 
essential to treating this deficiency.
Myelodysplasia often presents similarly to other causes of meg­
aloblastic anemia with macrocytosis, megaloblastic changes, and 
pancytopenia. Bone marrow evaluation and cytogenetics will help 
differentiate the underlying etiology, which can guide appropriate 
therapy. Drugs that cause megaloblastic anemia include antineoplastic 
agents, immunomodulators, antibiotics, antimalarial medications, and 
antiepileptic medications.
Dyserythropoietic anemia is characterized by abnormal erythropoi­
esis leading to defective RBC production. This can be inherited, such 
as congenital dyserythropoietic anemias, or acquired. In addition to 
defective production of RBCs and reticulocytopenia, hemolysis can also 
be seen in these conditions. Patients present with anemia, jaundice, and 
splenomegaly. In addition to the anemia and hemolysis, marrow find­
ings reveal dyserythropoietic changes and megaloblastic changes. Man­
agement includes supportive blood transfusions, and there are reports of 
successful bone marrow transplantation for some of these patients.
Increased Reticulocytes/Evidence of Hemolysis
Coombs Positive
A patient presenting with pancytopenia but with increased reticu­
locyte count indicates a possible cellular destructive etiology. Other 
evidence of hemolysis might be present, such as jaundice, hemo­
globinuria, and elevated indirect bilirubin. The direct Coombs test, 
or direct antiglobulin test (DAT), can further narrow the differen­
tial diagnosis. The DAT can identify antibodies and complement 
components on the surface of circulating erythrocytes. When the 
DAT is positive, this is indicative of an antibody-­mediated destruc­
tion of RBCs. Destruction of other cell lines can also be seen with 
concomitant immune destruction of RBCs leading to autoimmune 
pancytopenia.
Autoimmune
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is antibody-­mediated 
destruction of RBCs and can be classified into primary or second­
ary. Warm-­reactive AIHA is the most common form and involves 
immunoglobulin G autoantibodies that lead to hemolysis. Other less 
common forms include paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria and cold-­
agglutinin disease. Secondary AIHA is a result of another underlying 
diagnosis including autoimmune disorders, malignancies, medi­
cations, primary immunodeficiency diseases, and infections. These 
secondary causes often result in antibody-­mediated destruction of 
other cell lines, which can result in pancytopenia. Evans syndrome 
classically is associated with AIHA and immune-­mediated thrombo­
cytopenia but can have autoimmune neutropenia. Evans syndrome 
may be idiopathic or due to systemic lupus erythematosus, CVID, 
ALPS, or IPEX syndromes.
Coombs Negative
Sepsis/Shock
DAT-­negative hemolysis and pancytopenia can be a result of dimin­
ished cell production or increased cell destruction.
Disseminated intravascular consumption (DIC) is an 
acquired disorder of hemostasis that is characterized by increased 
thrombin formation, decreased anticoagulation, activation and 
A
B
C
Fig. 50.5  Osteopetrosis. Frontal radiograph of the chest (A) and posteroanterior image of the right wrist (B) 
demonstrate diffusely dense bones in a young child with osteopetrosis. C, Mortise view of the right ankle in 
an older child shows a pathologic fracture through the distal tibia in the setting of diffusely increased bone 
density. The “bone within bone” or “picture frame” appearance is noted, most pronounced in the metatar­
sals. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2017:211, Fig. 7.43.)
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
941
CHAPTER 50  Pancytopenia/Aplastic Anemia/Bone Marrow Failure
impairment of fibrinolysis, and activation of inflammatory 
pathways. This is often associated with thrombocytopenia, but 
pancytopenia can be seen. Patients can have both bleeding and 
thrombosis as a result of the consumption of both procoagulant 
and anticoagulant factors. In addition to cytopenias, there are pro­
longed prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time 
(PTT) and low fibrinogen all consistent with this consumption. 
Peripheral blood smear may reveal schistocytes. The most com­
mon cause of DIC in children is shock. Management of DIC is 
supportive but focused on identifying and treating the underlying 
cause.
Splenic Sequestration and Hypersplenism
The spleen filters all RBCs daily and removes any abnormal cells. In 
the setting of AIHA, sickle cell anemia, portal hypertension, and vari­
ous erythrocyte membrane disorders, the erythrocytes can be trapped 
within the spleen. Splenic sequestration, or enlargement of the spleen 
when blood cannot exit the spleen during filtration, leads to pooling of 
blood and expansion of the spleen. Hypersplenism starts as expansion 
of the spleen due to RBC pooling and then becomes a reservoir for all 
blood cells, which can lead to other cytopenias. Splenomegaly can also 
occur in the setting of liver disease due to portal hypertension. This can 
result in hypersplenism leading to cytopenias over time.
   	 R E D  F L A G S
Pancytopenia often becomes evident by bleeding (purpura, petechiae) 
or pallor. A CBC confirms the presence of anemia, neutropenia, and 
thrombocytopenia. Persistent, congenital, familial, and severe pancy­
topenia are potentially life-­threatening conditions. Red flags include 
fevers, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, bone pain, blasts noted 
on the peripheral smear, hemophagocytosis, and congenital anomalies. 
Disorders not to miss include leukemia, lymphoma, HLH, and genetic 
causes of bone marrow failure.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A bibliography is available at ExpertConsult.com.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
941.e1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Pancytopenia Introduction
Gajjar R, Jalazo E. Hematology. Table 14-­1 age-­specific blood cell indices. 
In: Harriet Lane Handbook: A Manual for Pediatric Housestaff. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:305–306.
Pomeranz AJ, Sabnis S, Busey SL, et al. Pediatric Decision-­Making Strategies. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2016.
Sills RH. Practical Algorithms in Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. Basel, 
New York: Karger; 2003.
Inherited
Agarwal S. Evaluation and management of hematopoietic failure in dyskeratosis 
congenita. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2018;32(4):669–685.
Bull MJ. Down syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(24):2344–2352.
Burroughs L, Woolfrey A, Shimamura A. Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome: a 
review of the clinical presentation, molecular pathogenesis, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2009;23(2):233–248.
Dokal I. Dyskeratosis congenita. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 
2011;2011:480–486.
Ebens CL, MacMillan ML, Wagner JE. Hematopoietic cell transplantation 
in Fanconi anemia: current evidence, challenges and recommendations. 
Expert Rev Hematol. 2017;10(1):81–97.
Faber J, Lauener R, Wick F, et al. Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome: early 
bone marrow transplantation in a high risk patient and new clues to 
pathogenesis. Eur J Pediatr. 1999;158(12):995–1000.
Fernandez Garcia MS, Teruya-­Feldstein J. The diagnosis and treatment of 
dyskeratosis congenita: a review. J Blood Med. 2014;5:157–167.
Geddis AE. Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia. Pediatr Blood 
Cancer. 2011;57(2):199–203.
Green AM, Kupfer GM. Fanconi anemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 
2009;23(2):193–214.
Kliegman R, Behrman RE, Nelson WE. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
Kupfer GM. Fanconi anemia: a signal transduction and DNA repair pathway. 
Yale J Biol Med. 2013;86(4):491–497.
Luca D. Fanconi anemia. 2019. https://www.pathologyoutlines.com/topic/
bonemarrowfanconis.html. Accessed June 10th, 2020.
Acquired
Bacigalupo A. How I treat acquired aplastic anemia. Blood. 2017;129(11):1428–
1436.
Brodsky RA. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood. 
2014;124(18):2804–2811.
Camitta BM, Rappeport JM, Parkman R, et al. Selection of patients for bone 
marrow transplantation in severe aplastic anemia. Blood. 1975;45(3):355–
363.
Devos T, Meers S, Boeckx N, et al. Diagnosis and management of PNH: 
review and recommendations from a Belgian expert panel. Eur J Haematol. 
2018;101(6):737–749.
Hartung HD, Olson TS, Bessler M. Acquired aplastic anemia in children. 
Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60(6):1311–1336.
Kliegman R, Behrman RE, Nelson WE. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
Peslak SA, Olson T, Babushok DV. Diagnosis and treatment of aplastic 
anemia. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2017;18(12):70.
Riveros-­Perez E, Hermesch AC, Barbour LA, et al. Aplastic anemia during 
pregnancy: a review of obstetric and anesthetic considerations. Int J 
Womens Health. 2018;10:117–125.
Valdez JM, Scheinberg P, Young NS, et al. Infections in patients with aplastic 
anemia. Semin Hematol. 2009;46(3):269–276.
Young NS, Calado RT, Scheinberg P. Current concepts in the pathophysiology 
and treatment of aplastic anemia. Blood. 2006;108(8):2509–2519.
Marrow Replacement
Arber DA, et al. The 2016 revision to the World Health Organization 
classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood. 
2016;127(2):2391–2405, Table 1, p. 2392.
Arceci R, Meshinchi S, Myeloid leukemia acute, syndromes myelodysplastic. 
In: Pizzo P, Poplack D, Adamson P, et al., eds. Principles and Practice of 
Pediatric Oncology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer; 2016:498–505.
Babushok DV, Bessler M, Olson TS. Genetic predisposition to myelodysplastic 
syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia in children and young adults. Leuk 
Lymphoma. 2016;57(3):520–536.
Barnea Slonim L, Glasser C. Infantile osteopetrosis. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
2018;40(3):225–226.
Bogaert DJ, Laureys G, Naesens L, et al. GATA2 deficiency and haematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation: challenges for the clinical practitioner. Br J 
Haematol. 2020;188(5):768–773.
Canbolat Ayhan A, Timur C, Ayhan Y, et al. Leukoerythroblastosis mimicking 
leukemia: a case report. Iran J Pediatr. 2014;24(3):332–333.
Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia/Other Myeloid Malignancies Treatment, 
National Cancer Institute, https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/
child-­aml-­treatment-­pdq#link/_74. Table 3, “World Health Organization 
(WHO) Classification of bone marrow and peripheral blood findings for 
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)”.
Dale DC, Bolyard AA, Marrero T, et al. Neutropenia in glycogen storage 
disease Ib: outcomes for patients treated with granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor. Curr Opin Hematol. 2019;26(1):16–21.
DeLario MR, Sheehan AM, Ataya R, et al. Clinical, histopathologic, and 
genetic features of pediatric primary myelofibrosis—an entity different 
from adults. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(5):461–464.
Duran R, Vatansever U, Acunas B, et al. Transient leukoerythroblastosis in a 
very low birth weight infant with parvovirus B19 infection. Int J Infect Dis. 
2009;13(6):e473–e475.
Grossman J, Cuellar-­Rodriguez J, Gea-­Banacloche J, et al. Nonmyeloablative 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for GATA2 deficiency. 
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2014;20(12):1940–1948.
Gulen H, Basarir F, Hakan N, et al. Premature labor and leukoerythroblastosis 
in a newborn with parvovirus B19 infection. Haematologica. 2005;90 
Suppl:ECR38.
Halkes CJ, Dijstelbloem HM, Eelkman Rooda SJ, et al. Extreme leucocytosis: 
not always leukaemia. Neth J Med. 2007;65(7):248–251.
Henter JI, Horne A, Arico M, et al. HLH-­2004: diagnostic and therapeutic 
guidelines for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 
2007;48(2):124–131.
Hickstein D. HSCT for GATA2 deficiency across the pond. Blood. 
2018;131(12):1272–1274.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme III JW, Blum NJ, et al. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 
21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
McReynolds LJ, Calvo KR, Holland SM. Germline GATA2 mutation and bone 
marrow failure. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2018;32(4):713–728.
Mupanomunda OK, Alter BP. Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood 
(TEC) presenting as leukoerythroblastic anemia. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
1997;19(2):165–167.
Parta M, Shah NN, Baird K, et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation for GATA2 deficiency using a busulfan-­based regimen. Biol 
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2018;24(6):1250–1259.
Rao, K, Drug-induced hematologic disorders. In Organ-­Specific Function Tests 
and Drug-­Induced Diseases. 2014:359–374.
Rice GM, Steiner RD. Inborn errors of metabolism (metabolic disorders). 
Pediatr Rev. 2016;37(1):3–15; quiz 16-­17, 47.
Singh ZN, Huo D, Anastasi J, et al. Therapy-­related myelodysplastic syndrome: 
morphologic subclassification may not be clinically relevant. Am J Clin 
Pathol. 2007;127(2):197–205.
Sun A. Lysosomal storage disease overview. Ann Transl Med. 2018;6(24):476.
Teti A, Teitelbaum SL. Congenital disorders of bone and blood. Bone. 
2019;119:71–81.
Varo R, Sitoe A, Cossa A, et al. Leukoerythroblastosis in a young child with 
severe malaria and superimposed gram negative infection. J Trop Pediatr. 
2018;64(6):553–556.
Wang DQ, Carreras CT, Fiske LM, et al. Characterization and pathogenesis 
of anemia in glycogen storage disease type Ia and Ib. Genet Med. 
2012;14(9):795–799.
Wlodarski MW, Collin M, Horwitz MS. GATA2 deficiency and related 
myeloid neoplasms. Semin Hematol. 2017;54(2):81–86.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
References
941.e2
Zeng Q, Wu Y, Zhan Y, et al. Leukemoid reaction secondary to 
hypersensitivity syndrome to phenobarbital: a case report. Int J Clin Exp 
Pathol. 2013;6(1):100–104.
Megaloblastic Anemia
Dobrozsi S, Flood VH, Panepinto J, et al. Vitamin B12 deficiency: the great 
masquerader. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;61(4):753–755.
Gambale A, Iolascon A, Andolfo I, et al. Diagnosis and management of congenital 
dyserythropoietic anemias. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016;9(3):283–296.
Hesdorffer CS, Longo DL. Drug-­Induced megaloblastic anemia. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373(17):1649–1658.
Orkin SH, Nathan DG. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and 
Childhood. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2009.
Increased Reticulocytes/Evidence of Hemolysis
McCormick PA, Murphy KM. Splenomegaly, hypersplenism and coagulation 
abnormalities in liver disease. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 
2000;14(6):1009–1031.
Orkin SH, Nathan DG. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and 
Childhood. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2009.
Downloaded for MacKenzi Hillard (mnh9003@med.cornell.edu) at Weill Cornell Medicine Samuel J Wood Library from ClinicalKey.com by 
Elsevier on April 18, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
